CODE CITY OF HAMPTON, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Adopted: December 14, 1983 
Effective: January 1, 1984 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
Republished January 2008 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF HAMPTON 
____________ 
Donnie Tuck 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jimmy Gray, Vice Mayor 
Linda Curtis 
W. H. "Billy" Hobbs, Jr. 
Steven L. Brown 
Eleanor W. Brown 
Chris Osby Snead 
Council Members 
____________ 
Mary Bunting 
City Manager 
____________ 
Cheran Cordell Ivery 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Katherine K. Glass 
Clerk of Council 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF HAMPTON 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
James L. Eason 
Mayor 
____________ 
John M. Phillips, Vice Mayor 
T. Melvin Butler 
Charles A. Nicholson 
Alan Vanasse 
Charles A. Wornom 
C. Edward Knight, III 
Council Members 
____________ 
Thomas I. Miller 
City Manager 
____________ 
A. Paul Burton 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kathann W. Hollomon 
Clerk of Council 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Hampton of a general and permanent nature. Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1964 Hampton City Code, as supplemented through January 13, 1982 (Supplement No. 24, Ord. No. 708), and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. As originally published, the Code is current through June 8, 1983 (Ord. No. 753). The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code, as authorized by section 15.1-37.3 of the Code of Virginia. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1964 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein, as well as sections of the 1956 Code and ordinances which were cited in the history notes of the 1964 Code. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to correlative Charter provisions and relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of the volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the third section of chapter 2 is 2-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 4-16 and 4-17 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-16.1, 4-16.2, 4-16.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13 it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way, or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of the Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
The successful maintenance of the Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Robert D. Ussery, Vice President, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to A. Paul Burton, Esquire, City Attorney, and Ms. Kathann W. Hollomon, Clerk of Council, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
The republication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Anne Wilson and Janet Cramer, Editors, and W. Eric Grant, Vice President, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. The republication is current through Ord. No. 1495, adopted October 25, 2007. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
NON-CODED ORDINANCE NO. 398 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Hampton, Virginia; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing for the Manner of Amending and Supplementing Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Enacted by the Council of the City of Hampton, Virginia: 
Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 41, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of the City of Hampton, Virginia" which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before June 8, 1983, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 1984, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City adopted on final passage on or before June 8, 1983, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code. 
Section 3. That the repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. That a violation of any provision of such Code, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-11 of such Code or as provided in any other applicable section of such Code. 
Section 5. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the governing body to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-11 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. Any ordinance adopted after June 8, 1983, which amends or refers to ordinances which have been codified in such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such Code. 
Section 8. That this ordinance and the Code adopted hereby, shall become effective January 1, 1984. 
Adopted by the City Council of the City of Hampton, at a regular meeting held on December 14, 1983. 
/s/ James L. Eason 
Mayor 
/s/ Kathann W. Hollomon 
Clerk of Council  
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Charter is set out herein as enacted by Chapter 167 of the 1979 Acts of the General Assembly, approved March 7, 1979. Amendments have been added and are indicated by history notes appearing in parentheses () at the end of the amended or new sections. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived, unamended, from Acts 1979, Chapter 167. Any words appearing in brackets [] were added by the editor for clarity. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the limits of the former City of Hampton and the County of Elizabeth City, including the former Town of Phoebus, as the same now are or may hereafter be established by law, are hereby declared to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Hampton and as such shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, and may have a corporate seal which it may alter, renew, or amend at its pleasure.  
Sec. 1.02. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Hampton as herein provided shall coincide and be coextensive with the boundaries of the former City of Hampton and Elizabeth City County, including the boundaries of the former Town of Phoebus, as they existed immediately preceding incorporation, namely midnight June thirty, nineteen hundred fifty-two, including any property owned by the United States of America within said area. There shall also be included in the boundaries of the city all wharves, docks, and other structures of every description that have been or may hereafter be erected along the waterfront of the city, and any contiguous territory heretofore or hereafter ceded to the Commonwealth of Virginia by any government or agency thereof.  
CHAPTER 2. - POWERS 
 
Sec. 2.01. - General grant of powers. 
The city shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to cities under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth and all other powers pertinent to the conduct of a city government the exercise of which is not expressly prohibited by the said Constitution and laws and which in the opinion of the council are necessary or desirable to promote the general welfare of the city and the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience, and morals of its inhabitants, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated in this Charter, and no enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive but shall be held to be in addition to this general grant of powers. 
a.  The city shall have the power and authority for making and improving the walkways upon then existing streets, and improving and paving then existing alleys, and for either the construction, or for the use of sewers, the council shall have the power to impose a tax or assessment upon the land abutting such improvements, or abutting the street along, or within which such improvements are constructed. But such assessment shall not be in excess of the peculiar benefits resulting to the land from such improvements. 
b.  The method of establishing such assessment, including provision for the determination of the amount thereof, notice, hearing, judicial review, and creation and enforcement of the lien thereof, may be determined by ordinance. 
c.  The city is hereby authorized and empowered in addition to the other powers granted by this Charter, to adopt ordinances paralleling state statutes prohibiting misdemeanors and may provide for forfeiture proceedings which may be instituted in the name of the said city and the procedure shall be mutatis mutandis, the same as is prescribed for forfeiture proceedings by the Commonwealth. 
d.  The city is hereby authorized to acquire by condemnation proceedings land, buildings, structures, and personal property or any interest, right, easement, or estate therein of any person or corporation whenever, in the opinion of the council, a public necessity exists therefor, which shall be expressed in the ordinance directing such acquisition. The city shall have the same powers as to condemnation as are provided in Title 25 of the Code of Virginia. As to property desired for streets, water, sewer or utility pipes or lines or related facilities, the city shall have the same powers as to condemnation as are provided in Article 7 of Chapter 1 of Title 33.1. In case of any property owned by a corporation bearing the powers of eminent domain, the provisions of Section 25-233 of the Code of Virginia shall be complied with. 
e.  The powers set forth in Sections 15.1-841 through 15.1-907, both inclusive, of Chapter 18 of Title 15.1 of the Code of Virginia are hereby conferred on and vested in the City of Hampton, except that Section 15.1-896 shall not be applicable to the powers herein granted.  
Sec. 2.02. - Financial powers. 
In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter, the city shall have the power: 
a.  To raise annually by taxes and assessments in the city such sums of money as the council shall deem necessary to pay the debts and defray the expenses of the city, in such manner as the council shall deem expedient; provided that such taxes and assessments are not prohibited by the laws of the Commonwealth. In addition to, but not as a limitation upon, this general grant of power, insofar as not prohibited by general law, the city shall have power to levy and collect ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property and machinery and tools; to levy and collect taxes for admission to or other charge for any public amusement, entertainment, performance, exhibition, sport, or athletic event in the city, which taxes may be added to and collected with the price of such admission or other charge; to levy on and collect taxes upon the purchase of meals at restaurants, which taxes may be added to and collected with the price of such meals; to levy on and collect taxes from purchasers of any public utility service, which taxes may be added to and collected with the bills rendered purchasers of such service; to establish, classify, impose, and enforce sewerage rates, garbage collection rates, and water rates, or other services, products, or conveniences, operated, rendered, or furnished by the city; to require licenses for the conduct of any business or profession and to require licenses of owners of vehicles of all kinds for the privilege of using the streets, alleys, and other public places in the city, require taxes to be paid on such licenses and prohibit the use of streets, alleys, and other public places in the city without such license, and to require licenses of operators of trailer camps or sites in said city. 
b.  To make appropriations, subject to the limitation imposed by this Charter, for the support and operation of the city government and any other purposes authorized by this Charter and not prohibited by the laws of the Commonwealth.  
Sec. 2.03. - Construction of powers. 
The powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to the city under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth and this Charter shall be liberally construed when such powers are exercised by the city and in case of doubt as to the existence of a power such doubt shall be resolved in favor of the city.  
Sec. 2.04. - Unclaimed funds in courts of record. 
Whenever any money shall have remained dormant for seven (7) years or more in the custody or under the control of any of the courts of record or the clerks thereof in the City of Hampton without any claim having been or being asserted thereto such court shall, where the amount is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more, cause a publication to be made once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city, setting forth the amount of such money, the source from which it was derived and the proceeding in which it is held, and requiring all persons having any claim to said money to appear before said court within such time after the completion of the publication as the court may prescribe, and establish their claim. If no person shall appear and show title in himself, the court shall order the money, after deducting therefrom the costs of such publication if such publication is made, and any other proper charges, to be paid into the treasury of the city and a proper receipt for the payment to be taken and filed among the records of the proceeding. If the sum be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), the court shall direct the same to be paid into the treasury of the city, and a proper receipt for the payment taken and filed among the records of the proceeding. 
The director of finance shall, in a book provided for the purpose, keep an account of all money thus paid into the city treasury, showing the amount thereof, when, by whom, and under what order it was paid, and the name of the court and as far as practicable a description of the suit or proceeding in which the order was made and, as far as known, the names of the parties entitled to said funds. Money thus paid into the treasury of the city shall be paid out, on the order of the court having jurisdiction of the proceeding, to any person entitled thereto who had not asserted a claim therefor in the proceeding in which it was held upon satisfactory proof that he is entitled to such money. The net amount thereof, after deducting costs and other charges, shall be paid to the claimant out of the treasury of the city on the warrant of the director of finance. No claim to such money shall be asserted after ten (10) years from the time when such court obtained control thereof; provided, however, if the person having such claim was an infant, insane, or imprisoned at the time the claim might have been presented or asserted by such person, claim to such money may be asserted within five (5) years after the removal of such disability.  
Sec. 2.05. - Vacation of streets, alleys and easements by agreement of abutting landowners. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, and in addition to any other methods provided by law, any street, alley, or easement, or part thereof, shown on a plat of subdivision or other plat, heretofore or hereafter recorded, may be vacated by all owners of properties abutting such street, alley, or easement, or part thereof, to be vacated, by instrument in writing signed by all owners of properties abutting such street, alley, or easement, or part thereof, to be vacated, approved by the city council, acknowledged in the manner of a deed, and filed for record in the clerk's office of the circuit court. In the case of an alley separating lots or parcels of land within any block bounded by one or more streets, it shall be presumed that only property owners within such block and whose properties abut the alley have any rights or privileges therein. In the case of a street, it shall be presumed that only property owners within the area of land shown on such plat and reasonably needing to use such street as a means of ingress and egress to and from their properties have any rights or privileges therein. As used in this section, the word "street" shall include any road, avenue, drive, or parkway; and the word "owners" shall include lien creditors; and as used in this section, the word "easement" shall include drainage easements, sewer easements, and other easements of a public nature, not constituting a street, alley, or passageway.  
Sec. 2.06. - Land development and site plan. 
In order to provide for the orderly and proper development of land within the City of Hampton and to protect the public safety, health, and welfare, the city council shall have the power to adopt by ordinance regulations and restrictions relative to the development of land, except detached dwellings located on a single lot and designed for or intended to be occupied by one family. Such regulations and restrictions may prescribe standards and requirements which provide for, but shall not be limited to, the following; Access for fire, police, emergency, and service vehicles; width, grade, elevation, location, alignment, and arrangement of streets and sidewalks with relation to existing streets and sidewalks, planned streets and sidewalks, and the master plan; easements for public utilities; facilities for off-street parking; laying out, construction, and improving streets, alleys, and sidewalks; access to adjacent land and to existing or proposed streets; water mains for servicing fire hydrants; disposition of storm water; disposition of sewage and waste; control of flooding through site elevation or otherwise; control of slippage, shifting, erosion, accretion and subsidence of soil; dedication of public streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewers, drains, and other public improvements; protection to other land, structures, person, and property; guarantee of payment by the development [developer] of all costs or a proportionate share of costs for public streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewers, and drains; the submission and approval of site plans and plats prior to development of land; and procedures, enforcement, and penalties for violation of any such ordinance or ordinances. The procedures may include but shall not be limited to authorizing the director of public works or other designated officer to consider the site plans and plats in light of the regulations and restrictions applicable hereto and approve or disapprove site plans and plats in accordance therewith and may include the requirement of dedication of necessary public streets and easements in accordance with the master plan for said city. The provisions of this section shall in nowise repeal, amend, impair, or affect any other power, right, or privilege conferred by this Charter or any other provisions of general law.  
Sec. 2.07. - Construction and operation of sports and recreational facilities. 
The city shall have the power to acquire land for, construct and operate auditoriums, coliseums, convention centers, arenas, stadiums, parks, zoos and museums, and other sports and recreational facilities as the council shall deem appropriate. The city council shall have the power to provide by ordinance for the establishment of a department within the city government to manage and operate such facilities, which said department may have a department head but shall be under the supervision of the city manager. The council shall have the power to provide by ordinance for the control and regulation of such facilities and to delegate to such department or department head as may be established the powers and duties of maintaining, leasing, operating, and managing such facilities.  
CHAPTER 3. - CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Composition; election and terms. 
The council shall consist of seven (7) members, a mayor and six (6) councilmen, who shall be elected at large from the qualified voters of the city. There shall be a general municipal election on the first Tuesday in May of each even-numbered year. In May of nineteen hundred eighty-six there shall be elected three (3) councilmen, and in May of nineteen hundred eighty-eight there shall be elected three (3) councilmen and thereafter their respective successors shall be elected every four (4) years. In the May nineteen hundred eighty-four municipal election and every four (4) years thereafter there shall be elected at large from the voters of the city a mayor. The members shall take office on July one of the year in which their election takes place and shall qualify in the manner prescribed by general law, and remain in office until their successors have qualified. 
Provided, however, that in the municipal election held in May, nineteen hundred eighty-two, there shall be elected two (2) councilmen to serve four-year terms and a mayor to serve a two-year term and in the municipal election held in May, nineteen hundred eighty-four, there shall be elected four (4) councilmen with the councilman receiving the smallest vote among the four (4) elected serving a two-year term and the remaining three (3) councilmen serving four-year terms; in such year a mayor shall be elected as hereinabove provided. 
The council shall be a continuing body, and no measure pending before it shall abate or be discontinued by reason of the expiration of the term of office or the removal of the members of the body or any of them. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 617, § 1)  
Sec. 3.01:1. - Nomination of candidates for mayor and council. 
Candidates for the office of mayor and council shall be qualified voters of the city and shall file their notice of candidacy and be nominated only by petition in the manner prescribed by general law. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 617, § 1)  
Sec. 3.01:2. - Election of mayor. 
No candidate for election to the office of mayor shall simultaneously run for election to any other position on the council. 
In the event that a councilmember other than a sitting mayor desires to be a candidate for mayor, the councilmember not elected on the same election cycle as the mayor is eligible to do so but must tender his or her resignation as a councilmember at least ten days prior to the final date for filing petitions and notices of acceptance as specified by general law, with such resignation to be effective on June 30 of the election year. Such resignation shall state the councilmember's intention to be a candidate for mayor; require no formal acceptance by the remaining councilmembers, and be final and irrevocable as of the date it is tendered. 
The vacancy resulting from any such resignation shall be filled for the remaining two-year term at the same succeeding general municipal election at which the office for mayor is filled. Such two-year term shall begin on the first day of July next following the date of such election. 
(Acts 2015, Ch. 438 , § 1; Acts 2015, Ch. 440 , § 1)  
Sec. 3.02. - Vacancies in office of mayor and councilmen. 
Vacancies in the office of mayor and councilmen from whatever cause arising shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council, or if the council shall fail to act within sixty (60) days of the occurrence of the vacancy, by appointment of a majority of the judges of the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton, Virginia. The person so appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold office until the qualified voters shall fill the same by election and the person so elected shall have qualified. Such election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the general laws of the Commonwealth relating to the filling of vacancies in the office of mayor and city councilmen. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 617, § 1)  
Sec. 3.03. - Compensation of councilmen. 
Councilmen shall receive the sum of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month as compensation for their services. The mayor shall receive five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month. Provided, however, that after July one, nineteen hundred eighty, the mayor shall receive seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) per month. 
No member of the council shall during the term for which he was elected or for one year thereafter be appointed to any office of profit under the government of the city. However, this provision shall not apply to persons whose term of office on council has expired and who have been appointed to boards, committees, commissions, or authorities appointed by the council, nor to boards, committees, commissions, or authorities appointed by council where there is statutory authority for a member of council to serve thereon during his term of office.  
Sec. 3.04. - Rules of procedure. 
The council shall have power, subject to the provisions of this charter, to adopt its own rules of procedure. Such rules shall provide for the time and place of holding regular meetings of the council, which shall be not less frequently than once in each month. They shall also provide for the calling of special meetings by the mayor, the city manager, or any three (3) members of the council, and shall prescribe the method of giving notice thereof, provided that the notice of each special meeting shall contain a statement of the specific item or items of business to be transacted and no other business shall be transacted at such meeting except by unanimous consent of all the members of the council. A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.  
Sec. 3.05. - Voting. 
No ordinance, resolution, motion, or vote shall be adopted by the council except at a meeting open to the public and, except motions to adjourn, to fix the time and place of adjournment, and other motions of a purely procedural nature, unless it shall have received the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members. All voting except on procedural motions shall be by roll call and the ayes and noes shall be recorded in the journal.  
Sec. 3.06. - Meeting of council; mayor and vice-mayor. 
At the first meeting of the council immediately following the taking of office of councilmen after a general councilmanic election, the council shall select by majority vote of all the members thereof one of their number to be vice-mayor for a two-year term. The first meeting of a newly elected council shall take place on the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in the month of July following the election at 12:00 noon at a place specified in the notice sent to the council members in accordance with the provisions of § 3.04 pertaining to special meetings. At or before this first meeting, the oath of office shall be administered to the duly elected members as provided by law. 
The mayor shall preside over the meetings of council and shall have the same right to vote and speak therein as other members. He shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, the purposes of military law, and the service of civil process. The vice-mayor, in the absence or disability of the mayor, shall perform the duties of mayor. In the absence or disability of both the mayor and the vice-mayor, the council shall by majority vote of those present, choose one of their number to perform the duties of mayor. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 617, § 1; Acts 2013, Ch. 552, § 1 )  
Sec. 3.07. - Clerk to the council. 
The council shall appoint a clerk to the council for an indefinite term. He shall keep the journal of the council's proceedings and shall record all ordinances in a book kept for that purpose and shall record same in the clerk's office of the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton. He shall be the custodian of the corporate seal of the city and shall be the officer authorized to use and authenticate it. He shall receive such compensation as clerk to the council as may be determined by the council.  
Sec. 3.08. - Powers of city council. 
All powers of the City of Hampton as a body politic and corporate shall be vested in the council except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The council shall be the policy-determining body of the city and shall be vested with all the rights and powers conferred on councils in cities of the first class, not inconsistent with this Charter. In addition to the foregoing, the council shall have the following powers: 
A.  To have full power to inquire into the official conduct of any office or officer under its control, and to investigate the accounts, receipts, disbursements, and expenses of any city officer; for these purposes it may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and require the production of books, papers, and other evidence; and in case any witness fails or refuses to obey any such lawful order of the council, he shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
B.  To provide for the performance of all the governmental functions of the city and to that end to provide for and set up all departments and agencies of government that shall be necessary. Whenever it is not designated in this Charter what officer or employee of the city shall exercise any power or perform any duty conferred upon or required of the city, or any officer thereof, by general law, then any such power shall be exercised or duly performed by that officer or employee of the city so designated by ordinance or resolution of the council. Any activity which is not assigned by the provisions of this Charter to specific departments or agencies of the city government shall, upon recommendation of the city manager, be assigned by the council to the appropriate department or agency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter, the council may, upon recommendation of the city manager, create, abolish, reassign, transfer, or combine any city functions, activities, or departments by ordinance. 
C.  After the close of each fiscal year the council shall cause to be made an independent audit of the accounts, books, records, and financial transactions of the city by the auditor of public accounts of the Commonwealth or by a firm of independent certified public accountants to be selected by the council. The report of such audit shall be filed within such time as the council shall specify and one copy thereof shall be always available for public inspection in the office of the clerk to the council during regular business hours. 
D.  Either the council or the city manager may at any time order an examination or audit of the accounts of any officer or department of the city government. Upon the retirement, death, resignation, removal, or expiration of the term of the city manager, director of finance, commissioner of revenue, or city treasurer, the director shall cause an audit and investigation of the accounts of such officer to be made and shall report the results thereof to the city manager and the council. If as a result of any such audit, an officer be found indebted to the city, the council shall proceed forthwith to collect such indebtedness. 
E.  The council shall by ordinance define and establish a classification plan and fix a schedule of compensation for all city officers and employees other than the constitutional officers, which shall provide uniform compensation for like services. 
F.  To prescribe the amount and condition of surety bonds to be required of such officers and employees of the city as the council may prescribe. 
G.  The council may request by resolution that the circuit court for the city order a referendum held on any question set forth in such resolution. The results of the vote on the referendum shall be binding on council and shall be final on the question. The referendum shall be held and the result ascertained in accordance with applicable general law. The council may instead request that a referendum be nonbinding on the council and for advisory purposes only. There shall be no recount of the results of an advisory referendum. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 617, § 1; Acts 1996, Ch. 311, § 1)  
Sec. 3.09. - Redevelopment and housing authority. 
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, there shall be seven (7) commissioners of the Hampton Redevelopment and Housing Authority. 
Commissioners shall hold their offices at the pleasure of the council for a term not to exceed four (4) years; provided, however, the council may at any time, and from time to time, adopt an ordinance terminating the term of all the commissioners and designating itself the commissioners of the authority. In that event, notwithstanding the provisions of section 3.11 to the contrary, a council member shall receive no compensation for serving as a commissioner nor shall he continue to serve as a commissioner after he ceases to be a member of council. 
The council may at any time repeal such ordinance designating itself the commissioners and appoint residents of the city to serve as the commissioners. 
The establishment and organization of the Hampton Redevelopment and Housing Authority heretofore established under the provisions of this Charter, together with all proceedings, acts, and things heretofore undertaken are hereby validated, ratified, and confirmed.  
Sec. 3.10. - Compensation of members of any authority. 
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the council of the city may authorize the compensation of each member of any authority, board, agency, or commission, including the housing authority or planning commission, created by the council of the City of Hampton and existing in the city to be compensated in an amount not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month and such amount shall be deemed to be a part of the operating expense of such authority, board, agency, or commission.  
Sec. 3.11. - Appointment of civil service employees of federal government to boards, commissions and authorities. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, civil service employees of the federal government, residing within the city, may be appointed to, and serve on, all boards, commissions and authorities appointed by the city council.  
Sec. 3.12. - Limitation of terms on certain appointments. 
No person, except a member of council, officer, or employee of the city, who is to be appointed to a term exceeding one year by the city council shall be eligible to serve more than two (2) complete terms in succession and the portion of an unexpired term occurring by reason of a vacancy.  
CHAPTER 3A. - RECALL, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM  
RECALL 
 
Sec. 3A-1. - Procedure. 
Any member of the council may be recalled and removed from office by the electors by the following procedure: A petition for the recall for the member or members designated, signed by electors equal in number to at least ten percent of the number of electors who cast their vote at the last preceding regular councilmanic election and containing a statement of factual reasons of not more than two hundred words of the grounds of the recall, shall be filed with the clerk to the council. Within fifteen days of the date such petition was filed the clerk shall have the general registrar of the city certify that the petition has the number of signatures of electors required to meet the abovementioned percentage. If the petition contains the required number of signatures, the clerk shall forthwith notify the member or members sought to be removed, and such member or members may, within ten days after such notice, file with the clerk a defensive statement of not more than two hundred words. The clerk shall, immediately upon the expiration of ten days, cause sufficient printed or typewritten copies of such petition, without the signatures, to be made, and to each of them he shall attach a printed or typewritten copy of such defensive statement or statements, if any such shall have been furnished him within the time provided. He shall preserve the original petition and any defensive statements in his office. He shall cause a copy of such petition with a copy of any defensive statement to be placed in the office of the general registrar of the city, who shall provide facilities for signing the petition and for the proper custody thereof. The clerk shall immediately cause notice to be published in some newspaper of general circulation in the city, of the place where the copies may be found, and of the time in which the same may be signed. 
The petition shall remain on file in the place designated for a period of thirty days, during which time it may be signed by electors of the city, including those who signed the original petition. 
At the expiration of said period of thirty days, the clerk shall assemble all of the copies, and shall file the same as one instrument with the clerk of the circuit court of the city, who shall examine the same and ascertain and certify thereon whether the persons whose names are signed thereto are electors of the city, equal in number of twenty-five percent of the number of electors who cast their vote at the last preceding regular councilmanic election; provided, however, the clerk of circuit court shall have the general registrar to certify which names on the petition are electors before certifying any petition himself. The general registrar and the clerk of the circuit court shall make their certifications within fifteen days of the date of filing. If such signatures do amount to such percentage, the clerk of the circuit court of the city shall at once serve notice of that fact upon the member or the members designated in the petition. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-2. - Recall election. 
If the member or members, or any of them, designated in such petition, file with the clerk to the council, within five days after the last mentioned notice from the clerk of the circuit court of the city, his or their written resignation or resignations, the clerk to the council shall at once notify the clerk of the circuit court of the city of that fact, and such resignation or resignations shall be irrevocable, and shall be filed and preserved in the offices of the clerk to the council, and the council shall proceed to fill the vacancy or vacancies, subject to the provisions of § 3.02 of this Charter. In the absence of notice from the clerk to the council that such resignation or resignations have been filed, as aforesaid, the clerk of the circuit court of the city shall, upon the expiration of said period of five days, forthwith present to the court the copies with his certificate as to the percentage of electors whose names are signed thereto, and a certificate as to the date of the service of the notice given by him to the member or members designated in the petition, as above provided. And thereupon the court shall forthwith enter an order calling and fixing a date for holding a recall election for the removal of the member or members named in the petition, who have not resigned as aforesaid. Any such election shall be held in accordance with the provisions of § 24.1-165 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-3. - Ballots and effect of voting. 
The ballots of such recall election shall provide, with respect to each person whose removal is sought, the following question: "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of councilman by recall?" 
In all other respects the election shall be held in accordance with general law. 
In any election, if the majority of the votes cast on the question of the removal of any member are affirmative, such member shall be deemed removed from office upon the ascertainment and certification of the results of such election as in other special elections, and the vacancy or vacancies caused by such recall shall be filled by the remainder of the council, according to the provisions of § 3.02 of this Charter. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-4. - Effect of resignations pending proceedings for the recall of the whole council. 
No proceedings for the recall of all of the members of the council at the same election shall be defeated in whole or in part by the resignation of any of them or all of them, but in any such case upon the resignation of any of them, the remaining members of council or if all members of council resign, then the judges of the circuit court, as provided for in § 3.02 of this Charter, shall have the power, and it shall be their duty forthwith, to fill such vacancy or vacancies temporarily until successors are elected, and the proceedings for the recall and the election of successors shall continue and have the same effect as though there had been no resignation. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-5. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
No petition to recall any member shall be filed within one year after he assumes the duties of his office. 
The method of removal herein provided shall not be deemed or held exclusive, but is in addition to such other methods as are now or may hereafter be provided by general law. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
INITIATIVE 
 
Sec. 3A-6. - Procedure. 
Any proposed ordinance or ordinances, including ordinances for the repeal or amendment of an existing ordinance, may be submitted to the council by petition signed by electors equal in number to ten percent of the number of electors who cast their votes at the last preceding regular councilmanic election. Such petition shall contain the proposed ordinance in full, and shall have appended thereto or written thereon the names and addresses of at least five electors, who shall be officially regarded as filing the petition, and who shall constitute a committee of petitioners for the purposes hereinafter stated. An affidavit signed by the committee of petitioners shall be attached to the petition stating the date the petition was first circulated. 
All papers comprising the petition shall be assembled and filed with the clerk of the council, as one instrument, within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date stated in the affidavit that the petition was first circulated. Within fifteen days of the date the petition is filed, the clerk shall have the general registrar of the city certify that the petition has the number of signatures of electors required to meet the abovementioned percentage. After the general registrar has certified that the number of signatures of electors meets the required percentage, the clerk shall submit the petition to the council at its next regular meeting, and provisions shall be made for public hearings upon the proposed ordinance. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-7. - Petition for election. 
The council shall at once proceed to consider such petition and shall take final action thereon within sixty days from the date of the submission thereof. If the council rejects the proposed ordinance, or passes it in a form different from that set forth in the petition, or fails to act finally upon it within the time stated, the committee of the petitioners may require that it be submitted to a vote of the electors in its original form, or that it be submitted to a vote of the electors with any proposed change, addition or amendment, by the following procedure: The committee shall present to the clerk of the circuit court of the city a petition for such election, addressed to the court and signed by electors equal in number to twenty-five percent of the number of electors who cast their votes at the last preceding regular councilmanic election, but in no case signed by less than four thousand electors of the city. The petition shall contain the proposed ordinance in full in the form in which it is to be submitted to the electors. The petition and all copies thereof shall be filed with the clerk as one instrument. Within fifteen days after the filing thereof the clerk shall examine the same and ascertain and certify thereon whether the persons whose names are signed thereto are electors of the city, equal in number to twenty-five percent of the number of electors who cast their votes at the last preceding regular councilmanic election; provided, however, the clerk of the circuit court shall have the general registrar certify which names on a petition are electors before certifying any petition himself. The general registrar and the clerk of the circuit court shall make their certifications within fifteen days of the date of filing. If it be found that the required number of electors have signed the petition, then the petition, with the certificate of the clerk thereon, shall be presented by the committee to the circuit court of the city, and thereupon the court shall forthwith enter an order calling and fixing a date for holding an election for the purpose of submitting the proposed ordinance to the electors of the city. Any such election shall be in accordance with § 24.1-165 of the Code of Virginia. At least ten days before any such election, the clerk of the court shall cause such proposed ordinance to be published once in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-8. - Ballots and effect of voting. 
The ballots at such election shall conform to § 24.1-165 of the Code of Virginia. With respect to each ordinance whose adoption, amendment, or repeal is sought, the following question shall be submitted: "Shall the ordinance entitled (title of ordinance) be (either adopted, amended, or repealed, as appropriate)?" 
If a majority of the electors voting on such proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, the proposed ordinance, upon the ascertainment and certification of the results of such election as in other special elections, shall become an ordinance of the city. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-9. - Ordinances adopted by the electors; how amended or repealed. 
No ordinance adopted by the vote of electors, as herein provided, shall be repealed or amended, except by vote of the electors; but the circuit court of the city may, on request of the council, by resolution, order that a proposed ordinance repealing or amending any ordinance so adopted be submitted to the electors at any election, or any special municipal election called for some other purpose, provided that the clerk of the court shall cause notice of the proposed submission of such proposed ordinance repealing or amending such ordinance, to be published once in one or more newspapers of the city not less than ten days prior to the election. If an amendment is proposed, the notice shall contain the proposed amendment in full, and the ballot shall be in the same form and the vote shall have the same effect as in the case of an ordinance submitted to election by popular petition. The ballots and effect of voting shall be as provided in § 3A-8 of this Charter. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
REFERENDUM 
 
Sec. 3A-10. - Petition for referendum. 
If at any time within a thirty-day period following the adoption of an ordinance, a petition, signed by electors equal in number to twenty-five percent of the number of electors who cast their votes at the last preceding regular councilmanic election, but in no case signed by less than four thousand electors of the city, be filed with the clerk to the council, requesting that any such ordinance be repealed, or amended, as stated in the petition, such ordinance shall not become operative until the steps indicated herein shall have been taken or the time allowed for taking such steps shall have elapsed without action. Such petition shall state therein the names and addresses of at least five electors, who shall be officially regarded as filing the petition, and who shall constitute a committee of petitioners for the purposes hereinafter stated. Referendum petitions shall contain the text of the ordinance or ordinances, the amendment or repeal of which is sought, and shall contain the proposed amendment, if an amendment is demanded. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-11. - Procedures. 
The clerk to the council shall present the petition to the council at its next regular meeting, and thereupon the council shall consider the ordinance. If, within sixty days after filing of such petition, the ordinance is not repealed or amended as requested in such petition, the clerk to the council shall, if so requested by a writing signed by a majority of the committee and presented to the clerk to the council within twenty days after the expiration of sixty days, present to the clerk of the circuit court of the city, the petition and all copies thereof as one instrument together with a copy of the ordinance the repeal or amendment of which is sought. The clerk of the circuit court of the city shall examine the petition and ascertain and certify thereon whether the persons whose names are signed thereto are electors of the city, equal in number to twenty-five percent of the number of electors who cast their votes at the last preceding regular councilmanic election; provided, however, the clerk of the circuit court shall have the general registrar to certify which names on a petition are electors before certifying any petition himself. The general registrar and the clerk of the circuit court shall make their certifications within fifteen days of the date of filing. If such signatures do amount to such percentage, the committee shall present the petition to the circuit court of the city, and thereupon the said court shall forthwith enter an order calling and fixing a date for holding an election for the purpose of submitting the ordinance to the electors of the city. Thereupon the ordinance shall ipso facto be further suspended from going into effect until such election shall have been held and shall then be deemed repealed or amended upon the approval by a majority of those voting thereon. Any such election shall be held in accordance with § 24.1-165 of the Code of Virginia. At least ten days before any such election the clerk of the court shall cause the ordinance to be published once in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city. 
The ballots used when voting upon such ordinance shall conform in all respects to the ballots required for an initiative election under § 3A-8 hereof, and the method of voting in any such election shall be as prescribed in said section. 
If in any such election the ordinance so referred or submitted be approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon, the said ordinance shall, upon the ascertainment and certification of the results of such election as in other special elections, go into effect as an ordinance of the city. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-12. - Conflict of ordinances. 
If two or more ordinances adopted or approved at the same election conflict in respect to any of their provisions, such ordinances shall go into effect in respect to such of their provisions as are not in conflict, and the one receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail insofar as their provisions conflict. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-13. - Measures not subject to referendum. 
Ordinances passed providing for any work, improvement or repair certified by the city manager to be immediately necessary to protect public safety, public property, health or morals from imminent danger or protect the city from imminent loss or liability, shall not be subject to referendum. The certificate of the city manager in any such case shall be conclusive. Any ordinance adopted to authorize revenue levies shall not be subject to referendum. All other ordinances unless exempted by law shall be subject to referendum. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 
 
Sec. 3A-14. - Elections. 
All municipal elections shall be conducted and the results canvassed and certified by the regular election officials provided by the general election laws of the State, and, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, all such elections shall be governed by the general election laws. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-15. - Petitions. 
All petitions referred to in this Charter shall be signed in ink or indelible pencil by the elector in person and not by agent or attorney. Each person signing any such petition shall print opposite his signature his full name and his place of residence by street and number. The signatures to any such petition need not all be appended to one paper, but to each such paper (except in the case of copies of recall petitions, which may not be circulated) there shall be attached an affidavit by the circulator thereof stating that each signature appended thereto is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. All copies of any such petition shall be treated as originals. No such petition shall be deemed invalid by reason of the fact that it is signed by one or more persons who are not electors, but the names of such persons shall not be counted. As used in this Charter the terms "elector," "qualified elector," "registered voter," and "qualified voter" are synonymous. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-16. - Presumptions. 
All signatures to any petition referred to in this Charter shall be accepted and treated as prima facie genuine. For the purpose of certifying the number of electors whose names are signed to any such petition the clerk of the circuit court of the city shall presume that any person whose name appears thereon is an elector if such person be an elector within the meaning of section 3A-13 hereof. All such petitions substantially complying with the requirements of this Charter and certified by the clerk of the circuit court to bear the required number of signatures of electors shall be accepted and treated as prima facie sufficient. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-17. - Qualifications of persons signing certain petitions. 
Any person shall be deemed to be an elector for the purpose of signing any petition referred to in this Charter if the name of such person is on the registration books maintained by the general registrar of the city on the date such petition is filed with the appropriate official. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-18. - Duty of city attorney. 
Before any ordinance or amendment proposed by popular petition shall be submitted to the council, it shall first be approved, as to form, by the city attorney, whose duty it shall be to draft such proposed ordinance or amendment in proper legal language, and to render such other service to persons desiring to propose such ordinances or amendments as shall be necessary to make the same proper for consideration by the council. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-19. - Offenses. 
No person shall: 
a.  Falsely impersonate another in the signing of any nominating petition or petition for the initiative, referendum or recall, or forge any name thereto or deface, destroy or remove from any of the places designated in this Charter, any copy of a petition for recall with intent to interfere with or defeat such recall: 
b.  Sign any nominating petition or petition for initiative, referendum with knowledge that he is not a qualified voter of the city; or purposely write his name or residence falsely in the signing of any such petition; sign or intentionally permit to be signed any petition for recall at any other place than one of the places hereinbefore designated for the signing of such petitions; employ or pay another or accept employment on the basis of the number of signatures subscribed thereto, for circulating any petition permitted by this Charter to be circulated. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
The foregoing provisions shall not be deemed or held to be exclusive of, but in addition to, all laws of the State prescribing penalties for the same offenses, or for other offenses relating to the same matter. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
Sec. 3A-20. - Compensation of clerk of the circuit court. 
For his services in connection with any proceedings under the foregoing sections relating to the initiative, referendum and recall, the clerk of the circuit court of said city shall be paid by the city such reasonable fees as are now or may hereafter be provided by law for similar services in other cases. 
(Acts 1981, Ch. 366, § 1)  
CHAPTER 4. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 4.01. - Appointment, tenure, compensation and residence. 
The council shall appoint a city manager, who need not be a resident of the city at the time of his appointment, and fix his compensation. He shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city and shall devote his full time to the work of the city. No member of the council shall, during the time for which he has been elected, or for one year thereafter, be chosen city manager, nor shall the managerial powers be given to a person who at the same time is filling an elective office. 
The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite tenure, but shall be removable at the pleasure of the council. The council may suspend him from office, provided that the period of suspension shall be limited to thirty (30) days. The action of the council in suspending or removing the city manager shall not be subject to review. 
In case of the absence or disability of the city manager, the council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office.  
Sec. 4.02. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the city which the council has authority to control. As the administrative and executive head of the city government, he shall be responsible to the council for guarding adequately all expenditures; securing proper accounting for all funds; looking after the physical property of the city; exercising general supervision of all city departments, institutions and agencies; and coordinating the various activities of the city and unifying the management of its affairs. To accomplish these purposes he shall have the following specific powers and duties: 
a.  The city manager shall appoint heads of departments and all officers and employees in the administrative service of the city, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, and shall appoint subordinates in such departments and agencies. All appointments shall be on the basis of ability, training and experience of the appointees which fit them for the work they are to perform. All appointments shall be without definite term. Any officer or employee of the city appointed by the city manager, or upon his authorization, may be laid off, suspended or removed from office or employment either by the manager or by the officer by whom he was appointed. 
b.  The city manager may, with the consent of the council, act as the director or head of one or more departments of the city, provided he is otherwise eligible to head such department or departments, and, in the case of those officers whose appointments must be approved, his appointment is likewise approved. 
c.  With the approval of the council, the city manager shall, subject to the limitations of section 3.08 e., fix the compensation of all officers and employees whom he or a subordinate may appoint or employ. 
d.  The city manager shall enforce all resolutions and orders of the council and see that all laws of the state required to be enforced through the council or other city officers subject to the control of the council are faithfully executed. 
e.  He shall attend all meetings of the council and have the right to take part in all discussions, to present his views on all matters coming before the council, and to recommend such action as he may deem expedient. He shall have no vote. 
f.  He shall submit to the council each year a proposed annual budget, with his recommendations and execute the budget as finally adopted. 
g.  He shall make regular monthly reports to the council in regard to matters of administration and keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition of the city. 
h.  He shall examine regularly the books and papers of every officer and department of the city and report to the council the condition in which he finds them. He may order an audit of any officer at any time. 
i.  All fines and forfeitures, fees and costs, imposed, assessed or taxed by the courts of the said city, for violation of the city ordinances, may be collected by such members of the police department or other persons as may be designated by the city manager with the approval of the council to collect same, who shall furnish bond with surety as fixed and approved by the council. 
j.  The city manager shall perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by the council.  
Sec. 4.03. - Absence. 
To perform the duties of the city manager in the event of his temporary absence, disability, death, or resignation, the council may, by resolution, appoint an officer of the city or any person other than a member of council to perform the duties of manager until said manager returns to duty or his successor is duly appointed.  
CHAPTER 5. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Establishment of legal department; qualifications; composition; terms; powers and duties, etc. 
There shall be a legal department which shall be headed by the city attorney, who shall be an attorney at law licensed to practice under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. He shall be appointed by the council and shall serve at its pleasure. The legal department shall consist of the city attorney and such other employees as may be provided by ordinance. 
The city attorney shall be the chief legal advisor of the council, the city manager and of all departments, boards, commissions and agencies of the city, including the school board, in all matters affecting the interests of the city. He shall represent the city in all legal proceedings including the prosecution of violations of city ordinances. He shall make such investigation into any affairs of the city as the city manager or council shall direct. It shall be his duty to perform all services incident to his position as may be required by the laws of the Commonwealth, this Charter, or by ordinance. He shall have general management and control of the department. 
(Acts 2007, Ch. 275, § 1)  
CHAPTER 6. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Department of finance. 
There shall be a department of finance which shall be under the supervision of a director of finance, appointed by the city manager, and which shall include the city treasurer and the city commissioner of the revenue and their respective offices, insofar as said inclusion is not inconsistent with the Constitution and general laws of this Commonwealth.  
Sec. 6.02. - Director of finance; appointment and qualifications. 
The director of finance shall be appointed by and under the supervision of the city manager. He shall be selected on the basis of his knowledge and experience in financial management and municipal accounting.  
Sec. 6.03. - General duties of director. 
The director of finance shall be the chief financial manager for the city and is responsible, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, to the city manager for the development and administration of an integrated citywide financial management system encompassing all aspects of the city's annual and long range financial operations.  
Sec. 6.04. - Expenditures and accounts. 
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, unless authorized under the provisions of section 6.11 or 6.12 of this Charter. Payments by the city shall be made only in such a manner as the council may by ordinance prescribe.  
Sec. 6.05. - Director; bond. 
The director of finance shall provide a bond with such surety and in such a manner as the city council may require.  
Sec. 6.06. - Real estate assessment department; office of assessor of real estate; board of review of real estate assessments; real estate assessment and reassessment generally. 
The city council may, in lieu of the method now prescribed by law, provide by ordinance for the annual assessment and reassessment and equalization of assessments of real estate for local taxation. To that end there may be established a city real estate assessment department to be known as the "office of the assessor of real estate" and the city manager shall appoint the head of such department and such department shall assess all such real estate for taxation and equalize such assessments. The budget for the city real estate assessment department shall be as provided by the city council. 
All duties imposed and all powers conferred by law on the commissioner of the revenue with respect to the assessment of real estate, including but not limited to the preparation of the land book, shall be transferred to the assessment department established as herein provided. In the preparation of the tax bills, the assessment department and the city treasurer, respectively, may avail themselves of the services of the data processing department of the city. 
All real estate shall be assessed at its fair market value as of January one of each year, and taxes for each year on such real estate shall be extended on the basis of the last assessment made prior to such year, subject to such changes as may have been lawfully made. 
There shall be established a board of review of real estate assessments composed of five (5) members to which review or appeal of real estate assessments may be made as a matter of right. The members of such board of review shall be appointed by the city council for terms of four (4) years, provided that the council may appoint or reappoint members for lesser terms in order that the term of one member of the board shall expire each year. All members of such board shall be residents of and own real property within the city. Such members shall receive such compensation for their services as shall be provided by ordinance and the members of such board shall be removable by the council, after fifteen (15) days' written notice to any such member and a hearing, if demanded, by such member, for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office. All vacancies shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term. The board of review shall have and may exercise the power to revise, correct and amend any and all assessments of real estate made by the assessment department. Such board shall have all the powers conferred upon boards of equalization by Sections 58-903 to 58-912, both inclusive, of the Code of Virginia. Notwithstanding any such provision of law, the board of review may adopt rules and regulations of procedure pertaining to requests for review or appeal. The board shall elect one of its members as chairman and a secretary, who need not be a member of the board, and may employ necessary clerical or other personnel, subject to appropriation made by the city council in accordance with this Charter. All such proceedings shall be in public session and no decision shall be made unless and until such board shall have heard a report on such assessment from the real estate assessment department. Any person, including the city real estate assessment department, aggrieved by any assessment made by the board of review may apply for relief to the courts in the manner provided by Sections 58-1145 to 58-1151, both inclusive, of the Code of Virginia. 
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as authorizing the assessment of property required to be assessed by the state corporation commission by the Constitution of Virginia. The members of the present board shall continue to serve their appointed terms.  
Sec. 6.07. - Disposition of moneys. 
All moneys received or collected for the use of the city from any source shall be paid over, held and disbursed as the council may order or resolve, and in such depository or depositories as may be prescribed by the council, either by ordinance or resolution. Such depository or depositories may be required to furnish such security, and under such conditions, as the council may prescribe, not inconsistent with general laws of the Commonwealth. Council may prescribe an investment policy and cash management plan including the use of such techniques as repurchase agreements as they deem necessary and not inconsistent with general laws of the Commonwealth.  
Sec. 6.08. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July and shall end on the last day of June of each calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.  
Sec. 6.09. - Tentative budget. 
The city manager shall, on or before April fifteen of each year, prepare and submit to the council a budget. The budget shall serve as a financial plan for the city, and the city manager in the budget message shall describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current financial and expenditure policies, and include such other material as the city manager deems desirable or as the council may from time to time require. The budget shall show all estimated income, indicating the property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures, including debt service and capital program, and shall be in a form as the manager deems desirable or the council may require. The total of proposed general fund expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated general fund income.  
Sec. 6.10. - Public hearing; notice; publication. 
A brief synopsis of the tentative operating and capital budgets shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city, and notice given of one or more public hearings, at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, at which a citizen or property owner of the city shall have the right to attend and state his views thereon. Such hearing may be adjourned from time to time until completed. 
(Acts 1989, Ch. 125, § 1)  
Sec. 6.11. - Approval and adoption of budget. 
Following such public hearing, and before the annual tax levy is made, the council shall approve its final budget for the next ensuing fiscal year by means of an annual appropriation ordinance. 
The budget shall be adopted by the votes of at least a majority of all members of the council. The budget shall be formally adopted not later than the first day of the last month of the fiscal year. Should the council take no final action on or prior to such day, the budget, as submitted, shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the council.  
Sec. 6.12. - Additional appropriations. 
a.  Supplemental appropriations. If available from surplus from previous year's operations or from planned fund balance in the current budget as adopted, the council by resolution may make supplemental appropriations for the year not to exceed the amount of such balance. Supplemental appropriations may also be made by council by resolution not to exceed the unanticipated revenue from the Commonwealth or federal sources where council has previously or currently approved the city's participation in such programs. 
b.  Emergency appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting the life, health, property, or the public peace, the council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the council may by such emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid no later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the emergency appropriation was made. Such appropriations shall not exceed limits established by the Constitution of Virginia. 
c.  Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it appears possible to the city manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to the amount appropriated, he shall report to the council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of deficit, any remedial action taken by him, and his recommendation as to any other steps to be taken. The council shall then by resolution take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent any deficit. 
d.  Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the city manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance within a department, office or agency, and such transfers shall be reported to the council at least quarterly. Upon recommendation by the city manager, the council may by resolution transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation from one department, office or agency to another.  
Sec. 6.13. - Borrowing powers. 
The council may, in the name and for the use of the city, incur indebtedness by issuing its negotiable bonds or notes for the purposes, in the manner, and to the extent provided for in the following paragraphs of this chapter.  
Sec. 6.14. - Purpose for which bonds or notes may be issued. 
Bonds, and notes in anticipation of bonds when the issuance of bonds has been authorized as hereinafter provided, may be issued for any purpose for which cities of the first class are authorized to issue bonds by the Constitution or general laws of this state. All bonds shall be in serial form payable, as consecutively numbered, in annual installments, the first of which shall be payable not more than one year from the date of issue of such bonds. 
Notes in anticipation of collection of revenue may be issued, when authorized by the council, at any time during the fiscal year, provided that said notes shall mature not later than twelve (12) months after date of issue, and in amount not in excess of the revenues anticipated.  
Sec. 6.15. - Manner of issuing bonds and notes. 
Bonds and notes of the city shall be issued in the manner provided by general law.  
Sec. 6.16. - Limitation of indebtedness. 
In the issuance of bonds and notes, the city shall be subject to the limitations as to amount which are contained in Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia.  
Sec. 6.17. - Collection of taxes; book of delinquent taxes. 
The city collector of taxes shall have any or all the powers which are now or which may be hereafter vested in any office of the state charged with the collection of state taxes and may collect the same in the same manner in which the state taxes are collected by any officer of this state. No deed of trust or mortgage upon goods and chattels shall prevent the same from being distrained or sold for taxes assessed thereon, no matter in whose possession such goods and chattels may be found. A tenant from whom payment of taxes on his landlord's property shall be obtained by distress or otherwise shall have credit for the same against such person on account of his rent, unless by contract the tenant is to pay such taxes. The council may require a list of all real estate in the City of Hampton delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes thereon for the preceding year to be recorded in a book of delinquent taxes to be kept in the office of the director of finance.  
Sec. 6.18. - Tax penalties; collection of taxes from party about to remove from city. 
The council may impose penalties for the nonpayment of city taxes and levies and for the failure to make any return required by law for the assessment of taxes, and may cause such penalty to be added to the amount of taxes and levies due from taxpayers, as it may by ordinance or resolution from time to time prescribe; and, after such penalty has been added the city collector shall have the power of distress, garnishment or action and any other power now possessed or that may hereafter be given to any person charged with the collection of state taxes after the penalty for the nonpayment of state taxes has been added. 
Should it come to the knowledge of the city collector of taxes that any person, firm, or corporation owing taxes or levies to the city is moving or contemplating moving therefrom prior to the time said penalty must be added by the council, he shall have the right to collect taxes by distress, garnishment, suit, or action or otherwise at any time after such bills for taxes have come into his hands.  
CHAPTER 7. - DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
 
Sec. 7.01. - School board and superintendent of schools. 
The city shall provide for public education through a city school board, a superintendent of schools, and the employees thereof. The school board and the superintendent of schools shall exercise all the powers conferred and perform all the duties imposed upon them by general law. The school board shall be composed of seven members who shall be elected for terms of four years in the manner prescribed by applicable law. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner provided in § 3.02 for the filling of vacancies of city council members, with interim appointments to be made by a majority vote of the remaining members of the school board. The school board shall appoint a school superintendent who shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her professional qualifications. 
( Acts 2013, Ch. 552, § 1 )  
Sec. 7.02. - Compensation of school board members. 
The school board shall pay each of its members an annual salary in accordance with Section 22.1-32 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Acts 1989, Ch. 125, § 1)  
CHAPTER 8. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Department of public health. 
There shall be a department of public health which shall consist of the director of public health, to be appointed by the city manager and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions, and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by the orders of the director consistent therewith.  
Sec. 8.02. - Functions. 
The department of public health shall be responsible for the exercise of all health functions imposed on municipalities by general law and such other functions as may be assigned to the department.  
Sec. 8.03. - Director of public health. 
The head of the department of public health shall be the director of public health. He shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions, and other units of the department. He shall have all the powers and duties with respect to the preservation of the public health which now are or may hereafter be conferred or imposed on municipal boards of health and health officers by the laws of the Commonwealth, as well as the powers and duties conferred or imposed on him by this Charter and the ordinances of the city.  
Sec. 8.04. - Board of health. 
The council may select two (2) qualified citizens of the city, who together with the director of public health shall constitute the board of health. The board of health shall advise and cooperate with the department of health and shall have power to adopt necessary rules and regulations, not in conflict with law, concerning the department. The provisions of general law relating to the establishment of local boards of health shall not apply to the City of Hampton.  
Sec. 8.05. - Contractual services. 
The council may, in its discretion, effectuate the powers, duties and functions assigned to the department of public health in this chapter through contractual agreements with the state department of health and neighboring cities and counties.  
CHAPTER 9. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Supervision and composition. 
There shall be a department of public safety which shall be under the supervision of the city manager and shall consist of the division of fire and division of police.  
Sec. 9.02. - Divisions of police and fire. 
The department of public safety shall consist of the division of fire and the division of police and such other functions and activities as may be assigned to it by the city council. 
The division of police shall consist of such police officers as may be appointed and shall be under the supervision of a chief of police to be appointed by the city manager. The chief of police and police officers shall have the powers and duties of police officers as provided by the general laws of the Commonwealth, and by ordinances of the city council. They shall receive such compensation as may be prescribed by the city council in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
The division of fire shall consist of such persons as may be appointed and shall be under the supervision of a fire chief to be appointed by the city manager. The fire chief and persons appointed shall have the powers and perform such duties as may be provided by the general laws of the Commonwealth, ordinances of the city, or prescribed by the city manager and shall receive such compensation as may be prescribed by the city council in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.  
CHAPTER 10. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Department of public works. 
There shall be a department of public works which shall consist of the director of public works to be appointed by the city manager and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions, and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by the orders of the director consistent therewith.  
Sec. 10.02. - Functions. 
The department of public works shall be responsible for the construction of all public buildings, streets, roads, bridges, drains, sewers, garbage and refuse collection and disposal, and all other public works and construction; the custody of such equipment and supplies as the council may require; and such other powers and duties as may be assigned to the department.  
Sec. 10.03. - Director of public works. 
The head of the department of public works shall be the director of public works. He shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department.  
CHAPTER 11. - DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES 
 
Sec. 11.01. - Director of social services. 
There shall be a department of social services which shall consist of the director of social services appointed by the city manager and such other officers and employees as may be assigned to this department in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. He shall have charge of the social service functions of the city and such other functions and activities as may be assigned to him in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. The director of social services shall, subject to the provisions of this Charter, act as the local board of social services in accordance with the provisions of general law relating to the administration of social services and/or public welfare in cities of the first class. 
However, the council may be ordinance establish a local board of social services to consist of not less than three (3) nor more than five (5) citizens of the city which shall, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, have the same powers and functions as local social service and/or public welfare boards in cities of the first class, or which may be created to serve in a purely advisory capacity to the director of social services.  
CHAPTER 12. - DEPARTMENT OF RECORDS 
 
Sec. 12.01. - Clerk of circuit court. 
The department of records shall be under the supervision and control of the clerk of the Circuit Court for the City of Hampton. 
The clerk shall, subject to the provisions of this Charter, exercise all the powers conferred and perform all the duties imposed upon such officers by general law and be subject to the obligations and penalties imposed by general law.  
CHAPTER 13. - CITY SHERIFF 
 
Sec. 13.01. - Sheriff's duties and responsibilities. 
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the sheriff shall, in addition to other duties and responsibilities imposed on him by general law, be responsible for the operation of the city jail, lockup facilities, receiving unit and court holding facilities.  
CHAPTER 14. - PROVISIONS FOR TRANSITION 
 
Sec. 14.01. - Assets and liabilities. 
The City of Hampton shall become and be liable for the bonded indebtedness and current debts and obligations of the former City of Hampton, the former County of Elizabeth City and the former Town of Phoebus, and of any sanitary or other districts of the said former city and former county and of the said former town, and shall become liable for the obligations and other liabilities of said former city and former county and former districts and of said former town, both in law and equity, arising out of any act of said former city, former county, or former districts or said former town for which said former city, former county, former districts or former town would have been liable, and the City of Hampton shall faithfully observe, keep and perform every such liability, and the City of Hampton may sue in its corporate name on all bonds, notes, accounts, or contracts payable to the said city, the former City of Hampton or said former districts, or the former County of Elizabeth City or the former Town of Phoebus. The title to all the property, all rights and privileges and things of value and other assets of the former City of Hampton and said former county and the said former districts and said former town, and their rights and privileges under any contract, including any and all moneys belonging to the former City of Hampton or former County of Elizabeth City, or former districts or former town, and their books, records, papers, and other things of value, shall vest in and become the property of the City of Hampton. In the same manner and to the same extent as provided above, all property, rights, and privileges, things of value, and other assets, and all bonded and other debts, obligations, and other liabilities of the school board of the former City of Hampton, the former County of Elizabeth City and the former Town of Phoebus, at the time of incorporation are hereby vested in the school board of the City of Hampton.  
Sec. 14.02. - Validation of certain acts. 
All acts performed by the council of the City of Hampton or any of its duly qualified officers or officials, including notaries of public heretofore qualified in the former City of Hampton or County of Elizabeth City subsequent to midnight, June thirty, nineteen hundred fifty-two are hereby confirmed [and] validated.  
Sec. 14.03. - Peninsula Airport Commission. 
All the rights, powers, liabilities, and benefits of the former City of Hampton, the former County of Elizabeth City, including the former Town of Phoebus, resulting from agreement or arising by law in the Peninsula Airport Commission shall inure to the City of Hampton, and the representatives of the former City of Hampton and the former County of Elizabeth City, including the former Town of Phoebus, on the Peninsula Airport Commission at the time of consolidation shall continue as a representative of the City of Hampton, as if the City of Hampton had originally been a party to the creation of the Peninsula Airport Commission.  
Sec. 14.04. - Transition of assets. 
The City of Hampton shall succeed to all of the rights and privileges of the former city, county and town with respect to the laws under which its interests in any water supply system and any sewerage and sewage disposal system or systems have been and are being installed, and to all of the rights and privileges granted by the Commonwealth of Virginia or by the United States to the former City of Hampton and/or County of Elizabeth City and/or Town of Phoebus. All of the former city, county, and town levies and taxes, both current and delinquent, and all school and other funds held by the state to the credit of the former City of Hampton, former County of Elizabeth City, and the former Town of Phoebus shall be turned over to the City of Hampton. The tax levy, service charges and assessments made for the current or ensuing year or years by the former city, county, and town shall stand as the levy and assessment of the City of Hampton. All contracts entered into by the former city, county, and town for materials or supplies or construction work in force on the date of incorporation are hereby declared to be the contracts of the city.  
Sec. 14.05. - Saving clause. 
In the event that any portion, section, or provision of this Charter shall be declared illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by final judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not invalidate any other portion, section, or provision hereof, but all parts of said Charter not expressly held to be invalid shall remain in full force and effect.  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
Acts of Assembly 		
Year 	Chapter 	Section 	Charter 
Section 
1979 	167 	1 	1.01, 1.02 
			2.01—2.07 
			3.01—3.12 
			4.01—4.03 
			5.01 
			6.01—6.18 
			7.01, 7.02 
			8.01—8.05 
			9.01, 9.02 
			10.01—10.03 
			11.01, 12.01 
			13.01 
			14.01—14.05 
1981 	366 	1 	3A-1—3A-20 
	617 	1 	3.01—3.02 
1989 	125 	1 	6.10, 7.02 
1996 	311 	1 	3.08 
2007 	275 	1 	5.01 
2013 	552 
1 	3.06 
			7.01 
2015 	438 
1       Added 	3.01:2 
	440 
1       Added 	3.01:2 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Hampton, Virginia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Hampton City Code." 
(Code 1956, § 1-1; Code 1964, § 1-1; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to codify and recodify its ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
Charter. The word "charter" shall mean the charter of the city, as it now exists and as it may be amended in the future. 
City. The words "city," "the city" and "this city" shall mean the City of Hampton in the State of Virginia. 
Clerk to the council; city clerk. The terms "clerk to the council" and "city clerk" shall be synonymous and shall mean the clerk appointed pursuant to section 3.07 of the Charter. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is used, without further qualification, it shall mean the "Code of the City of Hampton, Virginia," as designated in section 1-1. 
Code of Virginia. The term "Code of Virginia" shall mean the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or its successor, as amended. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Council. The term "council" or "city council" shall mean the council of the City of Hampton, Virginia. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one (1) person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one (1) person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
Occupant. The word "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of, or actually occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Hampton, Virginia." In addition, reference to a particular officer shall be construed as if followed by the words "or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative," subject however, to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1502. 
Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are referred to, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the city. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," where the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
State; commonwealth. The words "state" and "commonwealth" shall be construed as if the words "of Virginia" followed. 
Street. The word "street" shall include public avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. It shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. 
Swear, sworn. The words "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written or in writing shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, symbols, numbers, or figures, whether (1) printed or inscribed on a tangible medium or (2) stored in an electronic or other medium and retrievable in a perceivable form and whether an electronic signature authorized by Code of Virginia, § 59.1-479 et seq., is or is not affixed. 
Year. The word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year. The word "year" alone shall be equivalent to the expression "year of our Lord." 
(Code 1956, § 1-2; Ord. No. 523; Code 1964, § 1-2; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions and rules of construction applicable to state law, Code of Virginia, § 1-202 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division. 
(Code 1956, § 1-4; Code 1964, § 1-5; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to sections of state code, Code of Virginia, § 1-217.  
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions of Code considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the 1964 Hampton City Code and ordinances adopted subsequent thereto and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1964, § 1-3; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
If any part, chapter, article, division, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is, for any reason, declared to be unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
(Code 1956, § 1-3; Code 1964, § 1-4; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 1-6. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Any ordinance granting any franchise or right; 
(3)  Any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget; 
Cross reference— Taxation, Ch. 37. 
(4)  Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement or any special assessment; 
(5)  Any ordinance relative to salaries, compensation or bonds of city officers or employees or members of city boards and commissions; 
(6)  The zoning ordinance of the city or any amendment thereto, including amendments to the zoning map and ordinances zoning or rezoning specific property; 
(7)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; or 
(8)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereinafter enacted or presented to the city council for enactment shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of or additions to this Code. Amendments to this Code shall be made by reference to the chapter and section which is to be amended and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter and section. 
(Code 1956, § 1-15; Code 1964, § 2-37; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Amendment of ordinances generally, § 2-87.  
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Ordinances of general nature to be added to Code, § 2-86. 
State Law reference— Authority to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.  
Sec. 1-10. - Copies of Code and supplements to be available for public inspection. 
At least one (1) copy of this Code and every supplement thereto shall be kept in the office of the clerk of the council and shall there be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.  
Sec. 1-11. - Classification of and penalties for violations; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a Class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Class 1 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), or by confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(2)  Class 2 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by confinement in jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(3)  Class 3 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(4)  Class 4 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(b)  Whenever in any provision of this Code or in any other ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation of such provision and such violation is not described as being of a particular class of misdemeanor, such violation shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor and be punished as prescribed in subsection (a)(1) above. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no penalty shall be imposed for a violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance which is greater that the penalty prescribed by state law for a similar offense. 
(d)  Each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except where otherwise provided. 
(Code 1956, § 1-5; Ord. No. 600, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 17-1; Ord. No. 969, 7-11-90; Ord. No. 1007, 4-10-91; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06) 
Charter reference— Collection of fines, forfeitures, fees and costs imposed for ordinance violations, § 4.021; duty of city attorney to prosecute ordinance violations, § 5.01. 
State Law reference— Classification of misdemeanors and punishment therefor, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-9, 18.2-11; authority of city to provide penalties for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429; authority of court trying case, upon conviction, to require bond conditioned that the person convicted will not violate the ordinance for the breach of which he was convicted for a period of not more than one year, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1430; injunctive relief for continuing violations of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1432.  
Sec. 1-12. - Failure to appear in answer to summons for violation. 
Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear in any court within the city, when summoned as provided by law for a violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1956, § 1-9; Ord. No. 600, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 605, 1-24-79; Code 1964, § 17-5; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-128.  
Sec. 1-13. - Assessment of additional court costs in civil, criminal and traffic cases for courthouse construction, renovation or maintenance. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 17.1-281, there is hereby imposed and assessed, as part of the costs incident to each civil, criminal and traffic case in any court located within the city, the sum of two dollars ($2.00) for the construction, renovation or maintenance of courthouse or jail and court-related facilities and to defray increases in the cost of heating, cooling, electricity and ordinary maintenance. 
(b)  The assessment provided for in this section shall be in addition to all other costs prescribed by law and shall be collected by the clerk of the court and remitted to the treasurer of this city and held by such treasurer subject to disbursements as provided in subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 968, 6-13-90; Ord. No. 1021, 9-25-91; Ord. No. 1046, 5-13-92; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 1-14. - Assessment of additional court costs in criminal and traffic cases for courthouse and courtroom security. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 53.1-120 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed and assessed, as part of the costs incident to each criminal and traffic case in the circuit, general district and juvenile and domestic relations district courts located within the city, the sum of $10.00 for courthouse and courtroom security personnel, and, if requested by the sheriff, equipment and other personal property used in connection with courthouse security. 
(b)  The assessment provided for in this section shall be in addition to all other costs prescribed by law and shall be collected by the clerk of the respective courts, remitted to the treasurer of this city and held by such treasurer subject to disbursements as provided in subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 1328, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 10-0012, 5-12-10) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 10-0012, adopted May 12, 2010, shall be effective and the charges applied to billings made by the city on and after July 1, 2010. 
State Law reference— Assessment for courthouse and courtroom security, Code of Virginia, § 53.1-120.  
Sec. 1-15. - Assessment of additional court costs to support Hampton's local criminal justice training academy. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 9.1-106 of the Code of Virginia, the clerks of the circuit, general district, and juvenile and domestic relations district courts located within the city shall assess and collect a fee of $5.00 in every case in which costs are assessable pursuant to the Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-69.48:1, 17.1-275.1, 17.1-275.2, 17.1-275.3, 17.1-275.4, 17.1-275.7, 17.1-275.8, and 17.1-275.9. 
(b)  The assessment provided for in this section shall be in addition to all other costs prescribed by law and shall be collected by the clerk of each court and remitted to the treasurer of this city and held by such treasurer subject to appropriation by the city council. All funds collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be used to support the Hampton Police Division Training Academy. 
(c)  This section shall be effective on November 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 16-0015 , 10-12-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-0015 , adopted October 12, 2016 added § 1-15 and subsequently renumbered the remaining sections as set out herein.  
Sec. 1-16. - Jail processing fee imposed on certain individuals; use of revenue by sheriff's office. 
Pursuant to Section 15.2-1613.1 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed a processing fee in the amount of $25.00 on any individual admitted to the city jail following conviction. The fee shall be ordered as a part of court costs collected by the clerk of court and shall be deposited into the account of the treasurer of the city. The fee shall be used by the Hampton Sheriff's Office to defray the costs of processing arrested persons into the city jail. 
(Ord. No. 1337, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0015 , 10-12-16)  
Sec. 1-17. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
(Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0015 , 10-12-16)  
Sec. 1-18. - Editor's notes and references. 
The editor's notes, charter references, state law references and any other such reference notes in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0015 , 10-12-16)  
Sec. 1-19. - Altering code. 
It shall be unlawful to change or amend by addition or deletion any part of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented. 
(Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0015 , 10-12-16)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animal control officer and pound generally, § 5-4; elections, Ch. 12; libraries, Ch. 17; department of parks, recreation and leisure services, § 26-3 et seq.; pensions and retirement, Ch. 28; police, Ch. 29; assessment department and office of assessor, § 37-16; assessment board of review, § 37-18 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - General powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall be the official head of the city government and shall perform such duties and exercise such powers, not inconsistent with this office, as are prescribed by the council. 
(Code 1956, § 2-10; Code 1964, § 2-4) 
Charter reference— Election of mayor, § 3.01.  
Sec. 2-2. - Residence requirements for members of boards, commissions, etc. 
Except as otherwise provided by the general laws of the state, or Hampton City Code, any person appointed to a committee, board, commission, authority or similar body, by the city council must be a resident of the city, unless such body is multijurisdictional or regional in nature. 
(Ord. No. 593, 11-8-78; Code 1964, § 2-13.1; Ord. No. 19-0002 , 3-27-19)  
Sec. 2-3. - Armorial bearings of city described. 
The armorial bearings of the city shall be of the design prepared and submitted by the College of Arms, London, England, under date of December 20, 1960, with such words and figures engraved thereon as will, when used, produce impressions to be described as follows: The shield shall be divided in quadrants by the Red Cross of St. George; in each quadrant shall be a crestice buffalo with chains from the armorial bearings of the Third Earl of Southampton, Henry Wroithesley, for whom the city is named; on the pinnacle of the shield shall be found three (3) gold fleur-de-lis on a blue backing, representing the arms of the Princess Elizabeth, daughter of King James I of Great Britain, for whom Elizabeth City County, one of the original Virginia counties, was named. The supporter on the right shall be a halberdier of the reign of King James I, representing the first settlers in Hampton on July 9, 1610. The supporter on the left shall be the Algonquin Indian chief, Pochin, Chief of the Kecoughtan Indians at the time of the settlement on July 9, 1610. The crest of the helmet shall depict a Chesapeake Bay crab, representing the seafood industry in Hampton, holding in its claws the space capsule of the Project Mercury, representing the vehicle in which America's first spaceman ascended on May 5, 1961, and the Langley Laboratory of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in Hampton, Virginia, the home laboratory of the first astronauts. 
(Code 1956, § 1-19; Ord. No. 69; Code 1964, § 1-6)  
Sec. 2-4. - Motto of city. 
The motto of the city shall be " E Praeteritis Futura " and shall be shown at the base of the armorial bearings and Great Seal. 
(Ord. No. 69; Code 1964, § 1-7)  
Sec. 2-5. - Contents of city seal. 
The seal of the city shall contain the armorial bearings, as provided for in section 2-3, in the center, with the motto, as provided for in section 2-4, at the base of the bearings and surrounding such seal shall be the words "City of Hampton, Virginia, July 9, 1610." 
(Code 1956, § 1-19; Ord. No. 69; Code 1964, § 1-8) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to have corporate seal, § 1.01.  
Sec. 2-6. - Custody and use of armorial bearings and seal. 
The armorial bearings and seal of the city shall be kept and used in the custody of the clerk of the council and shall be used and affixed to all legal documents required, to all proclamations proclaimed and for all purposes to carry out the affairs of the city; provided, however, that any person desiring to use, sell, reproduce or copy the armorial bearings and seal of the city, by reasonable facsimile thereof, shall before doing so obtain the written permission of both the city manager and the clerk of council who have informally polled the members of council to ensure a majority supports the use. 
(Ord. No. 69; Ord. No. 403; Code 1964, § 1-9; Ord. No. 08-0012, 6-18-08) 
Charter reference— Clerk to be custodian of seal, § 3.07.  
Sec. 2-7. - Display of armorial bearings and seal. 
The display of the armorial bearings and seal of the city shall be regulated by the city manager, except as provided in section 2-6. Under his direction, the armorial bearings and seal shall be shown in, near or on all public buildings and on all municipal vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 69; Ord. No. 403; Code 1964, § 1-10)  
Sec. 2-8. - City flag generally. 
The flag of the city shall be made of bunting, merino, silk or other suitable material. It shall be the Red Cross of St. George, horizontally displayed on a white field. In the upper left quadrant of the flag shall be displayed the armorial bearings of the city, so that they shall be shown on both sides alike. In the lower right quadrant shall be shown "Hampton, Virginia, July 9, 1610," so that it shall be shown alike on both sides. This flag shall be known and respected as the flag of the city. 
(Ord. No. 69; Code 1964, § 1-11; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-9. - Duties of city manager as to city flag. 
The city manager shall regulate the size and dimensions of the flag of the city and shall have the care and custody of such flag. 
(Ord. No. 69; Code 1964, § 1-12)  
Sec. 2-10. - Display of flags at public buildings and schools. 
The display of the flag of the United States of America, the flag of the state and the flag of the city at each public building and public school is authorized and encouraged. The flag of the city shall be of a size to be determined by the city manager and shall be of a size similar to the flag of the United States and of the flag of the state. The flag of the city may be flown on the same flagstaff or pole as the flag of the United States and the flag of the state and immediately under the flag of the state. If a separate flagstaff or pole be provided for the flag of the city, such flag shall be flown to the immediate left of the flag of the state. 
(Ord. No. 69; Code 1964, § 1-13)  
Sec. 2-11. - Acceptance of deeds by city manager or his designee. 
The city manager, or his designee, shall have the authority to accept, on behalf of the city, deeds purporting to convey real property to the city which have been approved as to form by the city attorney or one of his assistants. 
(Ord. No. 1201, 12-10-97)  
Sec. 2-12. - Contract execution by city manager or his designee. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, Charter or ordinance, the city manager or his designee shall be authorized to make and execute, during the ordinary course of business, within the limitations of the appropriation ordinance for any year, all contracts on behalf of the city and such other contracts as may be authorized by the city council. Such contracts shall be approved as to availability of funds by the director of finance, as to content by the director of the department and as to form and legal sufficiency by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1423, 5-24-06)  
Secs. 2-13—2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council generally, Ch. 3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-26—2-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of council to adopt rules of procedure, § 3.04. 
Cross reference— Disorderly conduct at council meetings, § 24-12. 
 
Sec. 2-36. - Place and time for regular meetings and work sessions; cancellation of meetings, new business not to be started after certain hour. 
(a)  Effective September 1, 2014, regular meetings of the council shall be held in the council chambers of the city at 6:30 p.m. on the second and fourth Wednesdays in each month. 
(b)  Effective February 11, 2015, work sessions of the council shall be held at 1:00 p.m. or at such other time or location as council shall direct on the second and fourth Wednesdays in each month. The work session agenda, as prepared by the clerk of the council shall include all items of discussion and presentations of which he has been notified by any of the following persons: the mayor, at least two (2) concurring members of council, the city manager or the city attorney by 12:00 p.m. on each Friday following the second and fourth Wednesdays of each month, (i.e., the "work session agenda deadline"). Items submitted after the work session agenda deadline for any given work session shall be included on the work session agenda only with the approval of the city manager. 
(c)  Effective September 1, 2014, in addition, on the fourth Wednesday of each month the council shall be assembled at 6:00 p.m. in the council chambers for awards, proclamations and other ceremonial matters. 
(d)  If any such regular meeting date or council work session date shall fall upon a legal holiday, so declared by the city, the meeting or work session shall be held on the next succeeding day which is not a legal holiday, and at the same hours, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the council. 
(e)  A regular meeting or regularly scheduled work session of the council may be cancelled by the city manager, after consulting individually with the members of council, in the event that there are no agenda items for consideration at the regular meeting or work session. Any such meeting or work session may be continued if the mayor, or vice-mayor if the mayor is unable to act, finds and declares that weather or other conditions are such that it is hazardous for members and the public to attend the regular meeting or work session. Such decision to continue a meeting due to adverse weather or other conditions shall be communicated to the members and the media as promptly as possible and all hearings and other matters previously advertised shall be conducted at the continued meeting with no further advertisement required. Any such continuance declared in the discretion of the mayor or vice-mayor shall not extend beyond the time fixed for the next regular meeting. 
(f)  No new item of business shall be begun at a regular council meeting after the hour of 11:00 p.m., except by special consent of the council. Unfinished business shall be carried over to the next regular meeting, unless otherwise directed by the council. 
(Code 1956, § 2-13; Ord. No. 274; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-15; Ord. No. 08-0025, 12-17-08; Ord. No. 10-0003, 2-24-10; Ord. No. 10-0021, 9-8-10; Ord. No. 12-0038, 11-14-12; Ord. No. 13-0014, 6-12-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0015, 8-13-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0005, 1-28-15 ) 
Charter reference— Requirement that council hold at least one regular meeting each month, § 3.04.  
Sec. 2-37. - Call and notice of special meetings. 
(a)  The mayor, any three (3) members of the council or the city manager may call special meetings of the council at any time upon notice to each member personally notified at his usual place of business or residence. 
(b)  The city manager shall advise the press of all special meetings of the council in advance of the time of the meeting. 
(Code 1956, §§ 2-15, 2-16; Code 1964, §§ 2-17, 2-18; Ord. No. 08-0025, 12-17-08) 
Charter reference— Call and notice of special council meetings, § 3.04.  
Sec. 2-38. - To be open to public. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, all the meetings of the council, both regular and special, shall be open to the public, and no ordinance, resolution, motion or vote shall be adopted by the council except at a meeting open to the public. 
(Code 1956, § 2-20; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-14; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
Charter reference— Provisions concerning open meetings, § 3.05. 
State Law reference— The Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq.  
Sec. 2-39. - Presiding officer generally. 
The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council, with the same powers and duties as the other members, with a vote, but no veto power. He shall call the meeting to order at the hour for holding such meeting and he shall have general direction of the chamber in which the council meets. In case of disturbance or disorderly conduct, the mayor shall have the chamber cleared. 
(Code 1956, § 2-10; Code 1964, § 2-4; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
Charter reference— Mayor to provide at council meetings, § 3.06. 
Cross reference— Disorderly conduct at council meetings, § 24-12.  
Sec. 2-40. - Adjournment in absence of quorum. 
In the absence of a quorum at a council meeting, at the expiration of fifteen (15) minutes from the time appointed for the meeting, the clerk of the council shall enter upon the journal the names of the members present and the meeting shall stand ipso facto adjourned until the next regular meeting, or until a new call is issued in the prescribed manner, if it is a special meeting. 
(Code 1956, § 2-22; Code 1964, § 2-5) 
Charter reference— Council quorum, § 3.04.  
Sec. 2-41. - Persons permitted within bar. 
No person, other than officers of the city or clerks in the exercise of their official duties, shall be permitted within the bar during meetings of the council, unless by invitation of the mayor, which invitation shall apply only to the item or meeting for which it is given. 
(Code 1956, § 2-30; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-12)  
Sec. 2-42. - Parliamentary procedure. 
Upon all questions of procedure at council meetings not covered by this article or other ordinances of the city, the general principles of parliamentary procedure shall govern. 
(Code 1956, § 2-31; Code 1964, § 2-13)  
Sec. 2-43. - Order of business—Regular meetings. 
At every regular meeting of the council, the order of business shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call of the roll. 
(2)  Invocation/Pledge of allegiance. 
(3)  Consent agenda for the meeting, as prepared by the clerk of the council and to include consideration of the minutes of the previous meeting, ordinances believed to be routine and noncontroversial, and any other items believed by the clerk of the council to be routine and not controversial in nature; provided that, a member of the council may, by request, have any item moved from the consent agenda to the regular business agenda. Removal of an item from the consent agenda by an individual council member shall require twenty-four (24) hours notice to the city manager, city attorney or clerk of council, or the concurrence of three council members at the meeting. The consent agenda shall be approved in toto by motion and roll call vote. 
(4)  Presentations, proclamations and awards. 
(5)  Regular business agenda, as prepared by the clerk of the council and to include all public hearing items, public comment pertaining to other matters on the general business agenda and general business items. 
(a)  For purposes of this subsection, the regular business agenda will include items of which the clerk of council has been notified by any of the following persons: the mayor, at least three (3) concurring members of council, the city manager or the city attorney by 12:00 p.m. on each Friday following the second Wednesday each month, (i.e., the "regular meeting agenda deadline"). Items submitted after the regular meeting agenda deadline for any given meeting shall be included on the regular agenda only with the approval of the city manager. 
(b)  Members of the general public recognized to speak at public hearings on the regular business agenda or to speak to other matters on the regular business agenda shall be allotted three (3) minutes speaking time without regard to any attempt by others to yield time to the speaker, and shall only be permitted to use the city audio-visual equipment during their allotted speaking period after submission of the material to be displayed to the office of the clerk for virus screening and software compatibility no less than two (2) business days prior to the scheduled meeting. 
(6)  Reports by city manager, city council, staff or committees. 
(7)  Miscellaneous new business, to include and be limited to the opportunity for members of the council, the city manager and the city attorney to be heard concerning matters relating to the business of the city: No initiative requiring a vote by council, except when subject to a specific time constraint or determined to be an emergency by a majority vote of council, shall be presented on the floor by a council member under new business. 
(8)  Such order of business shall not be departed from except by the consent of four (4) members of the council. 
(Code 1956, § 2-14; Ord. No. 328; Ord. No. 399; Ord. No. 613, 2-28-79; Code 1964, § 2-16; Ord. No. 745-A, 2-23-83; Ord. No. 1317, 11-14-01; Ord. No. 1430, 7-19-06; Ord. No. 08-0025, 12-17-08; Ord. No. 10-0003, 2-24-10; Ord. No. 12-0038, 11-14-12; Ord. No. 13-0013, 6-12-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0015, 8-13-14 ; Ord. No. 17-0001 , 2-8-17)  
Sec. 2-44. - Same—Special meetings. 
The order of business at special meetings of the council shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call of the roll. 
(2)  Reading of the call for the special meeting, if written, or stated, if verbal. 
(3)  Discussion of the business on call, in the order given in the call. 
Such order of business shall not be departed from except by the consent of three (3) members of the council. 
(Code 1956, § 2-17; Code 1964, § 2-19)  
Sec. 2-45. - Limitation on business transacted at special meeting. 
No business shall be transacted at a special meeting of the council, except that for which it has been called, without the unanimous consent of all members of the council. 
(Code 1956, § 2-18; Code 1964, § 2-20) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 3.04.  
Sec. 2-45.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-0015 , adopted August 13, 2014, effective September 1, 2014, repealed § 2-45.1, which pertained to citizen comment at public comment periods and derived from Ord. No. 10-0003, 2-24-10 and Ord. No. 10-0021, 9-8-10. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 2-46. - Motions generally. 
Every motion made at a meeting of the council shall be reduced to writing, if requested by the mayor or any member of the council, and shall be delivered to the clerk's table to be read. No motion shall be considered by the council, unless and until a second to such motion is obtained and stated by the mayor before the same shall be voted upon. A motion, having been seconded, may be withdrawn or amended by the mover, only with the consent of the second, at any time before it is decided, amended or otherwise acted upon by the council. 
(Code 1956, § 2-24; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-7)  
Sec. 2-47. - Motions by mayor. 
The mayor, in making a motion at a meeting of the council, shall vacate as presiding officer thereof and make the motion as any other member of the council. 
(Code 1956, § 2-25; Code 1964, § 2-8)  
Sec. 2-48. - Motions for reconsideration. 
No motion to reconsider a question which has been decided shall be entertained at a council meeting, unless it be made by one of the members voting with the prevailing side. Any member may second a motion to reconsider a question. No vote or question shall be reconsidered more than once. A vote or question may be reconsidered only during the same meeting. 
(Code 1956, § 2-26; Ord. No. 328; Ord. No. 398; Ord. No. 587, 10-25-78; Code 1964, § 2-9)  
Sec. 2-49. - Required vote for adoption of measures generally. 
Except motions to adjourn, to fix the time and place of adjournment and other motions of a purely procedural nature, no measure shall be adopted by the council, unless it receives the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members. 
(Code 1956, § 2-20; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-14) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 3.05.  
Sec. 2-50. - Required vote, etc., for appropriations, borrowing, etc. 
No ordinance or resolution, having for its object an appropriation, not included in the budget, of more than ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00), shall be passed by the council except by the concurrence of five (5) members of the council and after recommendation of the city manager. No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding the sum of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) or imposing taxes shall be passed on the same day of its introduction, except that an appropriation may be made on the same day of its introduction by consent of five (5) members of the council. 
(Code 1956, § 2-28; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-10; Ord. No. 1348, 5-14-03)  
Sec. 2-51. - Minutes to be photocopied and recorded. 
When transcribed, approved by the council and signed by the mayor and the clerk of the council, the minutes of every open council meeting shall be photocopied and placed as the official record in the minute book provided for that purpose in the clerk's office of the circuit court. 
(Code 1956, § 2-29; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-11; Ord. No. 1416, 2-8-06)  
Sec. 2-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-0038, adopted Nov. 14, 2012, repealed § 2-52, which pertained to minutes of closed meetings and derived from Ord. No. 1417, adopted Feb. 8, 2006; Ord. No. 08-0007, adopted Feb. 13, 2008.  
Secs. 2-53—2-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CLERK[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Clerk to the council, § 3.07. 
 
Sec. 2-61. - General duties. 
The clerk of the council shall perform such clerical duties on behalf of the council and its members as the council may, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe. 
(Code 1956, § 2-32; Code 1964, § 2-24)  
Sec. 2-62. - Attendance at meetings. 
The clerk of the council shall attend all regular and special meetings of the council, as well as the meetings of any special committee of the council, if required. 
(Code 1956, § 2-33; Code 1964, § 2-25)  
Sec. 2-63. - General duties with respect to minutes. 
The clerk of the council shall keep the proceedings of the council and the approved minutes shall be recorded in a minute book provided for that purpose in the clerk's office of the circuit court and the same shall be properly indexed. 
(Code 1956, § 2-34; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-26) 
Charter reference— Clerk to keep journal of council proceedings, § 3.07.  
Sec. 2-64. - Duty to keep calendar or agenda. 
The clerk of the council shall keep, at the clerk's table during the sitting of the council, a calendar or agenda, so arranged as to show the condition or progress of the business of the council. 
(Code 1956, § 2-35; Code 1964, § 2-27)  
Sec. 2-65. - Keeping and use of roll. 
The clerk of the council shall keep a roll of the council and shall enter thereon the names of the members in alphabetical order, except that the name of the mayor shall be last. The clerk shall use this roll in the above order in recording all votes which are required to be recorded. 
(Code 1956, § 2-36; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-28)  
Sec. 2-66. - Duty to furnish transcripts of minutes, ordinances, etc. 
The clerk of the council shall, as soon as practicable after the close of each session of the council, make and present to each member thereof a transcript of the minutes and any ordinance, resolution or order and act of a legislative character passed at such session. He shall, in like manner, transmit to the director of finance and city treasurer a transcript of all ordinances or resolutions appropriating money or authorizing the payment of money or the issuance of bonds or notes. 
(Code 1956, § 2-37; Code 1964, § 2-29)  
Sec. 2-67. - Publication of reports and ordinances. 
The clerk of the council shall publish such reports and ordinances as the council is required, by law, to publish and such other reports and ordinances as it may direct. 
(Code 1956, § 2-28; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-30)  
Sec. 2-68. - Duty to act as clerk of boards and commissions. 
The clerk of the council shall act as clerk of such boards and commissions as the council may, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe. 
(Code 1956, § 2-39; Code 1964, § 2-31)  
Secs. 2-69—2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ORDINANCES 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-0026, adopted December 17, 2008, repealed § 2-81, which pertained to reading. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-82. - Numbering. 
The clerk of the council shall number all ordinances in sequence as adopted by the council. 
(Code 1956, § 1-12; Code 1964, § 2-34)  
Sec. 2-83. - Effective date generally. 
Every ordinance passed by the council shall be in effect from and after the date of its adoption by affirmative vote of four (4) members of council, unless otherwise provided in the ordinance. 
(Code 1956, § 1-13; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-35; Ord. No. 08-0026, 12-17-08)  
Sec. 2-84. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-0026, adopted December 17, 2008, repealed § 2-84, which pertained to effective date of zoning ordinances. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-85. - Signing, photocopying, recordation and indexing. 
All ordinances adopted by the city council shall be signed by the mayor and the clerk of the council and shall be photocopied and recorded, as the official record, in an ordinance book, which shall be properly indexed. The title only of the ordinance shall be spread in the minute book. 
(Code 1956, § 1-11; Code 1964, § 2-33; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
Charter reference— Ordinances to be recorded in circuit court clerk's office, § 3.07.  
Sec. 2-86. - Codification. 
The clerk of the council shall cause to be codified into this Code all ordinances of a general nature and amendments thereto. 
(Code 1956, § 2-38; Ord. No. 328; Code 1964, § 2-30; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Supplementation of Code, § 1-9. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to codify ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.  
Sec. 2-87. - Amendment, suspension or repeal generally. 
No ordinance shall be amended, suspended or repealed except by ordinance regularly introduced and passed, nor shall any section of an ordinance be amended, unless the whole section of the ordinance be reordained. 
(Code 1956, § 1-14; Code 1964, § 2-36) 
Cross reference— Amendments or additions to Code, § 1-8.  
Sec. 2-88. - Repeal not to affect liabilities. 
No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any offense committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatsoever to affect any such offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far as practicable, to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings. 
(Code 1956, § 1-16; Code 1964, § 2-38; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions applicable to state laws, Code of Virginia, § 1-239.  
Sec. 2-89. - Repeal not to revive former ordinance. 
When an ordinance which has repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1956, § 1-17; Code 1964, § 2-39; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions applicable to state laws, Code of Virginia, § 1-240.  
Secs. 2-90—2-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances relating to salaries, compensation or bonds of city officers and employees not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-6(5); resisting, obstructing or interfering with city officers in discharge of their duties, § 24-6; pensions and retirement, Ch. 28. 
 
Sec. 2-106. - Classification of positions. 
All positions covered under the classified service of the city shall be designated their respective grade levels by use of a systematic job comparison system which shall take into consideration such factors as skill, effort, responsibility and job conditions. The system determined by the city manager shall be used in the classification of all positions in the city government except for the following: Elected officials, the city manager, department heads and those employees who have like status and any position held by members of boards or commissions. Positions in departments that are operated and supervised jointly by the city and the state shall be classified and compensated in accordance with procedures established by the state. The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for developing an appropriate system for accurately defining and assigning position classifications. 
(Code 1956, § 2-40; Ord. No. 406; Code 1964, § 2-40; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
Charter reference— Duty of council to establish classification and pay plan, § 3.08e. 
State Law reference— City classification and pay plans, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1506.  
Sec. 2-107. - Examinations to determine qualifications for certain positions. 
A system of examinations shall be used to help to determine qualifications for the following positions with the city: Police officer, firefighter, clerk-typist, secretary and account clerk. All examinations used for selection of personnel shall be satisfactorily validated. 
(Code 1956, § 2-42; Ord. No. 406; Ord. No. 501; Code 1964, § 2-42; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-108. - Criminal background investigations of employees and applicants for city employment. 
(a)  In order to determine whether, in the interest of public welfare and safety, an applicant who is offered or accepts employment with the city or current employee candidate for promotion or transfer may be disqualified from such employment due to a criminal record, the director of human resources or department hiring official, or their designees, shall request from the Virginia Central Criminal Records Exchange a criminal record check of each applicant for city employment in security sensitive positions. Security sensitive positions include those where the anticipated duties or responsibilities involve: 
(1)  Handling of cash, checks, credit transactions or job-specific accountability for public funds; 
(2)  Direct provision of services to minors or persons unable to care for themselves; 
(3)  Entry for work purposes into or on to private living and work spaces; 
(4)  Capability and authorization to alter city technology support systems; or 
(5)  Service with either the police department or fire department. 
(b)  The city further reserves the right to require submission to criminal background checks by current employees where circumstances reasonably warrant review of their suitability for employment in security sensitive positions. The human resources director shall develop and maintain a list of all security sensitive positions which shall be approved by the city manager. 
(c)  In addition, under the provisions of Code of Virginia Sections 19.2-389 and 15.2-1503.1 and in the interest of public welfare and safety, the director of human resources or department hiring official shall require any applicant who is offered or accepts employment with the city in any security sensitive position to submit to fingerprinting and to provide personal descriptive information to be forwarded along with the applicant's fingerprints through the central criminal records exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining criminal history information regarding such applicant. Where authorized under the provisions of Code of Virginia Section 15.2-1503.1, the city may require such applicants to pay for the cost of fingerprinting or a criminal records check, or both. 
(d)  Criminal history information considered in accordance with this section shall include outstanding warrants, pending criminal charges, and records of conviction. Records of dispositions which occurred while an applicant was a juvenile shall not be referenced unless authorized by law or court order. 
(e)  Any applicant who is denied employment on the basis of information obtained in accordance with this section shall be notified of the information obtained, and shall be provided an opportunity to review the criminal history report and to provide additional information in response. 
(f)  The criminal history information provided in accordance with this section shall be used solely to assess eligibility for city employment or service, and shall not be disseminated by the city to any person not involved in the assessment process. 
(g)  The human resources director shall develop and issue procedural instructions and regulations for implementation of the provisions of this section, including but not limited to uniform criteria which shall be considered in determining when criminal record information bears a sufficient relationship to job duties to disqualify the applicant or employee. 
(h)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the city's right to consider in the hiring process information regarding applicant or employee misconduct, criminal or otherwise, voluntarily reported by the applicant or employee or obtained from sources other than a criminal history record report made pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1956, § 2-42; Ord. No. 406; Ord. No. 501; Code 1964, § 2-42; Ord. No. 1489, 9-26-07) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention, Ch. 14; police, Ch. 29.  
Sec. 2-109. - Merit review of personnel. 
A procedure to systematically review city personnel shall be established. This merit review shall be for the purpose of determining efficiency and productivity as a measure of the individual's job performance. The merit review and evaluations conducted shall be the basis for merit increases or reductions in pay as warranted. 
(Code 1956, § 2-41; Ord. No. 406; Code 1964, § 2-41)  
Sec. 2-110. - Payroll deductions. 
No deduction shall be made from any city employee's payroll check, except as follows: 
(1)  Federal income tax. 
(2)  Federal insurance contribution (social security). 
(3)  State income tax. 
(4)  Virginia Retirement System. 
(5)  Deferred compensation plan contributions. 
(6)  Deductions required by court order, decree or legal process. 
(7)  City group life insurance. 
(8)  City group hospitalization, dental and accident insurance. 
(9)  United States savings bonds. 
(10)  City employees' credit union. 
(11)  Peninsula United Fund. 
(12)  Alimony and support payments. 
(13)  Federal Bankruptcy Act plans. 
(14)  Damage to city property or loss of city property. 
(Ord. No. 461; Ord. No. 575, 6-14-78; Ord. No. 630, 9-27-79; Code 1964, § 2-42.1; Ord. No. 740, 1-12-83; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-111. - Payment of premiums on bonds. 
The premium on any bond required of any officer or employee of the city shall be paid by the city, provided such bond is obtained at the lowest rate and is approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1956, § 2-4; Code 1964, § 2-43) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to prescribe amount and condition of surety bonds required of such officers and employees as the council may prescribe, § 3.08e.  
Sec. 2-112. - Off-duty employment of police officers. 
Upon individual application to, and approval by, the chief of police, police officers may engage in off-duty employment, including employment which may occasionally require such officers to use their police powers in the performance of such employment. The chief of police is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations governing such off-duty employment. 
(Ord. No. 1191, 8-20-97)  
Sec. 2-113. - Residency requirement. 
The city manager, city attorney, assistant city managers, assistants to the city manager, council appointees, and all department heads or equivalents shall maintain principal residence within the city during their tenure in such office or employment. This residency requirement shall be met as soon as practical but no later than twelve (12) months subsequent to the commencement of employment. The city manager is authorized to make exceptions to this requirement for positions appointed by him only in the event of demonstrated hardship or shortage of qualified applicants. 
(Ord. No. 09-0018, 10-14-09)  
Sec. 2-114. - Legal department. 
(a)  The city attorney is authorized and empowered to appoint deputy city attorneys, assistant city attorneys and any other employees necessary to effectively operate and maintain a legal department, within the limitation of the funds provided for the purpose by city council. All deputy and assistant city attorneys shall serve at the pleasure of the city attorney and may be removed from their position by the city attorney regardless of their date of hire. The deputies and assistants shall, so far as required by the city attorney, discharge and perform any of the duties of the city attorney and, in the discharge of such duties, shall be under the direction and control of the city attorney. 
(b)  The city attorney may also, from time to time, appoint special counsel who shall perform such legal duties as may be required, and at such compensation as may be agreed upon. 
(c)  The city attorney is further authorized to enter into an agreement with the commonwealth's attorney pursuant to Virginia Code § 15.2-1542(D) to allow the city attorney to handle the prosecution of particular criminal misdemeanors. 
( Ord. No. 15-0001, 1-14-15 )  
Secs. 2-115—2-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE GENERALLY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— General financial powers of the city, § 2.02; financial administration, Ch. 6. 
Cross reference— Financing and administration of Hampton Employees's Retirement System, § 28-41 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 37. 
 
Sec. 2-131. - General duties of director of finance. 
The director of finance shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Maintaining a general accounting system, in conformity with accepted principles of governmental accounting, for the city government and each of its offices, departments and agencies and keeping separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the appropriation ordinance, each of which accounts shall show the amount of appropriations, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance. Additional accounts for classification of expenditures shall be maintained to provide adequate information for budgetary purposes. 
(2)  Maintaining a generally accepted internal audit program of the city's accounting system and procedures for evaluating internal controls and the establishment of more effective and efficient systems and procedures. 
(3)  Approving all proposed expenditures. No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any appropriation except in accordance with appropriations duly made and unless the director first certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such appropriation and that sufficient funds therefrom are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. 
(4)  Auditing all claims against the city for goods or services and ascertaining that such claims are in accordance with the purchase orders or contracts of employment from which the same arise. 
(5)  Submitting to the city manager and council, quarterly or upon request, financial statements in sufficient detail to show the financial condition of all departments of the city. 
(6)  Preparing an annual financial report as of the end of each fiscal year for the city manager and the council. 
(7)  Performing such other duties as may be assigned to him by the council or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 624, 7-25-79; Code 1964, § 17.1-1; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
Charter reference— Appointment and general duties of director of finance, §§ 6.02, 6.03.  
Sec. 2-132. - Signing of city checks generally. 
(a)  The countersignature of the director of finance and the city treasurer shall be affixed on every check drawn on city funds, except as provided for the coliseum event account and the convention center event account; provided, however, in the event of an absence, disability, sickness, death, resignation, or in a situation deemed an emergency by the city manager, the city manager may substitute for either of such officer's signature. A special account for coliseum events and convention center events may be established as provided in sections 26-74 and 26-128 respectively, of this Code. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all expenditures, including refunds of taxes, fees, licenses, etc., and payments to jurors for jury duty. However, this section shall not apply to expenditures related to bonafide transfers of money from one (1) city bank account to another or remittances by the city treasurer of sums due the state from state income tax collections. 
(Ord. No. 624, 7-25-79; Code 1964, § 17.1-1; Ord. No. 1318, 12-12-01; Ord. No. 1395, 4-13-05) 
Cross reference— Hampton Coliseum, § 26-71 et seq.  
Sec. 2-133. - Use of mechanical check signer. 
Checks of the city for the withdrawal of funds may be executed in its name and on its behalf by affixing to such checks the signatures of the treasurer of the city and the director of finance by means of a mechanical check signer. Any bank designated as a city depository is hereby authorized and directed to honor such checks in the same manner as if the same were signed on behalf of the city by such officers in the usual way, and no liability shall attach to the bank in the event any such checks should be executed by any unauthorized person. 
(Code 1956, § 2-7; Code 1964, § 2-1)  
Sec. 2-134. - Council approval prerequisite to acceptance of certain gifts to city; gifts for undercover law enforcement investigations; inventory of gifts. 
(a)  Gifts to the city of real property and tangible personal property valued at five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more shall be approved by the council, by appropriate motion duly recorded in the council minutes, before such gifts shall be deemed to have been accepted by the city. Gifts to the city of money of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, as aggregated or as a whole, shall be approved and appropriated for city use by the council by appropriate resolution before such gifts may be put to the use of the city. Any conditions pertaining to such gifts shall also be recorded in the council minutes. 
(b)  In approving and appropriating gifts in support of undercover law enforcement investigations, the council may omit from the authorizing resolution the identity of the donor if, in the determination of the city manager in consultation with the chief of police, disclosure of the donor's identity in the resolution would jeopardize the related law enforcement effort. The city manager shall notify the council as soon as practicable following the conclusion or other disposition of the investigation to permit the council to later disclose on the public record of a council meeting the identity of any such donor of money in support of such an undercover law enforcement investigation. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall maintain an inventory of all city property acquired by gift. The inventory shall include a list of any and all conditions pertaining to such gifts. The inventory shall be reviewed at least annually to ensure that the gift is being utilized by the city in accordance with any conditions imposed by the donor. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those property conveyances required by article IV of chapter 9 or chapter 35 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 431; Code 1964, § 1-15; Ord. No. 725, 9-8-82; Ord. No. 1494, 10-25-07; Ord. No. 11-0003, 4-13-11; Ord. No. 13-0012, 6-12-13 )  
Sec. 2-135. - Fee for passing bad checks to city. 
There is hereby imposed a fee, in the sum of thirty-five dollars ( $35.00), for the uttering, publishing or passing of any check, draft, or order for payment of taxes or any other sums due the city or the treasurer thereof, which is subsequently returned for insufficient funds or because there is no account or the account has been closed, or because such check, draft, or order was returned because of a stop-payment order placed in bad faith on the check, draft, or order by the drawer. Such fee shall be added to the tax or other sum due and shall be in addition to all taxes, penalties, interest and other sums otherwise due. 
(Ord. No. 382; Code 1964, § 1-14; Ord. No. 805, 8-14-85; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 10-0013, 5-12-10) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 10-0013, adopted May 12, 2010, shall be effective and the charges applied to billings made by the city on and after July 1, 2010. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-106.  
Sec. 2-136. - Establish procedures for the reconciliation of the city treasurer's cash balances to the accounting records of the director of finance. 
The director of finance shall establish detailed procedures for the formal reconciliation of the city's cash balances per the city treasurer's accounting records to the cash balances per the accounting records of the city's director of finance and the Chief Financial Officer of the Hampton School Board. The director of finance shall reduce such procedures to writing and deliver a copy of the procedures to the city treasurer, the Chief Financial Officer for the Hampton School Board and the clerk of council. The city treasurer, in cooperation with the city's director of finance and Chief Financial Officer of the Hampton School Board, shall perform the established procedures monthly. The resulting reconciliation must be in writing and attested to by the city treasurer, the city's director of finance and the Chief Financial Officer for the Hampton School Board. 
To enable this reconciliation process, the treasurer's accounting records for city and school board cash must be maintained in a generally acceptable accounting system, in conformity with accepted principles of governmental accounting. The city treasurer's accounting records shall maintain cash balances by fund consistent with the funds maintained by the director of finance and Chief Financial Officer for the Hampton School Board. 
(Ord. No. 1318, 12-12-01; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-137. - Authority to transfer funds. 
(a)  At any time during the fiscal year the city manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance within a department, office, agency, project, program or purpose, and report such transfers to city council quarterly. 
(b)  At any time during the fiscal year the city manager or budget director may make or cause to be made transfers of any unencumbered appropriation balance, from one (1) department, office, agency, project, program, or purpose to another department, office, agency, project, program or purpose within the same accounting fund. No appropriation of bond proceeds or debt service may be reduced or transferred without city council approval. No appropriation may be reduced or transferred if such transfers or reductions are specifically prohibited by ordinance. No appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the unencumbered balance. All such transfers by the city manager shall be reported to city council at least quarterly. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 1, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Secs. 2-138—2-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AUDIT 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of internal audit, which shall consist of the director of internal audit and such other officers and employees as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives of the city manager consistent with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1491, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 2-142. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  The department of internal audit shall be responsible for (i) the development and execution of a comprehensive internal financial audit program for the city based on objectives set by the city manager pursuant to the general direction of the council; (ii) providing advice and guidance on audit-related matters to the city manager and all levels of department management; (iii) determining the adequacy and effectiveness of internal accounting systems and management controls, and reviewing established systems of internal controls to ensure compliance with city, state and federal policies, plans, procedures, laws and regulations; (iv) determining the extent to which city assets are accounted for and safeguarded; and (v) investigating complaints concerning the mismanagement of funds and/or resources. 
(b)  The authority of the department to conduct financial audits shall extend to all city departments and agencies, as well as programs and other entities funded by the city budget process that are subject to control or supervision by the city manager or the council. This authority may be extended to political subdivisions that receive funding from the city, upon approval by the political subdivision. The department shall perform such other audit-related duties as may be assigned to the department by the city manager. 
(c)  The department shall report immediately in writing to the city council and to the city manager any unauthorized, illegal or irregular act or practice discovered affecting or involving public funds or the financial affairs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1491, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 2-143. - General powers of director. 
The director of internal audit shall be appointed by the city manager. Such director shall be the head of the department of internal audit and, under the supervision of the city manager, shall have general supervision and control of the operation of the department. 
(Ord. No. 1491, 9-26-07)  
Secs. 2-144—2-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ADVISORY BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Department of social services, § 11.01. 
State Law reference— Local advisory boards for social services, Code of Virginia, § 63.2-305. 
 
Sec. 2-181. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the term "board" shall mean the local advisory board of social services created by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-182. - Created; purpose. 
There is hereby created a local advisory board of social services, which shall serve in a purely advisory capacity to the director of social services. 
(Ord. No. 533; Code 1964, § 32B-1; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
Charter reference— Authority to create above board, § 11.01. 
State Law reference— Duty to create above board, Code of Virginia, § 63.2-305.  
Sec. 2-183. - Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
The board shall consist of seven (7) citizens of the city appointed by the council. Beginning July 1, 1977, members shall be appointed initially for terms of from one (1) to four (4) years, so as to provide for the balanced overlapping of the terms of four (4) each, except that appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired terms. No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms. The officer in charge of the department of social services shall be an ex officio member of the board, without vote. 
(Ord. No. 533; Code 1964, § 32B-1; Ord. No. 767, 2-8-84; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
Charter reference— Limitation on terms of appointment to boards, § 3.12. 
Cross reference— Residence requirements for members of boards and commissions, § 2-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 63.2-305.  
Sec. 2-184. - Election of chairman; meetings. 
The board shall elect its own chairman and shall meet at least bimonthly. In addition to scheduled meetings, it may meet at the call of the chairman or on the petition of at least one-half (½) of the members. 
(Ord. No. 533; Code 1964, § 32B-1; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 63.2-305.  
Sec. 2-185. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  To interest itself in all matters pertaining to the social welfare of the people of the city. 
(2)  To monitor the formulation and implementation of social welfare programs in the city. 
(3)  To meet with the officer in charge of the department of social services at least four (4) times a year for the purpose of making recommendations on policy matters concerning the department. 
(4)  To make an annual report to the council, concurrent with the budget presentation of the department of social services, concerning the administration of the public welfare program. 
(5)  To submit to the council, from time to time, such other reports as the board deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 533; Code 1964, § 32B-1; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 63.2-305.  
Secs. 2-186—2-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PLANNING COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, Ch. 35; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference— Local planning commissions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Created. 
A planning commission is hereby created for the city. 
(Code 1956, § 2-43; Code 1964, § 29-1; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Duty of city to create planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210.  
Sec. 2-202. - Composition; qualifications of members. 
The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members. One (1) member shall be a member of the council, one (1) shall be a member of the administrative branch of the government of the city and the remaining five (5), referred to as appointed members, shall be residents of the city qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development. At least one-half (½) of the members shall be owners of real property. 
(Code 1956, § 2-44; Code 1964, § 29-2; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-203. - Appointment and terms of members. 
All members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the council. The terms of the councilmanic member and of the member who is a member of the administrative branch of the city government who are appointed to the planning commission shall, in all cases, correspond with their tenure of office, unless the council, at its first regular meeting each year, appoints others to serve as its representatives. Of the other members first appointed, two (2) shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years, two (2) shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years and one (1) shall be appointed for a term of six (6) years. Their successors shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years. 
(Code 1956, § 2-45; Code 1964, § 29-3; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
Charter reference— Limitation on number of terms to be served by members of boards and commissions, § 3.12. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-204. - Filling of vacancies. 
Any vacancy in the membership of the planning commission shall be filled by appointment by the city council and such appointment, in the case of an appointed member, shall be for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1956, § 2-46; Code 1964, § 29-4; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-205. - Compensation of members. 
The councilmanic member of the planning commission and the member of the planning commission who is a member of the administrative branch of the city government shall serve as member of the planning commission without compensation as such. The appointed members of the commission shall receive such compensation as is prescribed by the council. 
(Code 1956, § 2-48; Code 1964, § 29-6; Ord. No. 744, 2-9-83; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Authority of council to provide for compensation of planning commission members, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-206. - Removal of members. 
Any appointed member of the planning commission may be removed for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. Such removal may be made only after a public hearing at which the member is given an opportunity to appear and be heard on the charges against him. 
(Code 1956, § 2-47; Code 1964, § 29-5; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Authority to remove planning commission members, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-207. - Powers and duties generally. 
The planning commission shall have the functions, powers and duties which are prescribed by law. 
(Code 1956, § 2-49; Code 1964, § 29-7; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-208. - Program of work. 
The planning commission shall prepare a program of work and shall adopt the same after consultation with the council. Such program of work shall outline the activities in which the commission expects to engage in: 
(1)  Assembling such data regarding the city and adjacent territory as the commission may deem to be necessary in exercising its functions, powers and duties; 
(2)  Analyzing such data and making such studies as may be necessary in the preparation of a master plan for the city; 
(3)  Preparing the master plan as a general guide for the development of the city and as a basis for the preparation of zoning and other regulations; and 
(4)  Recommending to the council appropriate procedures for effectuating the plan. 
(Code 1956, § 2-50; Code 1964, § 29-8; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Comprehensive plan, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2223 et seq.  
Secs. 2-209—2-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PENINSULA PLANNING DISTRICT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-226. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the term "commission" means the Peninsula Planning District Commission referred to in section 2-227, unless clearly indicated to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-227. - Established. 
The council does hereby authorize the establishment of membership in, and support of, the Peninsula Planning District Commission. 
(Ord. No. 204; Ord. No. 444; Code 1964, § 29-10; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Authority to organize a planning district commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4203.  
Sec. 2-228. - Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
The membership of the commission shall consist of three (3) members from each participating governmental subdivision. Appointments to the commission shall be made by the governing bodies of each of the participating governmental subdivisions. One member from each participating governmental subdivision shall be the chairman of the local planning commission of the governmental subdivision. The other two (2) members from each participating governmental subdivision shall be elected officials of the governing bodies of the participating governmental subdivisions; provided, that the governing bodies of the participating governmental subdivisions may appoint the chief administrative executive of the governmental subdivision as the alternate to serve in lieu of one of the elected officials of each of the governing bodies of the participating governmental subdivisions. The terms of office of the members of the governing body shall be coextensive with the term to which each has been elected, unless the governing body of the participating governmental subdivision shall appoint another member of such governing body in his place and certify such appointment to the commission. The term of office of the chairman of the local planning commission shall be coextensive with the term of office of such member as chairman of the local planning commission. The term of office of the alternate shall be co-extensive with the term of his office as chief administrative executive of the participating governmental subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 204; Ord. No. 213; Ord. No. 444; Code 1964, § 29-11) 
State Law reference— Organization of planning district commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4203.  
Sec. 2-229. - Filling of vacancies; eligibility for reappointment and removal of alternate members. 
(a)  Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment was made. 
(b)  Any alternate or member of the commission shall be eligible for reappointment, but may be removed for cause by the governing body which appointed him. 
(Ord. No. 204; Ord. No. 213; Ord. No. 444; Code 1964, § 29-11)  
Sec. 2-230. - General powers and duties. 
The commission shall perform the duties and have all the powers authorized and expressed in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4200 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 204; Ord. No. 444; Code 1964, § 29-14; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-231. - Appropriation of funds; budget. 
Funds for the operation and administration of the commission shall be appropriated by the participating political subdivisions on a pro rata basis of population, as determined by the latest decennial census reported by the United States Census Bureau. The commission shall submit to the chief administrative officer of each participating political subdivision, on or before March fifteenth of each year, a proposed budget for the commission for the forthcoming year. Such proposed budget shall clearly set forth the pro rata cost to each participating political subdivision in funding the commission. The commission shall have no authority or power to obligate, in any manner, any participating political subdivision beyond those funds duly appropriated by it for the use of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 204; Ord. No. 444; Code 1964, § 29-12; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Authority of council to appropriate or lend funds for planning district commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4218.  
Sec. 2-232. - Authority to accept grants, funds or other assistance. 
The commission is hereby authorized to receive grants from the federal or state government or any other source and may contract therewith regarding the acceptance or use of such grants. The commission may also accept and use funds, personnel or other assistance made available by the federal or state government or any other source and may enter into agreements or contracts regarding the acceptance or use of such funds or assistance. 
(Ord. No. 204; Ord. No. 444; Code 1964, § 29-13; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— State aid to planning district commissions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4216.  
Secs. 2-233—2-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PENINSULA PORT AND INDUSTRIAL AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 2-251. - Created; composition; powers and duties; etc. 
There is hereby created, jointly with the City of Newport News, Virginia, the Peninsula Port and Industrial Authority with the composition, government, powers, duties and other matters pertaining thereto, as set forth in chapter 46, Acts of the General Assembly of Virginia for the year 1952, and chapter 42, Acts of the General Assembly of Virginia, Special Session of 1956. 
(Ord. No. 39, § 1; Code 1964, § 28-1) 
Editor's note— In accord with the acts cited above, the councils of the Cities of Newport News and Hampton agreed to create the Peninsula Port and Industrial Authority. The council of the City of Newport News has, by ordinance, taken the requisite action relative to the establishment of such authority.  
Secs. 2-252—2-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PENINSULA TRANSPORTATION DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 2-271. - Created. 
Pursuant to the Transportation District Act of 1964, Code of Virginia § 15.2-4500 et seq., there is hereby created the Peninsula Transportation District which is also created hereby as a body corporate and politic under the name and style of, and to be known by, "Peninsula Transportation District Commission." 
(Ord. No. 411; Code 1964, § 29.1-1; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-272. - Boundaries. 
The Peninsula Transportation District shall encompass all the territory comprising the Cities of Hampton and Newport News and shall be generally bounded as follows: On the north by the County of York as it conjoins and meanders along its southerly boundary with the northern city limits of the Cities of Hampton and Newport News; on the east by the westerly city limits of the City of Norfolk and the City of Portsmouth; on the south by the northerly boundary of the Counties of Isle of Wight and Surry and the City of Nansemond; and on the west by the southerly boundary of the County of James City and the County of York. 
(Ord. No. 411; Code 1964, § 29.1-2)  
Sec. 2-273. - Cities included. 
The cities to be embraced in whole in the transportation district created by this article are the Cities of Hampton and Newport News. 
(Ord. No. 411; Code 1964, § 29.1-3)  
Sec. 2-274. - Purpose. 
It is hereby found that the orderly growth and development of this city and the comfort, convenience and safety of its citizens require an improved transportation system, composed of transit facilities, public highways and other modes of transport, and that joint action through a transportation district by the cities which compose the transportation district will facilitate the planning and development of the needed transportation system. 
(Ord. No. 411; Code 1964, § 29.1-4)  
Sec. 2-275. - Powers, duties, etc. 
The transportation district created by this article shall have all of the rights, powers, duties, liabilities and the like as provided in the Transportation District Act of 1964, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4500 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 411; Code 1964, § 29.1-5; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Secs. 2-276—2-279. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY OF THE CITY OF HAMPTON, VIRGINIA[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-0039, adopted Dec. 12, 2012, amended the title of Art. XI to read as herein set out. Article XI was formerly entitled "Industrial Development Authority of the City of Hampton, Virginia." 
 
Sec. 2-280. - Creation. 
Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4900 et seq., as amended, there is hereby created a political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia, named the "Economic Development Authority of the City of Hampton, Virginia" ("development authority"). 
(Ord. No. 793, 2-27-85; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 12-0039, 12-12-12)  
Sec. 2-281. - Authority to finance projects. 
The development authority shall finance no projects of any type or nature whatsoever without the prior consent of the council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 793, 2-27-85)  
Sec. 2-282. - Authority of city manager to execute documents. 
The city manager is authorized to enter into on behalf of the city contracts, agreements, and other documents setting forth the understandings between the development authority and the city. 
(Ord. No. 793, 2-27-85)  
Sec. 2-283. - Approval of policies and procedures. 
The city manager is authorized to prepare and bring before the council of the city for the council's consideration such resolutions, ordinances, rules, regulations, policy statements, and recommendations of individuals to serve as directors of the development authority as may be necessary to enable the development authority to be established and to exercise its powers as provided pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4900 et seq., as amended, subject to such limitations as may be set forth in this article, any subsequent ordinances or resolutions, and any documents prepared by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 793, 2-27-85; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Secs. 2-284—2-289. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - FEDERAL AREA DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 2-290. - Created; composition; powers and duties; etc. 
(a)  [Findings.] 
WHEREAS, the Council of the City of Hampton, Virginia (the "city council) created the City of Hampton, Virginia Federal Area Development Authority ("FADA") pursuant to the Authorities for Development of Former Federal Areas Act, Chapter 63, Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended (the "Act"); WHEREAS, a public hearing was held on April 27, 2006, by the city council on the adoption of the Ordinance pursuant to the Act and the Ordinance was adopted after two readings on May 11, 2005; WHEREAS, pursuant to emergency legislation enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia, a new federal area development authority shall be created by the city council to govern the reuse of the federal area and military installation known as "Fort Monroe" and the jurisdiction of the current FADA will be limited to those federal areas within the boundaries of the City of Hampton other than Fort Monroe; 
WHEREAS, the city council created the FADA in order to enable more efficient cooperation with the federal government and to increase the value of federal installations in the City of Hampton, Virginia (the "city") by promoting the development of federal employee housing, including military housing, office buildings and other infrastructure through increased coordination between military, private industry, and academic and research institutions located in the City and the Hampton Roads area, and it is the intent of the city council that the current FADA to be known as the "Hampton FADA" continue its mission and purpose as set forth herein as it relates to federal areas in the city other than Fort Monroe; and 
WHEREAS, Hampton FADA will benefit the citizens of the city by promoting increased employment opportunities, a strengthened economic base and increased tax revenues as a result of development or redevelopment areas in the city, other than Fort Monroe, that are or have been occupied by a United States governmental activity or operation as well as areas adjacent to such authority. 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HAMPTON, VIRGINIA: 
(b)  Creation of authority. The City of Hampton, Virginia Federal Area Development Authority (the "Hampton FADA") is hereby created as a political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act, with such public and corporate powers as set forth in the Act. 
(c)  Boundaries of the Hampton FADA. The Hampton FADA boundaries shall include areas within the city, other than Fort Monroe, that are, or have been occupied by a United States governmental activity or operation and areas adjacent to such authority. 
(d)  Purpose of the Hampton FADA. The Hampton FADA is created for the purpose of exercising the powers set forth in the Act, including fostering and stimulating the industrial, social and other economic development in its area of operation. 
(e)  Board of commissioners. The Hampton FADA shall be governed by a board of commissioners of up to nine (9) members to be appointed by the city council. All of the members shall be residents of the city. The members shall serve for terms of not more than four (4) years each. 
(Ord. No. 1399, 5-11-05; Ord. No. 1472, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 10-0018, 6-9-10)  
Secs. 2-291—2-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
Sec. 2-311. - Special events; purpose and intent. 
(a)  The City of Hampton is committed to facilitating a wide range of special events that highlight the diverse communities within the city while ensuring that all events are conducted in a safe and orderly fashion. Accordingly, this article sets forth the application and review process for special events to minimize any negative impacts on special event participants, spectators, and the general public. 
(b)  This article shall have an effective date of December 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 15-0026 , 10-28-15)  
Sec. 2-312. - Special events; definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms are defined as follows: 
Alcoholic beverages. Providing or selling alcoholic beverages when a license is required by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Virginia Code § 4.1-100-4.1-517, as amended), including but not limited to banquet, tasting, mixed beverage special events, or club events licenses. 
City-scale public special event. Any announced gathering held outdoors on city property, including but not limited to festivals, marathons, bicycle races, concerts, parades, public performances, block parties, and processions, whenever any of the following criteria ("City-scale public special event criteria") are met: 
(1)  Attendance is expected to exceed 250 people at any one point in time; 
(2)  Public street or other public right-of-way closure will be required; 
(3)  Live entertainment, mobile vendors, or alcoholic beverages will be provided; or 
(4)  Admission will be charged. 
City-scale public special events shall not include: 
(1)  Normal and customary use of city owned or leased outdoor recreational facilities, including but not limited to city operated golf courses and Hampton BMX, regardless of whether the city-scale public special event criteria are met, unless the event requires closure of a public street or other public right-of-way, or use of additional city staff. 
(2)  Rentals of city parks, including park shelters, but only if none of the city-scale public special event criteria are met. 
City-scale private special event. Any announced gathering held outdoors, not on city property, including but not limited to weddings, reunions, and birthday parties, whenever any of the following criteria ("City-scale private special event criteria") are met: 
(1)  Attendance is expected to exceed 250 people at any one point in time; 
(2)  Public street or other public right-of-way closure will be required; 
(3)  Mobile vendors will be provided; or 
(4)  Admission will be charged. 
City-scale private special events shall not include, regardless of whether the city-scale private special event criteria are met: 
(1)  Customary and regularly scheduled public school, private school, or college/university activities taking place on the school or college/university's property, unless the event requires closure of a public street or other public right-of-way, or use of additional city staff. 
(2)  Normal and customary events taking place at open-air venues permitted by the city zoning ordinance when the event will not exceed the capacity permitted by the certificate of occupancy. 
Live entertainment. Any artistic, musical or theatrical performance, including but not limited to, karaoke, open-microphone, live vocal or instrumental music, recorded music with a disc jockey (DJ), play, stand-up comedy, dance act, magic, poetry reading, reenactment, cabaret, or any combination thereof, performed by one (1) or more persons, whether or not they are compensated for the performance or admission is charged. 
Mobile vendors. The sale or exchange of any item, including, but not limited to, any and all goods, wares, flowers, prepared or unprepared food or any other product, by any person from any temporary structure, including, but not limited to, any table or stand, or from any motor vehicle, trailer, cart, dray, wagon, pushcart or any hand or pedal-propelled vehicle. 
Neighborhood-scale public special event. Any announced gathering held outdoors on city property where all of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  Attendance is not expected to exceed 250 people total; 
(2)  No mobile vendors or alcoholic beverages will be provided; 
(3)  Admission will not be charged; 
(4)  No public streets or other public rights-of-way are required to be closed; and 
(5)  The event will be held on city property identified on the neighborhood-scale public special event map. 
City property. Public streets, sidewalks, and other public rights-of-way, places, or properties owned by the City of Hampton, Virginia. 
Special event. One of three types of announced gatherings of people, including city-scale public special events, city-scale private special events, and neighborhood-scale public special events, as well as any other event deemed by the special event coordinator, after consultation with the appropriate divisions of the department of public safety and the city manager, to affect public safety, health, or welfare by its potential impacts on the general public or surrounding properties. 
Special event coordinator. The city manager of the City of Hampton or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 15-0026 , 10-28-15)  
Sec. 2-313. - Special events; permit required; penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person or organization desiring to hold a special event shall obtain a special event permit prior to operating a special event. 
(b)  The special event coordinator is authorized and directed to develop an application process for special event permits and procedures for reviewing special event applications, which shall be kept on file in the office of the special event coordinator. 
(c)  Failure to obtain a special event permit when required, or violation of the terms and conditions of an approved special event permit, shall result in the following: 
(1)  First offense: 
a.  Written notice of violation shall be issued by the special event coordinator to the applicant or the applicant's organization and the property owner; and 
b.  Neither the applicant, the applicant's organization, nor the property owner shall be eligible to apply for a special event permit for 18 months from the date of violation. 
(2)  Second offense: 
a.  Written notice of violation shall be issued by the special event coordinator to the applicant or the applicant's organization and property owner; 
b.  Neither the applicant, the applicant's organization, nor the property owner shall be eligible to apply for a special event permit for 18 months from the date of violation; and 
c.  A person convicted of a second offense under this article shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(3)  Third and any subsequent offense: 
a.  Written notice of violation shall be issued by the special event coordinator to the applicant or the applicant's organization and property owner; 
b.  Neither the applicant nor the property owner shall be eligible to apply for a special event permit for 18 months from the date of violation; and 
c.  A person convicted of a third or subsequent offense under this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(4)  Each day this article is violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 15-0026 , 10-28-15)  
Sec. 2-314. - Special event permit; application, submission deadlines, and fees. 
(a)  Applicant. 
(1)  Application for a special event permit on city property shall be made by the person or organization desiring to hold the special event in writing to the special event coordinator. 
(2)  Application for a special event permit on non-city property shall be made by the property owner, or by persons other than the property owner with the written consent of the property owner, in writing to the special event coordinator. 
(b)  A complete special event permit application shall include the following: 
(1)  A fully completed and timely special event permit application determined by the scale and type of event as provided in subsection (3) below; and 
(2)  A non-refundable application fee of: 
a.  $50.00 for city-scale public and city-scale private special events. 
b.  $25.00 for neighborhood-scale special events. 
(3)  Special event permit applications vary depending on the scale and type of event. When a permit is required, one of the following special event permit applications must be fully completed, executed, and submitted: 
a.  City-scale public special event; 
b.  City-scale private special event; or 
c.  Neighborhood-scale public special event. 
(c)  Special event permit application deadlines. 
(1)  Application for a special event permit must be submitted within the time periods set forth in this section. Submission of a special event permit application after the submittal deadline constitutes grounds for denial of the special event permit, and the special event coordinator may return the application without further review. 
a.  City-scale public special event and city-scale private special event with more than 500 people expected to be in attendance or requiring a street closure: at least 90 calendar days prior to event. 
b.  City-scale public special event and city-scale private special event with fewer than 500 people expected to be in attendance: at least 60 calendar days prior to event. 
c.  Neighborhood-scale public event: at least 30 calendar days prior to event. 
(2)  All licenses, fees, approvals, and materials required for the proposed event must be received by the special event coordinator within five (5) calendar days of the proposed special event date. Failure to submit said licenses, fees, approvals, and materials constitutes grounds for denial of the special event permit. 
(d)  Special event fees. In addition to the application fee set forth in this section, the following fees apply to all special events, as applicable by the location, nature, and size of the special event: 
(1)  Park and outdoor facilities fees as set forth in chapter 26 of this Code; and 
(2)  As determined by the city department or division responsible for provision of the services, reasonable fees for: 
a.  Police services at the extra duty rate set by the chief of police; 
b.  Fire and emergency medical services at the rate set by the fire chief; 
c.  Rental equipment and related personnel, including but not limited to sanitation, signs, barricades, and traffic-control devices; and 
d.  All other personnel, equipment, and support reasonably necessary to facilitate the event so as not to constitute a detriment to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 15-0026 , 10-28-15)  
Sec. 2-315. - Special event permit; procedure for application review. 
(a)  Upon submission and acceptance of a complete special event permit application, the special event coordinator shall transmit the application to appropriate city departments and other agencies affected by the proposal, retrieve comments, and develop any conditions suitable to mitigate the impact of the proposed event. 
(b)  The special event coordinator shall convene the special events committee, comprised of officials from the appropriate city departments and other agencies affected by the proposal, and provide the date, location, and time of the meeting to the applicant. Applicants must attend the special events committee meeting where the event is discussed. Failure to attend the meeting without prior permission by the special event coordinator constitutes grounds for denial of the special event permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-0026 , 10-28-15)  
Sec. 2-316. - Special event permit; standards for application review. 
(a)  The special event coordinator is authorized to grant special event permits meeting all of the requirements of this article provided the following standards are met: 
(1)  The proposed event will not unreasonably interfere with the normal use of city property by the city or the general public; 
(2)  The proposed event does not present a safety or health risk to participants, spectators, the general public, or an environmental hazard; 
(3)  The proposed event is compatible with the surrounding area or neighborhood in consideration of anticipated noise, traffic, crowd capacity, and other similar factors; 
(4)  City resources necessary to support the proposed activity are reasonably available; and 
(5)  The special event coordinator has received all licenses, fees, approvals, and materials required by this article within five (5) calendar days of the proposed event date. 
(Ord. No. 15-0026 , 10-28-15)  
Sec. 2-317. - Special event permit; insurance, conditions, and fees. 
(a)  For events on city-owned property, insurance is required as follows: 
(1)  City-scale public events. The applicant must provide proof of liability insurance underwritten by insurers acceptable to the risk manager, indemnifying the city against all claims which may arise in connection with the proposed activity. Such coverage shall be in amounts set forth by the risk manager, based upon risks associated with each type of event. 
(2)  Neighborhood-scale public events. If the applicant is a registered neighborhood organization certified as such by the department of community development, no liability insurance for the event shall be required. If the applicant is not a registered neighborhood organization certified as such by the department of community development, the applicant must provide proof of liability insurance underwritten by insurers acceptable to the risk manager, indemnifying the city against all claims which may arise in connection with the proposed activity. Such coverage shall be in amounts set forth by the risk manager, based upon risks associated with each type of event. 
(b)  In granting a special event permit, the special event coordinator may impose conditions, requirements, and restrictions as are necessary to reasonably protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Provision of police services at the extra duty rate set by the chief of police; 
(2)  Provision of fire and emergency medical services at the rate set by the fire chief; 
(3)  Provision of equipment and personnel necessary for sanitation, signs, barricades, traffic-control devices, crowd control, security, fire protection, emergency medical services, food handling, and waste disposal; and 
(4)  Limitation on the number of attendees permitted based on the location, nature, and size of the proposed event. 
(Ord. No. 15-0026 , 10-28-15)  
Sec. 2-318. - Special event permit; grant or denial and recurring special events. 
(a)  After review of the special event permit application by the special event coordinator and special events committee, the special event coordinator may: 
(1)  Approve the special event permit with or without conditions if it meets the standards for approval set forth in this article; or 
(2)  Deny the special event permit if it does not meet the standards for approval set forth in this article. Upon denial of a special event permit application, the applicant shall be apprised of the reasons for denial and shall be entitled to appeal the decision to the city manager. 
(b)  If the special event permit is approved, the special event permit application and related conditions and materials become binding upon the applicant as part of the special event permit and shall be enforced by the Hampton police division and special event coordinator. 
(c)  Recurring special events. The special event coordinator may, through the grant of a single special event permit, allow for a special event to occur on multiple dates when the event will be substantially similar each time and will occur in the same location each time. Recurring special events may be permitted up to one calendar year in advance. 
(Ord. No. 15-0026 , 10-28-15)  
Sec. 2-319. - Special event permit; revocation and public safety cancelations. 
(a)  Revocation of special event permit. 
(1)  The special event coordinator may revoke a special event permit at any time if any of the following occurs: 
a.  Violation of any provisions of this article, any term of condition of the special event permit, or other federal, state, or local law related to operation of the event; 
b.  Weather conditions render the special event unsafe; or 
c.  Operation of the special event constitutes a public nuisance or hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise is endangering the life or property of others. 
(2)  If a special event permit is revoked, the event must be immediately canceled and all activities related to the event be immediately terminated. 
(b)  Cancelation of a special event. The chief of police or the fire chief, or their designees, may cancel and shut down any special event, without notice to the event organizer, when operation of the special event violates any provision of this article, any term or condition of the special event permit or other federal, state, or local law related to operation of the event, or threatens the public health, safety, and welfare. Grounds for cancelation include but shall not be limited to severe weather events, unruly or violent crowds, and crowds in excess of property capacity. The city shall not issue any refunds if an event is canceled and shut down pursuant to this section and the city shall not be liable for any additional expenses incurred by the event organizer as a result of cancelation. 
(Ord. No. 15-0026 , 10-28-15)  
ARTICLE XIV. - PROCUREMENT OFFICE[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1015, adopted June 26, 1991, amended the Code by the addition of a new Art. XIII, §§ 2-300—2-320 and 2-330—2-338 and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been redesignated as Art. XIV, §§ 2-320—2-340 and 2-350—2-358 in order to avoid duplicative article and section numbering. 
State Law reference— Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4300 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-320. - Created; supervision; composition. 
There shall be a procurement office which shall be a division of the city's finance department and under the supervision of a director of finance. The office shall consist of employees as may be authorized to perform the functions of the office. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95)  
Sec. 2-321. - Appointment, supervision and qualifications of director. 
The director of finance shall be appointed by, and shall be under the supervision of, the city manager. The director of finance will appoint and supervise all procurement office employees on the basis of their knowledge and experience in public procurement. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95)  
Sec. 2-322. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
"Certified" as used in reference to a minority-owned business enterprise or woman-owned business enterprise means that the business has been determined by the Virginia Department of Minority Business Enterprise to be a women-owned or minority-owned business for the purpose of reporting women-owned, and minority-owned business participation in state contracts and purchases pursuant to §§ 2.2-1404 and 2.2-1405 of the Virginia Code, as amended. 
Governing body means that group of elected or appointed individuals who serve as the ultimate policy-making body for a public entity. 
Minority-owned business enterprise means a business entity that is fifty-one (51) percent owned by one (1) or more African Americans, Hispanic Americans, Asian Americans, American Indians, Eskimos, or Aleuts, all as defined in Virginia Code § 2.2-1401, who are U.S. citizens or non-citizens in full compliance with U.S. immigration law, and both the management and daily business operations are controlled by one (1) or more such persons. 
Public entity means any political subdivision, agency, authority, office, commission, or committee utilizing the services of the consolidated procurement office, either by direction of law or through a cooperative agreement pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4304. 
Public procurement means a financial commitment between a public entity and a nonpublic source for the rental, lease, or purchase of goods, materials, equipment, or services for which public monies are to be utilized for payment of obligations. 
Small business means an independently owned and operated business which, together with affiliates has two hundred fifty (250) or fewer employees, or average annual gross receipts of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) or less averaged over the previous three (3) years. 
Women-owned business enterprise means a business entity that is fifty-one (51) percent owned and controlled by one (1) or more women who are U.S. citizens or non-citizens in full compliance with U.S. immigration law, and both the management and daily business operations are controlled by one (1) or more such women. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 09-0005, 4-29-09)  
Sec. 2-323. - General powers and duties of director. 
(a)  The director of finance shall be the chief procurement officer authorized to act as general agent on behalf of public entities utilizing the services of the procurement office, and shall be responsible, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, to the city manager for the development and administration of a centralized procurement system. 
(b)  The chief procurement officer or his designee shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Recommend and enforce administrative procedures that ensure that all procurements are made pursuant to applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(2)  Recommend and enforce specifications with respect to all goods, materials, supplies, equipment and services. 
(3)  Inspect or review the inspection reports of all deliveries of goods, materials, supplies, equipment and services, and make the final determination as to their quality, quantity and conformance with specifications. 
(4)  Resolve all claims, disputes or discrepancies arising in the course of procurement of goods, materials, supplies, equipment and services. 
(5)  Transfer to or between officers, departments or agencies or sell surplus, obsolete or unused goods, materials, supplies and equipment. 
(6)  With the approval of the chief executive officer of the applicable public entity, delegate limited authority to procure certain goods, materials, supplies, equipment or services, if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective operation of the department. 
(7)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95)  
Sec. 2-324. - Applicability of, and compliance with, article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all procurements made by public entities, as defined. 
(b)  To the extent that any public entity is allowed by state law to choose to follow the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4300 et seq., it shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. To the extent that any committee appointed by city council is given authority to do so, it may adopt alternate procurement procedures for purchases under ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(c)  The city economic development authority is exempt from the provisions of this article to the extent such exemption is defined in Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4344(B) and 15.2-4902. All other procurements not specifically exempt by these code sections shall be in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The direct procurement of publication space for the purpose of advertising public business shall be exempt from the requirements of competitive bidding and/or prior approvals. In those cases where there are not specific legal requirements as to when and where ads are to be placed, the chief executive officer of the public entity or his designee shall issue prior approvals for publication. 
(e)  When the chief of police certifies in writing that the procurement of certain items is needed to support undercover police operations and with the written approval of the city manager, such procurements may be made in a manner to protect the undercover operation, notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this article. 
(f)  All procurement relating directly to and necessary in support of events, exhibitions, and performances presented under the guidance of the city's arts commission may be made directly by the arts commission, notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this article. All such procurements shall be reported as part of the detailed event settlement statement as required by the city's finance department. 
(g)  Where a procurement transaction involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the receipt of which is conditioned upon compliance with mandatory requirements in federal laws or regulations not in conformance with provisions of this article, the procedure used may comply with such federal requirements, notwithstanding the provisions of this article, only upon the written determination of the governing body of the appropriate public entity that acceptance of the grant or contract funds under the applicable conditions is in the public interest. Such determination shall state the specific provision of this article in conflict with the conditions of the grant or contract. 
(h)  The procurement of certain utilities (water, Newport News Waterworks; sewage, Hampton Roads Sanitation District; electricity, Virginia Power; gas, Virginia Natural Gas; local phone service, C&P Telephone) shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. This exemption does not include telephone hardware or long distance service. These two (2) items are subject to provisions of this article. 
(i)  Upon a determination that circumstances make only one (1) source practically available for that which is to be procured, a purchase order or contract may be negotiated and awarded to that source upon the specific approval of the governing body of the appropriate public entity. 
(j)  Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this article, the chief procurement officer may enter into joint purchase agreements through agencies of the United States or agencies of the commonwealth or with other political subdivisions of the commonwealth. 
(k)  For a sole source procurement transaction involving the expenditure of federal assistance or grant funds, the item must either only be available from a single source; if it is a case of an emergency as defined in section 2-328; the federal awarding agency expressly authorizes noncompetitive proposals, or after solicitation competition is determined to be inadequate. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 12-0039, 12-12-12; Ord. No. 16-0010 , 6-8-16)  
Sec. 2-325. - Verification of funds; purchase orders. 
(a)  Except in cases of emergency, as defined in section 2-328 of this article, no public procurement shall be made except subsequent to the issuance of a formal purchase order by the finance department. Except in cases of emergency, the finance department shall be prohibited from issuing a purchase order to cover a previously made procurement. 
(b)  Except in cases of emergency, no financial commitment shall be made or purchase order or contract issued until it has been determined that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriate and available funds sufficient to cover the proposed expenditure and that the funds have been encumbered to ensure monies to pay the invoice upon receipt. 
(c)  Any procurement made contrary to the provisions of this article shall not be considered a legally binding obligation on the appropriate public entity. 
(d)  The provisions of this section apply to all public procurements regardless of dollar amount. The fact that procurements below one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) are exempt from competitive bids has no relation to this section nor does it create any exception. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95)  
Sec. 2-326. - Competitive bidding requirements. 
Except in specific situations as defined in this article, all purchase orders or contracts for public procurement shall be issued only after prices have been obtained in accordance with the applicable processes set forth in this section as follows: 
(1)  Advertised, competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed proposals shall not be required for procurements below thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00). Instead, the following competitive procurement procedures shall apply: 
a.  For procurements not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) city departments shall solicit at least two (2) price quotes and at least one (1) quote shall be solicited from a minority-owned or woman-owned business enterprise, whenever feasible. Quotes may be obtained either orally or in writing. 
b.  For procurements between five thousand one dollars ($5,001.00) and nine-thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($9,999.99) city departments shall solicit at least three (3) price quotes to include any price available pursuant to state or local government cooperative procurement, and where feasible, a quote from a local vendor and from a certified minority-owned or woman-owned business enterprise. Quotes may be obtained either orally or in writing. 
c.  For procurements between ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and twenty-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($29,999.99) the procurement office shall solicit at least four (4) written price quotes and at least two (2) of those quotes shall be solicited from certified minority-owned or woman-owned business enterprises. 
(2)  Formal, sealed bids or proposals shall be required for all procurements of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) and over and shall be administered by the procurement office of the department of finance. Advertisements for such bids or proposals shall be placed at least ten (10) days prior to the bid or proposal opening date in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city and shall state the place where vendors may examine any plans or specifications and receive bid or proposal forms, and the time and place where bids or proposals will be received and opened. The chief procurement officer or his designated representative is directed, in addition to the above-mentioned advertisement, to solicit bids or proposals from prospective vendors, including at least four (4) certified minority-owned or women-owned enterprises, by forwarding written notice to such prospective vendors. 
All bids or proposals provided for in this subsection (2) shall be submitted sealed to the chief procurement officer or his designated representative at the place designated in the advertisement prior to the stated time for the opening. All such bids or proposals received shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the advertisement. 
(3)  In solicitations for procurements of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and above, the chief procurement officer shall set individualized goals for participation of certified minority-owned business enterprises and women-owned business enterprises in accordance with the city's minority business program plan as approved and amended by city council from time to time upon the recommendation of the city manager. 
(4)  Where multiple quotes are obtained pursuant to any process set forth in this subsection, city departments and/or the procurement office, as applicable, shall award to the lowest "responsible" vendor as that term is defined by the Virginia Public Procurement Act, Virginia Code § 2.2-4300 et seq., as amended. The failure of any person or firm to receive notice of solicitation by letter or telephone shall not affect the validity of any procurement under this subsection. A written record of all the solicitations and the quotes or proposals received shall be made a part of the purchasing records, including documentation of all efforts required by this subsection to solicit quotes from minority- and women-owned businesses. The chief procurement officer shall issue policies setting forth the content and form of documentation necessary to satisfy the requirements of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 09-0005, 4-29-09; Ord. No. 10-0025, 11-10-10; Ord. No. 16-0010 , 6-8-16) 
State Law reference— Competitive bidding, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303.  
Sec. 2-327. - Contracts for professional/consultant services. 
(a)  All contracts for professional/consultant services (definition: work performed by an independent contractor within the scope of the practice of accounting, architecture, land surveying, landscape architecture, law, medicine, optometry or professional engineering) shall be made on the basis of a person or firm's technical competence, experience and capability at a negotiated fee considered fair and reasonable. Expressions of interest/statements of qualifications for such services shall be solicited, unless it is determined in writing that, because of past work or association with a project, one person or firm has the knowledge, background and technical notes to make him or it clearly the most logical choice. If such a determination is made, the provisions contained in section 2-324(i), singe-source procurements, shall be followed. 
(b)  If the decision is made by a public entity to procure services other than professional via the competitive negotiation process, the decision shall be stated in the solicitation, along with those items that shall be subject to negotiation. Proposals for such procurements shall be submitted at the time and place stated. A list of respondents will be made public but the contents of proposals shall not be revealed until negotiations have been concluded and a mutually acceptable agreement reached. After such agreement has been reached, all records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95) 
State Law reference— Contracts for professional services to be procured by competitive negotiation, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303(B).  
Sec. 2-328. - Emergency procurements. 
(a)  An emergency shall be deemed to exist in the following circumstances: 
(1)  When, in the opinion of the head of the using department, office or agency, goods, materials, supplies, equipment or services are needed for immediate use in work which vitally affects the health, safety, welfare or convenience of the public. 
(2)  When there is a breakdown in essential service provided by the public entity, and the public entity does not have the necessary supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services to provide the service. 
The decision to declare a situation an emergency shall be the sole responsibility of the head of the using department, office or agency. Once an emergency has been declared, that department head or his designated employee shall, by the fastest possible means, procure whatever is needed. Once the procurement is completed, the department shall send to the consolidated procurement office a requisition, vendor's invoice or copy of a delivery ticket showing prices, together with a written explanation of the circumstances of the emergency. 
(b)  All emergency procurements shall be reported to the chief executive officer of the applicable public entity by the procurement division of the finance department upon receipt of notification of such from the department involved. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95) 
State Law reference— Procurement in cases of emergencies, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303(F).  
Sec. 2-329. - Contracts for construction—Bid, performance and payment bonds. 
(1)  Except in cases of emergency, all bids or proposals for construction (definition: the building, alteration, improvement, removal, repair or demolition of any building, highway, bridge, street, sidewalk, culvert, sewer, storm drain, reservoir, dam, dock or wharf and draining, dredging, excavation, grading or other such work upon real property) of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or more shall be accompanied by a bid bond or certified check, payable to the public entity, in such sum as shall be stated in the bid or proposal forms. This amount, in any case, shall not exceed five (5) percent of the bid amount. Such bid bond shall serve as a guarantee that, if the contract is offered, the vendor will enter into a properly executed contract with the public entity for the work set forth in the specifications. Failure or refusal to execute the contract within the time designated in the bid or proposal forms shall mean forfeiture of the bid security. 
(2)  A performance bond and a payment bond, each equal to one hundred (100) percent of the contract price, shall be required on all contracts for construction of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or more. 
(3)  All bonds provided for in this section shall be issued by a surety company legally authorized to do business in the state; however, if approved by the city attorney, the vendor may furnish a personal bond, property bond, certified check payable to the city, or irrevocable letter of credit in the total amount required for the performance and payment bond. Approval shall be granted only upon a determination that the alternate form of security proffered affords protection to the public entity equivalent to a corporate surety's bond. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 09-0005, 4-29-09)  
Sec. 2-330. - Same—State aided. 
No contract for the construction of any building or for an addition to or improvement of an existing building for which state funds of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or more, either by appropriation, grant-in-aid or loan, are used or are to be used for all or part of the cost of construction shall be let except after competitive bidding. The procedure for the advertising for bids and letting of the contract shall conform, mutatis mutandis, to Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4300 et seq., the Virginia Public Procurement Act. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4336.  
Sec. 2-331. - Same—Withdrawal of bid due to error. 
(a)  A bidder for a public construction contract, other than a contract for construction or maintenance of public highways, may withdraw his bid from consideration if the price bid was substantially lower than the other bids due solely to a mistake therein; provided, the bid was submitted in good faith and the mistake was a clerical mistake, as opposed to a judgment mistake, and was actually due to an unintentional arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of the bid, which unintentional arithmetic error or unintentional omission can be clearly shown by objective evidence drawn from inspection of original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn. 
(b)  The bidder shall give notice in writing of his claim of right to withdrawn his bid under this section within two (2) business days after the conclusion of the bid opening procedure. 
(c)  No bid may be withdrawn under this section when the result would be the awarding of the contract on another bid of the same bidder or of another bidder in which the ownership of the withdrawing bidder is more than five (5) percent. 
(d)  If a bid is withdrawn under the authority of this section, the lowest remaining bid shall be deemed to be the low bid. 
(e)  No bidder who is permitted to withdraw a bid shall, for compensation, supply any material or labor to, or perform any subcontract or other work agreement for, the person or firm to whom the contract is awarded or otherwise benefit, directly or indirectly, from the performance of the project for which the withdrawn bid was submitted. 
(f)  If the withdrawal of a bid under the provisions of this section is denied, the bidder shall be notified in writing, stating the reasons for the decision. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4330.  
Sec. 2-332. - Same—Employment discrimination prohibited. 
(a)  All construction contracts for ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or in excess thereof shall include the provisions in subsections (1) and (2) herein: 
(1)  During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows: 
a.  The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, religion, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, or other basis prohibited by state law relating to discrimination in employment, except where there is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the contractor. The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 
b.  The contractor, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, will state that such contractor is an equal opportunity employer. 
c.  Notices, advertisements and solicitations placed in accordance with federal law, rule or regulations shall be deed sufficient for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section. 
(2)  The contractor will include the provisions of the foregoing subsections a, b and c in every subcontract or purchase order of over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), so that the provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 
(b)  Successful bidders for contracts exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall be required to maintain a list of subcontractors, if any. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4311.  
Sec. 2-333. - Same—Action on performance bond. 
No action against the surety on a performance bond shall be brought unless within one year after completion of the contract, including the expiration of all warranties and guarantees, or discovery of the defect or breach of warranty, if the action be for such. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4340.  
Sec. 2-334. - Same—Action on payment bond. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) hereof, any claimant who has performed labor or furnished materials in accordance with the contract for which a payment bond has been given, and who has not been paid in full thereof before the expiration of ninety (90) days after the day on which such claimant performed the last of such labor or furnished the last of such materials for which he claims payment, may bring an action on such payment bond to recover any amount due him for such labor or material, and may prosecute such action to final judgment and have execution on the judgment. The obligee named in the bond need not be named a party to such action. 
(b)  Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with any subcontractor from whom the contractor has not required a subcontractor payment bond, but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the contractor's payment bond only if he has given written notice to such contractor within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date on which the claimant performed the last of the labor or furnished the last of the materials for which he claims payment, stating with substantial accuracy the amount claimed and the name of the person for whom the work was performed or to whom the material was furnished. Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with a subcontractor from whom the contractor has required a subcontractor payment bond, but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the subcontractor's payment bond. Notice to the contractor shall be served by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to such contractor at any place where his office is regularly maintained for the transaction of business. Claims for sums withheld as retainages with respect to labor performed or materials furnished shall not be subject to the time limitations stated in this subsection. 
(c)  Any action on a payment bond must be brought within one year after the date on which the person bringing such action last performed labor or last furnished or supplied materials. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4341.  
Sec. 2-335. - Same—Payment retainage. 
In any public contract for construction which provides for progress payments in installments based upon an estimated percentage of completion, the contractor shall be paid at least ninety-five (95) percent of the earned sum when payment is due, with not more than five (5) percent being retained to assure faithful performance of the contract. All amounts withheld may be included in the final payment. Any subcontract for a public project which provides for similar progress payments shall be subject to the same limitations. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4333.  
Sec. 2-336. - Same—Change orders and modifications. 
Contracts for construction may include provisions for modification during performance, but no contract may be increased by more than twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the contract or thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), whichever is greater, without the advance written approval of the appropriate governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 09-0005, 4-29-09) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4309.  
Sec. 2-336.1. - Same—Design-build and construction management contracting. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia chapter 43 § 2.2-4302, as it may be amended from time to time, the provisions of Code of Virginia chapter 43.1 §§ 2.2-4378, 2.2-4379, and 2.2-4382 related to governmental procurement of construction utilizing the design-build and construction management procurement methods, as those sections may be amended from time to time, are incorporated herein by this reference. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, whenever any provision of those sections incorporated thereby are modified or amended by any other section of the city code, or by any rule, regulation, policy, procedure, or administrative directive, such provision shall be interpreted and implemented as modified or amended. 
(c)  When design-build and construction management contracting methods are authorized. 
(1)  The city may enter into a contract for construction on a fixed price or not-to-exceed price construction management or design-build basis, provided that the city complies with (i) the requirements of Code of Virginia chapter 43.1 § 2.2-4382, as those sections may be amended from time to time, and (ii) the director of finance or designee shall have implemented procedures consistent therewith. 
(2)  Prior to making a determination as to the use of design-build or construction management for a specific construction project, the city shall have in its employ or under contract a licensed architect or engineer with professional competence appropriate for the project who shall advise the city regarding the use of design-build or construction management for that project and assist the city with the preparation of the request for proposal and the evaluation of such proposals. 
(3)  Prior to taking any action on the use of design-build or construction management for a specific construction project, the department making such request must receive formal approval to proceed from the city manager. The request shall contain a written determination justifying why competitive sealed bidding is not practicable or fiscally advantageous, and such writing shall document the basis for the determination to utilize design-build or construction management. The determination shall be included in the request for qualifications and be maintained in the procurement file. 
(4)  Design-build construction projects shall include a two-step competitive negotiation process consistent with the standards established by the Virginia division of engineering and buildings of the department of general services for state agencies. 
(5)  Construction management contracts shall include a two-step process and the selection criteria shall be included in the request for qualifications and the request for proposals. The procedures and required construction management terms shall be consistent with the procedures as adopted by the Virginia Secretary of Administration. 
(6)  Prior design-build or construction management experience or previous experience with Virginia's Bureau of Capital Outlay Management shall not be a prerequisite for award of a contract. However, in the selection of a contractor, the city may consider the experience of the contractor on comparable projects. 
(7)  The following additional requirements apply to construction management contracts: 
a.  Construction management contracts may be utilized for projects where the project cost is expected to be more than $10,000,000.00. 
b.  Construction management may be utilized on projects where the project cost is expected to be less than $10,000,000.00, provided that (i) the project is a complex project and (ii) the project procurement method is approved by the city council. The written approval of the city council shall be maintained in the procurement file. 
c.  The construction management contract shall be entered into no later than the completion of the schematic phase of design, unless prohibited by authorization of funding restrictions. 
d.  Construction management contracts shall require that (i) no more than 10 percent of the construction work, as measured by the cost of the work, be performed by the construction manager with its own forces and (ii) the remaining 90 percent of the construction work, as measured by the cost of the work, be performed by subcontractors of the construction manager, which the construction manager shall procure by publicly advertised, competitive sealed bidding to the maximum extent practicable. 
e.  Public notice of the request for qualifications shall be posted on electronic procurement website, known as eVA, at least 30 days prior to the date set for receipt of the request for qualifications. 
f.  Price is a critical basis for award of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 18-0003 , 3-14-18)  
Sec. 2-337. - Reservation of rights; award of purchase orders and contracts; extension of term of service contract. 
(a)  The public entity shall reserve the right to reject any and all bids or proposals, to award purchase orders or contracts in whole or in part, and to waive any informalities therein. All advertisements, invitations for bid, or requests for proposals shall contain a reservation of such right. 
(b)  All purchase orders and contracts shall be awarded on the basis of the bid or proposal that is judged to be most advantageous to the public entity. In the case where the award is not based on the lowest bid or proposal, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the chief procurement officer or his designated representatives and filed with the papers relating to the transaction. 
(c)  The following factors shall be considered when determining the bid or proposal most advantageous to the public entity: Price, delivery terms, payment terms, method of shipment, method of packaging, vendor location and/or point of shipping origin, capability and expertise of the vendor, past performance of the vendor, current financial and legal status of the vendor, and any other factor or factors which influence or determine the substantial value or advantage to the public entity of the bid or proposal. 
(d)  In the event that the person to whom a purchase order or contract is awarded is unable to fulfill its obligations pursuant to the award, the chief procurement officer may, at his discretion, either select from the other bids or proposals that have been submitted that bid or proposal that is judged to be most advantageous to the public entity, or rebid the purchase order or contract. 
(e)  If the bid or proposal judged most advantageous to the public entity exceeds available funds, the public entity shall reserve the right to negotiate a price within available funds, if such is practicably possible. If the right to negotiate is exercised, such negotiations shall be conducted under the supervision of the chief procurement officer or his designated representative, with full and complete written documentation of the negotiation made a part of the papers relating to the transaction. 
(f)  Unless otherwise provided in the invitation to bid or request for proposal, the name of a certain brand, make or manufacturer does not restrict bidders to the specific brand, make or manufacturer named. It conveys the general style, type, character and quality of the article desired; and during evaluation of bids or proposals, it shall be the sole discretion of the public entity to determine what offerings are the equal of that specified, considering quality, workmanship, economy of operation and suitability for the purpose intended. 
(g)  Except in cases of emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare, no purchase order or contract shall be awarded on the basis of cost plus percentage of cost. A policy or contract of insurance or prepaid coverage having a premium computed on the basis of claims and retention, stated in whole or in part as a percentage of such claims, shall not be prohibited, however. 
(h)  The term of an existing contract for services may be extended only to allow completion of any work undertaken but not completed during the original term of the contract. 
(i)  A modification to an existing contract for services for the purpose of adding additional scope of services shall be considered a single-source procurement and the provisions of section 2-324(i) shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-338. - Disposal of surplus personal property. 
The chief procurement officer or his designee shall be required to dispose of surplus personal property in a manner judged most practical, considering the condition of the surplus item, by one (1) of the following methods, unless specific directions to do otherwise are issued by formal vote of the governing body of the applicable public entity: 
(1)  At public auction or sale only after advertisements for such auction or sale have been placed on the city cable channel, city web page, published or advertised through other media with a public distribution. The advertisement must state the time, date and location of the auction or sale, general list of items for sale, time and location available for inspection of property and the terms and conditions of the sale. 
(2)  To the highest bidder submitting an acceptable bid in response to a publicly advertised (same method as in (1) above), request for sealed written bids. The advertisement shall state the location and time where surplus material may be inspected, the terms and conditions of sale, and the time, date and place where all bids shall be received, opened and made public. 
(3)  Surplus equipment determined by the chief procurement officer or his designee to be unusable by the city, to have little or no value based on current market to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1379, 8-11-04; Ord. No. 15-0008, 3-11-15 )  
Sec. 2-339. - Discrimination prohibited. 
In the solicitation or awarding of contracts, no public body shall discriminate because of the race, religion, color, sex, or national origin of the bidder or offeror. Whenever solicitations are made, each public body shall include at least one business, where practicable, selected from a list made available by the commonwealth, department of minority business enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4310(A).  
Sec. 2-340. - Public inspection of certain records. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, all proceedings, records, contracts and other public records relating to procurement transactions shall be open to the inspection of any citizen, or any interested person, firm or corporation, in accordance with the Virginia Freedom of Information Act (Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq.). 
(b)  Cost estimates relating to a proposed procurement transaction prepared by or for a public entity shall not be open to public inspection. 
(c)  Any competitive sealed bidding bidder, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect bid records within a reasonable time after the opening of all bids but prior to award, except in the event that the public entity decides not to accept any of the bids and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, bid records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. 
(d)  Any competitive negotiation offeror, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect proposal records within a reasonable time after the evaluation and negotiations of proposals are completed but prior to award, except in the event that the public entity decides not to accept any of the proposals and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, proposal records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. 
(e)  Any inspection of procurement transaction records under this section shall be subject to reasonable restrictions to ensure the security and integrity of the records. 
(f)  Trade secrets, lists of subcontractors, or proprietary information submitted by a bidder, offeror or contractor in connection with a procurement transaction shall not be subject to public disclosure under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act; however, the bidder, offerer or contractor must invoke the protection of this section prior to, or upon submission of, the data or other materials, and must identify the data or other materials to be protected and state the reasons why protection is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4342.  
Sec. 2-341. - Prequalification of bidders or offerors. 
(a)  The chief procurement officer or his designee is authorized to prequalify bidders or offerors prior to any solicitation of bids or proposals in accordance with the procedure set forth in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4317(B), whether for goods, services, insurance or construction, by requiring prospective bidders or offerors to submit such information as the chief procurement officer or his designee shall deem appropriate, including samples, financial reports, and references; provided, however, that the opportunity to prequalify shall be given to any prospective bidder or offeror who has not been suspended or debarred from bidding or submitting proposals for city contracts. 
(b)  The chief procurement officer or his designee may refuse to prequalify any prospective contractor in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4317(B), provided that written reason for such refusal to prequalify shall be made a part of the record in each case. The decision of the chief procurement officer or his designee shall be final. 
(c)  Prequalification of a bidder or offeror shall not constitute a conclusive determination that the bidder or offeror is a responsible bidder or offeror as defined in Virginia Code Section 2.2-4301, and such bidder or offeror may be rejected as nonresponsible on the basis of subsequently discovered information. 
(d)  Failure of a bidder or offeror to prequalify with respect to a given procurement shall not bar the bidder or offeror from seeking prequalification as to future procurements or from bidding on procurements which do not require prequalification. 
(Ord. No. 08-0024, 12-17-08) 
State Law reference— Bidder prequalification, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4317.  
Sec. 2-342. - Debarment. 
(1)  Debarment defined. As used in this section debarment means action taken by the director of finance, or designee to exclude individuals or firms from contracting with departments for particular types of goods or nonprofessional services for specified periods of time. Debarment actions must be coordinated with the minority business development coordinator. Debarment does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for existing obligations. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of debarment is to protect the city from risks associated with awarding contracts to persons or firms having exhibited an inability or unwillingness to fulfill contractual requirements, and to protect city interests and the integrity of the city's procurement process by preventing individuals or firms who have displayed improper conduct from participating on city requirements for specific periods of time. 
(3)  Causes for debarment. An individual or firm may be debarred for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Breach (including anticipatory breach) of contract with the city. 
b.  Stating an unwillingness or inability to honor a binding bid. A mere request to withdraw a bid, which does not otherwise state an unwillingness or inability to perform, is not a cause for debarment. 
c.  Stating an unwillingness or inability to honor the minority or women owned business subcontracting plan submitted with a binding bid. 
d.  Falsifying or misrepresenting subcontracting information in order to appear responsive to a solicitation. 
e.  Falsifying or misrepresenting manufacturer's specifications in order to appear responsive to a solicitation. 
f.  Conferring or offering to confer any gift, gratuity, favor, or advantage, present or future, upon any employee of a procuring public entity who exercises any "official responsibility" for a "procurement transaction" as those terms are defined in the Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4368. It is not necessary that the offer be accepted by the employee, or that the offer is made with intent to influence the employee in an official act. Extending to any city employee exercising official responsibility for a procurement transaction any discount or privilege not available to all city employees is considered to be offering an advantage. 
g.  Failing to disclose a condition constituting a conflict of interest by any officer, director, owner, or partner of the vendor in a contract or purchase order awarded by the city (Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3106). 
h.  Any cause indicating that the individual or firm is not a responsible vendor. 
i.  A determination by the director of finance, or designee that a vendor has used abusive language toward or has threatened purchasing personnel during the performance of their duties or as a result of the performance of their duties. 
j.  Sale, under nonemergency conditions, of building materials, supplies, or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for the city by an independent contractor employed to furnish architectural or engineering services, but not construction for such building or structure or from any partnership, association or corporation in which such architect or engineer has a personal interest (Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3101 and § 2.2- 4374). 
k.  Sale, under nonemergency conditions, of building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for the city by any person who has provided or is currently providing design services specifying a sole source for such materials, supplies or equipment to be used in such building or structure to the independent contractor employed by the city to furnish architectural or engineering services in which such person has a personal interest as defined in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3101. 
l.  Sale of goods or services to the city when such sale is prohibited by any debarment then in effect. 
m.  Conviction of any criminal offense involving public contracting. Examples include, but are not limited to, bribery (Code of Virginia, § 18.2-447) and knowingly making a false statement in regard to collusion on a solicitation (Code of Virginia, § 18.2-498.4). Conviction for any of the above of any officer, director, owner, partner, agent, or related business entity of a vendor shall constitute grounds for the removal of the vendor. 
n.  Court judgment finding a violation of either federal or state antitrust laws. 
o.  Conviction of any offenses indicating a lack of moral or business integrity. 
p.  Failure to pay reprocurement costs pursuant to a contract termination for default. 
It is not necessary that there be a judicial determination of violations contained in subparagraphs a. through l. and p. for debarment to occur. 
If the director of finance finds that the cause for debarment reflects on the contractor's traits or tendencies only with regard to certain goods or services, the debarment may apply only to such transactions for purchase of such goods or services. Otherwise the debarment shall apply to all goods and services within the purview of the debarring authority. 
(4)  Ineligibility or disqualification of manufacturer. Should any manufacturer commit any of the acts described above, bids offering material, equipment, or supplies manufactured by that firm may be rejected even though the bid is submitted by a vendor in good standing. 
(5)  Debarment period. Debarment shall be for a period of ninety (90) days to three (3) years, at the discretion of the director of finance, except as follows: The debarment pursuant to subparagraphs m., n., and o. shall be for a period of three (3) years. The debarment pursuant to subparagraph p. shall be for a period of one (1) year or until the reprocurement costs are paid or until the contract breach is resolved, whichever is longer. Debarment shall commence upon notification, or if later, upon expiration of any existing debarments. 
Notwithstanding the prescribed duration of the debarment, at the discretion of the director of finance or designee, a debarment may be lifted or suspended at any time if it is in the best interest of the city. A debarred individual or firm may apply for reinstatement at any time in writing to the debarring official citing actions taken to remedy the reason for debarment or prevent recurrence of the situation that caused the debarment action to be taken and otherwise indicating that lifting or suspension of the debarment would be in the best interest of the city. Examples of actions that the director or his designee may take into consideration include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Repayment by a debarred contractor of additional costs resulting from a default action for which the contractor had previously failed to reimburse the city and was debarred. 
b.  Disassociation with individuals or firms responsible for the debarment. 
(6)  Suspension. Suspension is a type of ineligibility based upon adequate evidence that a vendor has committed any of the grounds for debarment as listed above. In the event that an indictment against a vendor or its principles exists for any of the reasons listed in subparagraphs m., n., or o., the indictment shall constitute adequate evidence for suspension. The period of suspension shall not exceed one (1) year unless requested by the city attorney. The process for suspension will be governed by the same procedures used for debarment/ineligibility. 
"Adequate evidence" means information sufficient to support the reasonable belief that a particular act or omission has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 09-0005, 4-29-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-0005, adopted April 29, 2009, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 2-341. Inasmuch as Ord. No. 08-0024 previously added provisions so designated, the provisions of said Ord. No. 09-0005 have been included herein as § 2-342 at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Debarment, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4321.  
Secs. 2-343—2-349. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC PROCUREMENT 
 
Sec. 2-350. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Immediate family means a spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters and any other person living in the same household as the employee. 
Official responsibility means administrative or operating authority, whether intermediate or final, to initiate, approve, disapprove or otherwise affect a procurement transaction, or any claim resulting therefrom. 
Pecuniary interest arising from the procurement means a personal interest in a contract as defined in the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act (Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100 et seq.). 
Procurement transaction means all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any goods, services or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract and all phases of contract administration. 
Public employee means any person employed by a public body, including elected officials or appointed members of governing bodies. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4368.  
Sec. 2-351. - Relationship to state law. 
The provisions of this division supplement, but do not supersede, other provisions of law, including, but not limited to, the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act (Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100 et seq.), the Virginia Governmental Frauds Act (Code of Virginia, § 18.2-498.1 et seq.) and articles 2 and 3 of chapter 10 of title 18.2 (§ 18.2-438 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia. The provisions of this division apply notwithstanding the fact that the conduct described may not constitute a violation of the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-352. - Violations. 
Willful violation of any provision of this division shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. Upon conviction, any public employee, in addition to any other fine or penalty provided by law, shall forfeit his employment. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4337.  
Sec. 2-353. - Proscribed participation by public employees in procurement transactions. 
Except as may be specifically allowed by Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3112(A)(2), (3) or (4), no public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall participate in that transaction on behalf of the public body when the employee knows that: 
(1)  The employee is contemporaneously employed by a bidder, offeror or contractor involved in the procurement transaction; 
(2)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family holds a position with a bidder, offeror or contractor, such as an officer, director, trustee, partner or the like, or is employed in a capacity involving personal and substantial participation in the procurement transaction, or owns or controls an interest of more than five (5) percent; 
(3)  The employee, the employee's partner or any member of the employee's immediate family has a pecuniary interest arising from the procurement transaction; or 
(4)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family is negotiating, or has an arrangement concerning, prospective employment with a bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4369.  
Sec. 2-354. - Solicitation or acceptance of gifts. 
No public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall solicit, demand, accept or agree to accept from a bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal or minimal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. The public body may recover the value of anything conveyed in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4371.  
Sec. 2-355. - Disclosure of subsequent employment. 
No public employee or former public employee having official responsibility for procurement transactions shall accept employment with any bidder, offeror or contractor with whom the employee or former employee dealt in an official capacity concerning procurement transactions for a period of one (1) year from the cessation of employment by the public body, unless the employee or former employee provides written notification to the public body, or a public official if designated by the public body, or both, prior to commencement of employment by that bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4370.  
Sec. 2-356. - Gifts by bidders, offerors, contractors or subcontractors. 
No bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor shall confer upon any public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 2-357. - Kickbacks. 
(a)  No contractor or subcontractor shall demand or receive from any of his suppliers or his subcontractors, as an inducement for the award of a subcontractor or order, any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services, or anything, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(b)  No subcontractor or supplier shall make, or offer to make, kickbacks as described in this section. 
(c)  No person shall demand or receive any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of value in return for an agreement not to compete on a public contract. 
(d)  If a subcontractor or supplier makes a kickback or other prohibited payments as described in this section, the amount thereof shall be conclusively presumed to have been included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the public body and shall be recoverable from both the maker and recipient. Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4372.  
Sec. 2-358. - Purchase of building materials, etc., from architect or engineer prohibited. 
(a)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for a public body shall be sold by, or purchased from, any person employed as an independent contractor by the public body to furnish architectural or engineering services, but not construction, for such building or structure, or from any partnership, association or corporation in which such architect or engineer has a personal interest as defined in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3101. 
(b)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for a public body shall be sold by or purchased from any person who has provided or is currently providing design services specifying a sole source for such materials, supplies or equipment to be used in the building or structure to the independent contractor employed by the public body to furnish architectural or engineering services in which such person has a personal interest as defined in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3101. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply in cases of emergency or for transportation-related projects conducted by the state department of transportation or the Virginia Port Authority. 
(Ord. No. 1015, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1144, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1471, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4374.  
Secs. 2-359—2-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - RESERVED[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1421, adopted February 22, 2006, repealed Art. XV, §§ 2-371, 2-372, which pertained to the Peninsula Transportation District. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 2-371—2-375. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - THE H2O COMMUNITY AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 2-376. - Created; composition; powers and duties; etc. 
(a)  [ Findings. ] 
WHEREAS, the Virginia Water and Waste Authorities Act, Chapter 51, Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended (the "Act"), authorizes the creation of a community development authority on the petition of the landowners of at least fifty-one (51) percent of the land area or assessed value of land of a tract of any size within a city; 
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Hampton, Virginia (the "city council") has received a petition (the "petition") from the Hampton Redevelopment and Housing Authority, which represents that it owns one hundred (100) percent of the land within the proposed H 2 O Community Development Authority (the "CDA") district, and Sandler at Coliseum Central, L.L.C. (the "contract purchaser") (collectively, the "petitioner") for the creation of the CDA; 
WHEREAS, the contract purchaser has agreed that it will acquire one hundred (100) percent of the land within the CDA district before final approval of this section and will become the sole petitioner for the creation of the CDA; 
WHEREAS, a public hearing has been held on September 28, 2005 by the city council on the adoption of this section and notice has been duly provided as set forth in §§ 15.2-5104 and 15.2-5156 of the Act; 
WHEREAS, the city council proposes to create the CDA in order to provide the public improvements described in the petition; 
WHEREAS, the creation of the CDA to assist in financing certain improvements in connection with the proposed development within the CDA district will benefit the citizens of the City of Hampton, Virginia (the "city") by providing additional residential options for the citizens of the city, as well as infrastructure improvements benefiting the citizens of the city, will promote economic development and redevelopment and expansion of the city's tax base and will meet the increased demands placed upon the city as a result of development within the CDA district; 
WHEREAS, the petitioner has waived in writing the right to withdraw its signature from the petition in accordance with § 15.2-5156 of the Act; and 
WHEREAS, the council has established a policy for the establishment of special assessment districts (the "policy") to ensure that the creation of such districts will not place the city's financial assets at risk and will further the economic development/quality growth management/redevelopment goals of the city. 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Council of the City of Hampton, Virginia as follows: 
(b)  Creation of authority. The council finds that the health, safety and welfare of the city would benefit from the creation of the CDA. In accordance with such finding, the council hereby creates the H 2 O community development authority as a public body politic and corporate and political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act. The CDA shall have the powers set forth in the Act. 
(c)  Boundaries of CDA. The CDA boundaries shall initially include the property identified in the attached Exhibit A (the "Initial CDA District"). In accordance with § 15.2-5157 of the Act, a copy of this section shall be recorded in the land records of the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton for each tax map parcel in the CDA district as such CDA district exists at the time of issuance of the CDA's bonds (the "bonds") and the CDA district shall be noted on the land records of the city. The city council, upon the request of the CDA or the petitioner, may, by resolution, release or exclude from the CDA district before or after the issuance of the bonds certain de minimis portions of land not to exceed approximately one (1) acre. In addition, the CDA may release and exclude from the CDA district parcels of land with respect to which all special assessments have been paid or prepaid. 
(d)  Facilities and services. The CDA is created for the purpose of exercising the powers set forth in the Act, including financing, constructing, acquiring and developing, and owning and maintaining if necessary, certain improvements in connection with the development of a planned residential development as described in the petition and the CDA's articles of incorporation. The CDA shall have all the powers provided by the Act. The CDA shall not provide services which are provided by, or obligated to be provided by, any authority already in existence pursuant to the Act unless such authority provides the certification required by § 15.2-5155 of the Act. 
(e)  Articles of incorporation. Attached as Exhibit B are the proposed articles of incorporation of the CDA. The city manager is authorized and directed to execute and file such articles of incorporation on behalf of the city council with the state corporation commission in substantially the form attached as Exhibit B with such changes, including insubstantial changes to the boundary description of the CDA district described therein, as the city manager may approve. The city manager is authorized to approve such changes or corrections to the articles of incorporation prior to filing with the state corporation commission as do not change the purpose or function of the CDA as set forth in this section and in the petition. 
(f)  Capital cost estimates. The city council hereby finds, in accordance with § 15.2-5103(B) of the Act, that it is impracticable to include capital cost estimates. 
(g)  Membership of the authority. 
(1)  The powers of the CDA shall be exercised by an authority board consisting of five (5) members. 
(2)  All members of the CDA board shall be appointed by the city council in accordance with the provisions of § 15.2-5113. 
(3)  One (1) member of the CDA board shall be the city manager or an alternate to be designated by the city manager from time to time. 
(4)  Four (4) members of the CDA board shall be recommended by the petitioner. 
(5)  In addition to the five (5) CDA board members described above, the city council shall also appoint three (3) alternate board members recommended by the petitioner in a manner consistent with the Act. 
(6)  The initial members of the CDA board shall be as set forth in the articles of incorporation for the terms set forth therein. 
(7)  CDA board members shall not receive compensation for their services as CDA board members except that they shall be reimbursed for any actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties as CDA board members, including, but not limited to, necessary and reasonable travel and business expenses incurred while working on business for the CDA. 
(h)  Plan of finance; issuance of bonds. 
(1)  The improvements, services and operations to be undertaken by the CDA as described herein and in the petition shall be funded from all or some of the following sources: (i) bonds to be issued by the CDA; (ii) special assessments to be levied pursuant to Virginia Code § 15.2-5158A5 and (iii) any other source of funding available to the CDA including rates, fees and charges levied by the CDA for the services and facilities provided or funded by the CDA. 
(2)  The bonds to be issued by the CDA, in one (1) or more series from time to time, will be used to pay all or a portion of the costs of certain infrastructure as described herein and in the petition, the costs of issuing the bonds and any required reserves, and interest on the bonds prior to and during construction and for a period up to two (2) years after completion. 
(3)  Any bonds issued by the CDA or any other financing arrangements entered into by the CDA will be debt of the CDA, will not be a debt or other obligation of the city and will not constitute a pledge of the faith and credit of the city. 
(4)  In accordance with the policy, any financial obligation of the CDA shall be subject to approval by the city and to the terms contained in a memorandum of understanding between the CDA and the city regarding such obligation. 
(i)  Effective date. This section shall take effect immediately upon its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 1409, 9-28-05) 
Editor's note— Exhibits referenced in this section are not set out herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city. 
State Law reference— Authority to create, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-5102.1 et seq.  
ARTICLE XVII. - THE PENINSULA TOWN CENTER COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 2-377. - Created; composition; powers and duties; etc. 
(a)  [ Findings. ] 
WHEREAS, the Virginia Water and Waste Authorities Act, Chapter 51, Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended (the "Act"), authorizes the creation of a community development authority on the petition of the landowners of at least fifty-one (51) percent of the land area or assessed value of land of a tract of any size within a city; 
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Hampton, Virginia (the "city council"), has received a petition (the "petition") from Hampton Mall Associates, a Virginia general partnership (the "landowner"), for the creation of the Peninsula Town Center Community Development Authority (the "CDA"), and the establishment of the boundaries of the Peninsula Town Center Community Development Authority District (the "CDA district"); 
WHEREAS, the landowner has represented that it owns at least fifty-one (51) percent of the land included in the proposed CDA district; 
WHEREAS, a public hearing has been held on February 8, 2006, by the city council on the adoption of this section and notice has been duly provided as set forth in §§ 15.2-5104 and 15.2-5156 of the Act; 
WHEREAS, the city council proposes to create the CDA in order to provide the public improvements described in the petition and to establish the boundaries of the CDA district; 
WHEREAS, the creation of the CDA to assist in financing certain improvements in connection with the proposed development within the CDA district will benefit the citizens of the City of Hampton, Virginia (the "city"), by providing additional residential and commercial options in a network of connected public streets and urban park sites for the citizens of the city, as well as public improvements benefiting the citizens of the city, will promote economic development and redevelopment and expansion of the city's tax base and will meet the increased demands placed upon the city as a result of development within the CDA District; and 
WHEREAS, the landowner has waived in writing the right to withdraw its signature from the petition in accordance with § 15.2-5156(B) of the Act. 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Hampton, Virginia: 
(b)  Creation of authority. The Peninsula Town Center Community Development Authority is hereby created as a public body politic and corporate and political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act. The CDA shall have the powers set forth in the Act. 
(c)  Boundaries of CDA. The CDA district is hereby established and the boundaries shall initially include the property identified in the attached Exhibit A. In accordance with § 15.2-5157 of the Act, a copy of this section shall be recorded in the land records of the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton for each tax map parcel in the CDA district as such CDA district exists at the time of issuance of the CDA's bonds and the CDA district shall be noted on the land records of the city. The city manager, upon the request of the CDA, may modify the boundaries of the CDA district before or after the issuance of the CDA's bonds to permit exchanges of certain property included in the CDA district for property owned by the city and located within the perimeter of the CDA district (but not included in the CDA district on the date hereof), up to three (3) acres. 
(d)  Facilities and services. The CDA is created for the purpose of exercising the powers set forth in the Act, including without limitation, financing, funding, planning, establishing, acquiring, constructing or reconstructing, enlarging, extending, equipping, developing, operating, owning and maintaining if necessary, certain improvements in connection with the development of an urban residential and commercial town center as described in the petition and the CDA's articles of Incorporation. The CDA shall have all the powers provided by the Act. The CDA shall not provide services which are provided by, or obligated to be provided by, any authority already in existence pursuant to the Act unless such authority provides the certification required by § 15.2-5155 of the Act. 
(e)  Articles of incorporation. Attached as Exhibit B are the proposed articles of incorporation of the CDA. The city manager is authorized and directed to execute and file such articles of incorporation on behalf of the city council with the state corporation commission in substantially the form attached as Exhibit B with such changes, including insubstantial changes to the boundary description of the CDA district described therein, as the city manager may approve. The city manager is authorized to approve such changes or corrections to the articles of incorporation prior to filing with the state corporation commission as do not change the purpose or function of the CDA as set forth in this section and in the petition. 
(f)  Capital cost estimates. The city council hereby finds, in accordance with § 15.2-5103(B) of the Act, that it is impracticable to include capital cost estimates. 
(g)  Membership of the authority. 
(1)  The powers of the CDA shall be exercised by an authority board consisting of five (5) members. 
(2)  All members of the CDA board shall be appointed by the city council in accordance with the provisions of § 15.2-5113. 
(3)  One (1) member of the CDA board shall be the city manager or his designee, and such designee shall be designated in writing by the city manager and shall serve the same fixed term as the city manager. 
(4)  One (1) member of the CDA board shall be the landowner's designee, and such designee shall be designated in writing by the landowner. 
(5)  Three (3) members of the CDA board shall be recommended by the landowner for appointment by city council. 
(6)  In addition to the five (5) CDA board members described above, the city council shall also appoint one (1) alternate board member in a manner consistent with the Act. 
(7)  The initial members of the CDA board shall be as set forth in the articles of incorporation for the terms set forth therein. 
(8)  A vacancy on the CDA board caused by death, resignation, disqualification, or incapacity shall be filled by the city council, except the city manager shall appoint a replacement for any vacancy of the city manager's designee, and such persons so appointed shall serve for the unexpired portion of the term so vacated, and except further that the landowner shall appoint a replacement for any vacancy of the landowner's designee, and such persons so appointed shall serve for the unexpired portion of the term so vacated. 
(9)  Each CDA board member, other than the city manager or his designee, shall receive such compensation for his or her services as a CDA board member as may be authorized from time to time by resolution of the CDA board, provided that no member shall receive compensation in excess of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per meeting attended unless authorized by resolution of the city council. 
(h)  Plan of finance; issuance of bonds. 
(1)  The improvements, services and operations to be undertaken by the CDA as described herein and in the petition shall be funded from all or some of the following sources: (i) bonds to be issued by the CDA; (ii) a special ad valorem real estate tax to be levied pursuant to Virginia Code § 15.2-5158(A)(3); (iii) special assessments to be levied pursuant to Virginia Code § 15.2-5158(A)(5); (iv) certain amounts to be paid by the city to the CDA from incremental tax revenues generated within an area to be designated by the city, which amounts and sources will be determined pursuant to an agreement between the city and the CDA and may include certain incremental increases in the city's real property, sales, meals and amusement taxes; and (v) any other source of funding available to the CDA including rates, fees and charges levied by the CDA for the services and facilities provided or funded by the CDA. 
(2)  Bonds to be issued by the CDA (the "bonds"), in one (1) or more series from time to time, will be used to pay all or a portion of the costs of certain public improvements as generally described herein and in the petition, the costs of issuing the bonds and any required reserves, and interest on the bonds prior to and during acquisition and construction of such public improvements and for a period up to two (2) years after completion of such public improvements. 
(3)  Any bonds issued by the CDA or any other financing arrangements entered into by the CDA will be debt of the CDA, will not be a debt or other obligation of the city and will not constitute a pledge of the faith and credit of the city. 
(4)  In accordance with the policy adopted by city council on August 10, 2005, any financial obligation of the CDA shall be subject to approval by the city and to the terms contained in a memorandum of understanding between the CDA and the city regarding such obligation. 
(i)  Effective date. This section shall take effect immediately. 
(Ord. No. 1419, 2-22-06) 
Editor's note— Exhibits referenced in this section are not set out herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city. 
State Law reference— Authority to create, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-5102.1 et seq.  
Secs. 2-378—2-390. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - OFFICE OF MEDIA AND COMMUNITY RELATIONS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1490, adopted September 26, 2007, has been codified herein as Art. XVIII, at the request of the city. Subsequently, Ord. No. 09-0010, adopted July 8, 2009, amended the title of Art. XVIII to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. XVIII was entitled, "Office of Community and International Relations." See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 2-391. - Office established; responsibilities; administration by special assistant to city manager. 
(a)  There is hereby established an office of media and community relations ("the office") which shall be under the general supervision of the city manager. The office shall be directed and administered by a special assistant to the city manager who shall be appointed by and directly responsible to the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to designate the specific duties and responsibilities of the office within its general responsibility for public communications, community outreach, diversity education, promotion of cultural understanding, and cultivation and maintenance of appropriate international relationships. The office shall provide direction and oversight to the public communications office and the citizens' unity commission. 
(c)  The special assistant to the city manager assigned to the office shall be responsible for and exercise such functions as may be assigned to the office by ordinance or as may be designated by the city manager consistent with such ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1490, 9-26-07; Ord. No. 09-0010, 7-8-09)  
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Sound trucks, § 22-21 et seq.; advertising obscene items, exhibitions or performances, § 23-6; dropping advertising material from aircraft, § 24-42; posting advertisements in parks, § 26-32. 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Stopping or impeding vehicles for advertising purposes. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to stop, slow or delay a vehicle traveling at any time upon a public street or public parking lot in the city, for the purpose of advertising or promoting any article, merchandise, business, profession, trade or occupation of any nature to the occupants of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 216; Code 1964, § 2A-2; Ord. No. 1434, 11-15-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21.  
Sec. 3-2. - Deposit of advertising matter on parked vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or leave any handbill, advertising matter, circular or commercial writing of any kind on the outside of any vehicle parked on any of the streets or public parking lots of the city. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Nothing in subsection (a) shall prohibit the following: 
(1)  Placement of a card, handbill or other document approved by the chief of police upon a vehicle parked in a space reserved for persons with disabilities. 
(2)  Placement of a card, handbill or other document approved by the director of public works upon a vehicle providing information concerning street sweeping operations or other right-of-way maintenance activities. 
(Ord. No. 216; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, §§ 2A-1, 27.1-2; Ord. No. 1173, 10-23-96; Ord. No. 1269, 1-12-00; Ord. No. 1434, 11-15-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Boats, beaches and waterways, Ch. 7; license tax on various amusements, § 18.1-75 et seq.; license tax on amusement machine operators, § 18.1-101; obscene exhibitions and performances, § 23-5; scalping tickets to public events, § 24-29; parks, recreation and leisure services generally, Ch. 26; theatrical entertainments and other performances in parks, § 26-27; swimming pools, Ch. 6; tax on admission charged to places of amusement or entertainment, § 37-276 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1255, adopted Aug. 11, 1999, repealed § 4-1, which prohibited carnivals between certain dates, and which derived from Ord. No. 601, adopted Dec. 13, 1978; and Code 1964, § 27.1-8.  
Secs. 4-2—4-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC DANCE HALLS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate public dance halls, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912.3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-16. - Defined. 
For the purposes of this article, "public dance hall" means any place open to the general public where dancing is permitted and to which an admission fee is charged or for which compensation is in any manner received, either directly or indirectly, by cover charge, membership fee, or otherwise, or where refreshments, food or any form of merchandise are provided for compensation before, during or after dancing; provided, however, that a restaurant licensed under Code of Virginia, § 4.1-210, to serve food and beverages having a dance floor with an area not exceeding ten (10) percent of the total floor area of the public establishment shall not be considered a public dance hall. The sale of any refreshments, food or any form of merchandise at any such place or the exhibiting of such for sale shall be deemed compensation to any such dance hall within the meaning of this section. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 1; Ord. No. 611, 2-14-79; Code 1964, § 32A-1; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912.3.  
Sec. 4-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-0007, adopted July 13, 2011, repealed § 4-17, which pertained to exemptions from chapter and derived from Ord. No. 111, § 1; Ord. No. 611, adopted Feb. 14, 1979; Code 1964, § 32A-1; Ord. No. 1435, adopted Nov. 15, 2006.  
Sec. 4-18. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article or any term, condition or restriction of a permit granted under this article, or failing to comply with any action pursuant to section 4-42, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. In addition thereto and not in lieu thereof, any continuing violation of any provision of this article may be enjoined by the circuit court upon application of the city attorney. 
(b)  A conviction for violation of any provision of this chapter, other than section 4-36, shall ipso facto work a revocation of such offender's license, issued under chapter 18.1 of this Code, to conduct such public dance hall in the city, unless a new permit is thereafter granted under this article. 
(c)  Neither the commencement of criminal or civil proceedings under this section, nor any judgment rendered therein, shall preclude the city from taking action in accordance with section 4-42. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 11; Ord. No. 611, 2-14-79; Code 1964, § 32A-11; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Violations of dance hall ordinance to be punished as for a Class 3 misdemeanor, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912.3.  
Sec. 4-19. - Right of entry of police, enforcement. 
The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this article, and for that purpose, police officers of the city may enter any public dance hall for which a permit has been granted under this article during all hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 5; Ord. No. 185; Ord. No. 402; Ord. No. 611, 2-14-79; Code 1964, § 32A-5; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11)  
Sec. 4-20. - Security requirements. 
Whenever the number of patrons in a public dance hall is at least one hundred (100), the public dance hall shall have at least three (3) security employees or contractors on duty, at least one of whom shall be a law-enforcement officer outside of the establishment dedicated to maintaining order in and around the public dance hall. For purposes of this section, the term "law enforcement officer" has the meaning ascribed to that term by Code of Virginia, § 9.1-101. All other security employees or contractors shall be "unarmed security officers" or "armed security employees or contractors" as defined by Code of Virginia, § 9.1-138 validly registered with the state Department of Criminal Justice Services as required by Code of Virginia, § 9.1-139. The permit holder for the public dance hall shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this section and for all costs associated with fulfilling the security requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11)  
Sec. 4-21. - Minors not to be allowed on premises. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall remain in a public dance hall after 10:00 p.m. unless lawfully employed therein or unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  The manager of any public dance hall shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, a positive identification check of each person seeking admittance to ensure compliance with this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent his or her age in order to gain admittance to a public dance hall or for any person to aid, abet or assist in making such false representation. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 6; Ord. No. 611, 2-14-79; Code 1964, § 32A-8; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11)  
Sec. 4-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-0007, adopted July 13, 2011, repealed § 4-22, which pertained to dancing and music prohibited between certain hours and derived from Ord. No. 111, § 5; Ord. No. 185; Ord. No. 402; Ord. No. 601, adopted Dec. 13, 1978; Ord. No. 611, adopted Feb. 14, 1979; Code 1964, §§ 27.1-10, 32A-5; Ord. No. 1435, adopted Nov. 15, 2006.  
Secs. 4-23—4-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— License tax on dance halls, § 18.1-78. 
State Law reference— Dance hall ordinance to provide for issuance of operating permit, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912.3. 
 
Sec. 4-36. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public dance hall in the city without first obtaining a public dance hall permit from the city. A separate permit shall be required for each location or operation at a cost of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each permit issued. 
(b)  No license shall be issued by the commissioner of the revenue, under chapter 18.1 of this Code, for the operation of a public dance hall in the city, unless the applicant has the permit required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 111, §§ 2, 5; Ord. No. 185; Ord. No. 402; Ord. No. 611, 2-14-79; Code 1964, §§ 32A-2, 32A-5; Ord. No. 831, 5-28-86; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11)  
Sec. 4-37. - Application. 
Any person desiring to obtain a permit for the operation of a public dance hall in the city as required by this article shall make written application therefor to the Dance Hall Permit Review Committee (DHPRC). The DHPRC shall be composed of the director or a designee from each of the following city departments or entities: police, fire marshal, zoning administrator, building official, health, commissioner of revenue, economic development and a representative from the Neighborhood Commission. 
The application shall be accompanied by the fee required by section 4-36 for each location requested. Such fee shall be non-refundable. 
The application shall contain the following information and attachments: 
(1)  The street address where the proposed dance hall is to be located. 
(2)  The names and addresses of all persons who have or will have an ownership interest in the proposed dance hall and, if the owner or owners will not be the only individuals responsible for the management of the establishment, in addition thereto the names and residence addresses of each individual having management authority. 
(3)  If the owner or operator is a corporation or other entity, then such application shall set forth the name and residence addresses of the officers and directors of such corporation or other entity, or if there are no such officers or directors, the names and residence addresses of all persons having an ownership interest therein. 
(4)  A statement as to the type of food or drink to be offered and the facilities to be provided for the preparation and service thereof. 
(5)  Certification from both the building official and the zoning administrator that the establishment is in compliance with the ordinances of the city regulating building construction and/or use. 
(6)  A current certificate of occupancy from the building official and a plat showing the area of the establishment where dancing is to be permitted and the number of people such area is to accommodate. 
(7)  A statement of whether or not alcoholic beverages are to be served on the premises together with copies of the license application filed with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, if any, and the license issued by the board or writing constituting denial of such application. 
(8)  The name and address of the person who is designated to receive notices given pursuant to sections 4-38 and 4-42; and 
(9)  A statement of whether any of the individuals whose names are required to be set forth in the application pursuant to subdivisions (2) and (3) has ever applied for or had an ownership interest in any business entity which applied for a permit required by this article or a similar ordinance of any other county, city or town in the Commonwealth of Virginia. If such statement is in the affirmative, the applicant shall give full particulars as to the nature of the application, the date thereof, and the disposition of the application. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 3; Ord. No. 611, 2-14-79; Code 1964, § 32A-3; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11)  
Sec. 4-38. - Investigation of the application; issuance or denial of permit. 
(a)  The DHPRC shall grant the permit if it contains all of the information required by section 4-37 and: 
(1)  None of the individuals whose names are required to be set forth in the application pursuant to section 4-37 has been convicted of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude or the possession or sale of, attempted possession or sale of, or conspiracy to possess or sell a controlled substance, alcohol or firearms, and 
(2)  There has been no misrepresentation or misstatement concerning, or omission of, any material fact, in the application, as determined by the DHPRC, whether such misrepresentation, misstatement or omission is intentional or inadvertent. 
(b)  The DHPRC shall grant or deny the permit within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete application filed pursuant to section 4-37 of this article; provided, however, that in the event the DHPRC is unable to determine within such time whether or not the application complies with the requirements for the granting of a permit on the basis of the information provided, they shall notify the applicant and require the applicant to provide such additional information as may be necessary within a specified time. In such case, the DHPRC shall have an additional thirty (30) days from the date on which such information is furnished to grant or deny the permit. In the event the applicant shall fail to provide such information within the amount of time specified by the DHPRC, the application shall be denied. 
(c)  The DHPRC may attach such conditions to a permit as are reasonably related to the preservation and protection of the public peace, order and general welfare. 
(d)  A permit shall not be issued to a person, nor shall a permit be deemed to authorize the operation of a public dance hall by any person, other than the applicant or applicants whose names are set forth in the application. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the DHPRC to deny a permit may appeal such action to the city manager in writing received in the office of the city manager within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision; provided, however, that the commencement of such appeal shall not stay the action of the DHPRC. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 4; Ord. No. 611, 2-14-79; Cede 1964, § 32A-4; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11)  
Sec. 4-39. - Conditions and restrictions. 
Every permit granted for the operation of a public dance hall shall be subject to the conditions and restrictions set forth specifically in the permit granted under this article and to all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 5; Ord. No. 185; Ord. No. 402; Ord. No. 611, 2-14-79; Code 1964, § 32A-5; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11)  
Sec. 4-40. - Transfer; change in ownership, management or location. 
A permit issued under this article shall not be transferable. Any change in the ownership or management of a public dance hall shall invalidate the permit for such establishment, unless the DHPRC consents, in writing, to such change. Any change in the location of a public dance hall shall invalidate the permit. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 5; Ord. No. 185; Ord. No. 402; Ord. No. 611, 2-14-79; Code 1956, § 32A-5; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11)  
Sec. 4-41. - Procurement by fraud or misrepresentations. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to procure a permit required by this article by fraud or false representation of facts. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 8; Code 1964, § 32A-6; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11)  
Sec. 4-42. - Suspension, revocation, other action. 
(a)  Upon notice of violation of any condition of the permit or violation of any provision of this article by the holder of a permit issued under this article, or by any employee or agent of such holder, the DHPRC shall have the right, in addition to any other remedies allowed by law, to amend, suspend or revoke the permit after due hearing and upon not less than five (5) days notice in writing to the person who is designated to receive notices at the address provided in the application. 
(b)  The DHPRC shall render a decision within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing and shall promptly notify the permit holder, or person who is designated to receive notices at the address provided in the application. Such notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail. 
(c)  Any permit holder aggrieved by a decision of the DHPRC pursuant to subsection (b) of this section may appeal such action to the city manager in writing received in the office of the city manager within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision; provided, however, that the commencement of such appeal shall not stay the action of the DHPRC. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 10; Ord. No. 611, 2-14-79; Code 1964, § 32A-7; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0007, 7-13-11)  
Secs. 4-43—4-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POOLROOMS 
 
Sec. 4-56. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1956, §§ 16-26, 16-27; Ord. No. 88; Ord. No. 295; Code 1964, §§ 31-5, 31-6; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 4-57. - Operation at other than street level. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any poolroom on any floor above or below the street level of any building in the city. 
(Code 1956, § 16-26; Ord. No. 88; Code 1964, § 31-2; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 4-58. - Obstructing view from street. 
It shall be unlawful for the proprietor of any poolroom to erect or maintain any screen, curtain or thing of any nature which may obscure a free and uninterrupted view of such poolroom from the street. 
(Code 1956, § 16-26; Ord. No. 88; Code 1964, § 31-3; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 4-59. - Minors prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall frequent, play in or loiter in any establishment licensed as a public poolroom or billiard room, nor shall the proprietor of any such establishment or his agent permit any person under eighteen (18) years of age to frequent, play in or loiter in any such place. 
(b)  No proprietor of any room of a public nature, other than establishments referred to in subsection (a) above, where pool or billiards or games of a like character are played, or the agent of any such proprietor, shall allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to play pool or billiards or games of a like nature therein. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall apply to military or naval personnel in uniform. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to an establishment or business wherein pool, billiards or games of like nature are played, when such establishment or business: 
(1)  Has obtained and has on display a certificate of approval from the director of public safety. Such certificate of approval may be withdrawn by the director of public safety, after written notice to the proprietor, when in his opinion such establishment or business is not a proper place for minors to frequent. 
(2)  Allows no alcoholic beverage to be sold, kept or consumed on the premises and has direct access to an area or place where such alcoholic beverages may be sold or consumed. 
(3)  Has an interior having a minimum lighting throughout at a level of forty (40) footcandles. 
(4)  Has no partitioned or closed-off areas, other than those for toilet facilities, office space or storerooms, and all playing areas and billiard tables are visible from a public street or way open to the public. 
(5)  Has a window or windows open to view for a public street or way open to the public, having a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of transparent glass, which window or windows shall not be permanently covered or otherwise obstructed. 
(6)  Contains only regulation size minimum measurements of four and one-half (4½) feet by nine (9) feet, playing tables and has a minimum of ten (10) such tables. 
(7)  Has separate restroom facilities for both sexes. 
(8)  Has no pinball machines or machines operating on the coin-in-the-slot principle, except machines dispensing food or merchandise. 
(Code 1956, § 16-26; Ord. No. 88, Ord. No. 201; Ord. No. 232; Ord. No. 296; Code 1964, §§ 31-1, 31-4.1; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate presence of minors in places of amusement, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.  
Sec. 4-60. - Closing hours. 
The proprietors of all rooms of a public nature where pool or billiards or games of like character are played shall close such rooms not later than 1:00 a.m., every day, and keep such rooms closed until 6:00 a.m. the same day, and shall not allow any such game to be played therein between such hours. 
(Code 1956, § 16-27; Ord. No. 88; Ord. No. 295; Code 1964, § 31-6; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 4-61. - Application of article to poolrooms located in bowling alleys. 
The provisions of this article, except section 4-60, shall not apply to any poolroom or billiard room or to tables for playing pool or billiards located within a bowling alley building containing twenty-four (24) or more regulation bowling lanes, except that no person under eighteen (18) years of age, other than military or naval personnel in uniform, shall be allowed to frequent, play in or loiter in that portion of such bowling alley building to be used for pool or billiards or games of a like character. 
(Code 1956, § 16-26; Ord. No. 88; Code 1964, § 31-4; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 4-62—4-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BINGO GAMES AND RAFFLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1174, adopted Oct. 23, 1996, amended and re-enacted Art. IV of Ch. 23 to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 4, Art. IV contained similar subject matter and was derived from provisions presumably enacted during the 1983 codification; from §§ 19-6.2 and 19-6.3 of the 1964 Code; from Ord. Nos. 391, 419, 471; and from Ord. No. 594, adopted Nov. 8, 1978; Ord. No. 625, adopted July 25, 1979; Ord. No. 689, adopted May 13, 1981; Ord. No. 857, adopted May 12, 1987; Ord. No. 1131, adopted Nov. 9, 1994; Ord. No. 1143, adopted July 5, 1995. 
State Law reference— No authority to tax certain charitable gaming, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912.2. 
 
Sec. 4-76. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the words "bingo" and "raffle" shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 18.2-340.16 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1174, 10-23-96; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 4-77. - Violations of article. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day in violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1174, 10-23-96; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Secs. 4-78—4-90. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-91. - Permit required. 
Unless otherwise exempt, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate any bingo game or raffle within the city, unless he has a current permit so to do, issued by the state department of charitable gaming. 
(Ord. No. 1174, 10-23-96; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Annual permit required, Code of Virginia § 18.2-340.25; organizations exempt from certain permit requirements, Code of Virginia § 18.2-340.23.  
Secs. 4-92—4-95. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-96. - Hours of operation. 
Bingo shall not be conducted between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midday nor shall bingo be conducted longer than five (5) consecutive hours in any calendar day at any premises, regardless of whether it is conducted by one (1) or more organizations. 
(Ord. No. 1174, 10-23-96; Ord. No. 1435, 11-15-06)  
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Dogs prohibited on beaches during certain periods, § 7-49; animals in food establishments, § 15-46; unlawful riding or leading of horses in parks, § 26-34. 
State Law reference— General authority of city to regulate and control animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6544. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Violations of chapter generally. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-1, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 5-2. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the content clearly indicates a different intention, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meaning indicated in this section: 
Abandon means to desert, forsake, or absolutely give up an animal without having secured another owner or custodian for the animal or by failing to provide the elements of basic care as set forth in Virginia Code § 3.2-6503 for a period of four (4) consecutive days. 
Adequate care or care means the responsible practice of good animal husbandry, handling, production, management, confinement, feeding, watering, protection, shelter, transportation, treatment, and, when necessary, euthanasia, appropriate for the age, species, condition, size and type of the animal and the provision of veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering or impairment of health. 
Adequate exercise or exercise means the opportunity for the animal to move sufficiently to maintain normal muscle tone and mass for the age, species, size, and condition of the animal. 
Adequate food or feed means access to and the provision of food that is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain each animal in good health; is accessible to each animal; is prepared so as to permit ease of consumption for the age, species, condition, size and type of each animal; is provided in a clean and sanitary manner; is placed so as to minimize contamination by excrement and pests; and is provided at suitable intervals for the species, age, and condition of the animal, but at least once daily, except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species. 
Adequate shelter means provision of and access to shelter that is suitable for the species, age, condition, size, and type of each animal; provides adequate space for each animal; is safe and protects each animal from injury, rain, sleet, snow, hail, direct sunlight, the adverse effects of heat or cold, physical suffering, and impairment of health; is properly lighted; is properly cleaned; enables each animal to be clean and dry, except when detrimental to the species; and, for dogs and cats, provides a solid surface, resting platform, pad, floormat, or similar device that is large enough for the animal to lie on in a normal manner and can be maintained in a sanitary manner. Under this chapter, shelters whose wire, grid, or slat floors (i) permit the animals' feet to pass through the openings, (ii) sag under the animals' weight, or (iii) otherwise do not protect the animals' feet or toes from injury are not adequate shelter. 
Adequate space means sufficient space to allow each animal to (i) easily stand, sit, lie, turn about, and make all other normal body movements in a comfortable, normal position for the animal and (ii) interact safely with other animals in the enclosure. When an animal is tethered, adequate space means a tether that permits the above actions and is appropriate to the age and size of the animal; is attached to the animal by a properly applied collar, halter, or harness configured so as to protect the animal from injury and prevent the animal or tether from becoming entangled with other objects or animals, or from extending over an object or edge that could result in the strangulation or injury of the animal; and is at least three (3) times the length of the animal, as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail, except when the animal is being walked on a leash or is attached by a tether to a lead line. When freedom of movement would endanger the animal, temporarily and appropriately restricting movement of the animal according to professionally accepted standards for the species is considered provision of adequate space. 
Adequate water means provision of and access to clean, fresh, potable water of a drinkable temperature that is provided in a suitable manner, in sufficient volume, and at suitable intervals appropriate for the weather and temperature, to maintain normal hydration for the age, species, condition, size and type of each animal, except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species; and is provided in clean, durable receptacles that are accessible to each animal and are placed so as to minimize contamination of the water by excrement and pests or an alternative source of hydration consistent with generally accepted husbandry practices. 
Adoption means the transfer of ownership of a dog or a cat, or any other companion animal, from a releasing agency to an individual. 
Agricultural animals means all livestock and poultry. 
Ambient temperature means the temperature surrounding the animal. 
Animal means any nonhuman vertebrate species except fish. For the purposes of section 5-77 of the Hampton City Code, animal means any species susceptible to rabies. For the purposes of Article VI of the Hampton City Code, animal means any nonhuman vertebrate species including fish except those fish captured and killed or disposed of in a reasonable and customary manner. 
Animal control officer means a person appointed as an animal control officer or deputy animal control officer as provided in Va. Code § 3.2-6555. 
Animal shelter means a facility, other than a private residential dwelling and its surrounding grounds, which is used to house or contain animals and which is owned, operated, or maintained by a nongovernmental entity including, but not limited to, a humane society, animal welfare organization, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or any other organization operating for the purpose of finding permanent adoptive homes for animals. 
At large shall mean roaming, running or self-hunting off the property of its owner or custodian and not under its owner's or custodian's immediate control by leash, rope, or chain attached to a commercial pet collar or harness or contained within a pet carrier, crate or enclosed pet stroller. A dog shall not be considered at large if it is on a bona fide hunt in the city in the company of the hunter; is off leash in an officially designated Bark Park; or is off leash in a space within a public park defined as an off-leash dog area by the director of parks, recreation and leisure services and identified by signage as available for off-leash dog activity. At large shall not apply to any person while engaged in law enforcement or search and rescue activity; in a supervised formal obedience training class or show; or during formally sanctioned field trials or field dog training. 
Boarding establishment means a place or establishment, other than public or private animal shelter, where companion animals not owned by the proprietor are sheltered, fed and watered in exchange for a fee. This shall not include any private residential dwelling that shelters, feeds, and waters fewer than five (5) companion animals not owned by the proprietor. 
Collar means a well-fitted device, appropriate to the age and size of the animal, attached to the animal's neck in such a way as to prevent trauma or injury to the animal. 
Companion animals means dogs, both domestic and feral; cats, both domestic and feral; nonhuman primates; guinea pigs; hamsters; rabbits not raised for human food or fiber; exotic or native animals; reptile; exotic and native birds; or any feral animal or any animal under the care, custody, or ownership of a person or any animal that is bought, sold, traded, or bartered by any person. Agricultural animals, game species, or any animals regulated under federal law as research animals shall not be considered companion animals for the purpose of this chapter. 
Dealer means any person who, in the regular course of business for compensation or profit, buys, sells, transfers, exchanges or barters companion animals. The following shall not be considered dealers: (i) any person who transports companion animals in the regular course of business as a common carrier or (ii) any person or organization whose primary purpose is to find permanent adoptive homes for companion animals. 
Direct and immediate threat means any clear and imminent danger to an animal's health, safety or life. 
Emergency veterinarian treatment means veterinary treatment to stabilize a life threatening condition, alleviate suffering, prevent further disease transmission, or prevent further disease progression. 
Enclosure means a structure used to house or restrict animals from running at large. 
Euthanasia means the humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death or by a method that involves anesthesia, produced by an agent which causes painless loss of consciousness, and death during such loss of consciousness. 
Exotic bird means any bird that is not a species native to the United States. 
Feral animal means any domesticated animal that was formerly owned or has been abandoned and is no longer socialized, or any animal born outdoors that has not been socialized. 
Foster care provider means a person who provides care or rehabilitation for companion animals through an affiliation with a public or private animal shelter, home-based rescue, releasing agency, or other animal welfare organization. 
Foster home means a private residential dwelling and its surrounding grounds at which site through an affiliation with a pound, animal shelter, or other releasing agency care or rehabilitation is provided for companion animals. 
Home-based rescue means an animal welfare organization that takes custody of companion animals for the purpose of facilitating adoption and houses such companion animals in a foster home or a system of foster homes. 
Housing facility or facility means a building or portion thereof as designated by the State Veterinarian, other than a private residential dwelling and its surrounding grounds, used to contain a primary enclosure or enclosures in which animals are housed or kept. 
Humane means any action taken in consideration of and with the intent to provide for the animal's health and well-being. 
Humane care and treatment shall include, but not be limited to, the protection of animals from direct sun rays in the summer and freezing cold in the winter and the maintenance of food and water bowls in a separate and clean manner. The bowls shall be sufficiently secured so that they cannot be easily overturned. 
Humane investigator means a person who has been appointed by a circuit court as a humane investigator as provided in Virginia Code § 3.2-6558. 
Humane society means any incorporated, nonprofit organization that is organized for the purposes of preventing cruelty to animals and promoting humane care and treatment or adoptions of animals. 
Kennel means any establishment in which five (5) or more canines, felines, or hybrids of either are kept for the purpose of breeding, hunting, training, renting, buying, boarding, selling, or showing. 
Law enforcement officer means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of a police department or sheriff's office that is part of or administered by the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof and who is responsible for the prevention and detection of crime and the enforcement of the penal, traffic or highway laws of the commonwealth. Part-time employees are compensated officers who are not full-time employees as defined by the employing police department or sheriff's office. 
Livestock includes all domestic or domesticated: bovine animals; equine animals; bovine animals; porcine animals; cervidae animals; capradae animals; animals of the genus Lama; ratites; fish or shellfish in aquaculture facilities, as defined in Virginia Code § 3.2-2600 enclosed domesticated rabbits or hares raised for human food or fiber; or any other individual animal specifically raised for food or fiber, except companion animals. 
Local ordinance means any law, rule, regulation, or ordinance promulgated by the governing body of any county, city, or town. 
Locality or local government means a county, city, or town, as the context may require. 
Nuisance pertaining to dogs means excessive, continuous or untimely barking, howling, molesting of passersby, chasing vehicles, attacking other domestic animals, or unwelcome trespassing upon school grounds, private or public property. Nuisance pertaining to cats means excessive, continuous or untimely caterwauling, a sound made during courtship, and/or destructive trespassing on the property of another. Other officer includes all other persons employed or elected by the people of Virginia or by any municipality, county, or incorporated town thereof, whose duty it is to preserve the peace, to make arrests or to enforce the law. 
Owner means any person who: (i) has a right of property in an animal; (ii) keeps or harbors an animal; (iii) has an animal in his care; or (iv) acts as custodian of an animal. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, joint-stock company, corporation, association, trust, estate or other legal entity. 
Pet shop means an establishment where companion animals are bought, sold, exchanged or offered for sale or exchange to the general public. 
Poultry includes all domestic fowl and game birds raised in captivity. 
Pound means a facility operated by the commonwealth or any locality for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals, or a facility operated for the same purpose under a contract with any county, city, town, or incorporated society for the prevention of cruelty to animals. 
Primary enclosure means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, cage, compartment or hutch. For tethered animals, the term includes the shelter and the area within reach of the tether. 
Private animal shelter means a facility operated for the purpose of finding permanent adoptive homes for animals that is used to house or contain animals and that is owned or operated by an incorporated, nonprofit, and nongovernmental entity, including a humane society, animal welfare organization, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or any similar organization. 
Public animal shelter means a facility operated by the commonwealth, or any locality, for the purpose of impounding or sheltering seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, unwanted, or surrendered animals or a facility operated for the same purpose under a contract with any locality. 
Research facility means any place, laboratory or institution licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture at which scientific tests, experiments or investigations involving the use of living animals are carried out, conducted or attempted. 
Sanitize means to make physically clean and to remove and destroy, to a practical minimum, agents injurious to health. 
Treasurer means the city treasurer and his assistants or other officer designated by law to collect taxes in the city. 
Treatment or adequate treatment means the responsible handling or transportation of animals in the person's ownership, custody or charge, appropriate for the age, species, condition, size and type of the animal. 
Veterinary care or treatment means treatment by or on the order of a duly licensed veterinarian and shall include, but not be limited to, immunization of animals against distemper, hepatitis, leptospira (DHL), rabies and parvo virus, and a periodic check for tape, round, hook, whip and heart worms. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-2, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0014, 8-20-08; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16; Ord. No. 17-0009 , 8-9-17; Ord. No. 18-0007 , 6-13-18) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6500.  
Sec. 5-3. - Public educational program as to animal control problems. 
The city shall develop and promote an educational program designed to inform the public of the animal-control problems existing in the city. The council shall allocate such funds as are available for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-46, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08)  
Sec. 5-4. - Animal control officer and pound generally. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint or designate an officer to be known as the animal control officer, who shall have the power to enforce this chapter and other ordinances and state laws for the protection of domestic animals. Within the limits of the appropriations therefor, the city council may also appoint one (1) or more deputies to assist the animal control officer in the performance of his duties. 
(b)  An animal pound shall be maintained by the city in accordance with the requirements deemed necessary by the city council and of a type approved by the health department. All dogs found running at large without the tag required by section 5-58, or in violation of section 5-38 and all cats found running at large in violation of section 5-38 shall be confined therein. The city need not own such pound but may contract for its establishment with a private group alone or in conjunction with one (1) or more other local political subdivisions of the state. 
(c)  The pound provided for in this section shall be accessible to the public at reasonable hours during the week and meet all other requirements stated in the Code of Virginia, § 3.2-5900 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-13, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 764, § 4-13, 12-14-83; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08) 
State Law reference— Position of animal control officer created, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6555; city pounds, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546.  
Sec. 5-5. - Qualifications and training of animal control officer and deputy animal control officer; authority of animal control officer and deputy animal control officers. 
(a)  Animal control officers shall have a knowledge of the animal control and protection laws of Virginia and the city's animal control ordinances which they are required to enforce. All animal control officers shall also complete the state mandated training as outlined in Virginia Code § 3.2-6556. 
(b)  When in uniform or upon displaying a badge or other credentials of office, animal control officers shall have the power to issue a summons or obtain a felony warrant as necessary, providing the execution of such warrant shall be carried out by any law- enforcement officer as defined in Virginia Code § 9.1-101, to any person found in the act of violating any laws or ordinances pertaining to animals. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-41, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 784, 9-26-84; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia §§ 3.2-6555, 3.2-6556.  
Sec. 5-6. - Violation of chapter by animal control officer, shelter or pound custodian. 
(a)  No animal control officer or custodian of any pound or animal shelter shall (i) obtain the release or transfer of an animal by the animal's owner to such animal control officer, humane investigator, humane society or custodian for personal gain or (ii) give or sell or negotiate for the gift or sale to any individual, pet shop, dealer, or research facility of any animal which may come into his custody in the course of carrying out his official assignments. No animal control officer or custodian of any pound or animal shelter, nor any member or employee of the firm, partnership or corporation of said pound or animal shelter shall be granted a dealer's license under section 5-73. Violation of this subsection shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall preclude any animal control officer from lawfully impounding any animal pursuant to article V of this chapter of the Hampton City Code. 
(b)  Any animal control officer or custodian of any pound who violates any provision of chapter 5 of the Hampton City Code which relates to the seizure, impoundment and custody of animals by an animal control officer may be subject to suspension or dismissal from his position. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-41, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6557.  
Sec. 5-7. - Sterilization of dogs and cats; enforcement; civil penalty. 
(a)  Every new owner of a dog or cat adopted from a releasing agency within the city or from a releasing agency receiving funding of any kind from the city shall cause to be sterilized the dog or cat pursuant to the agreement required by subdivision 2 of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  A dog or cat shall not be released for adoption from a releasing agency within the city or from a releasing agency receiving funding of any kind from the city unless: 
(1)  The animal has already been sterilized; or 
(2)  The individual adopting the animal signs an agreement to have the animal sterilized by a licensed veterinarian (i) within 30 days of the adoption, if the animal is sexually mature, or (ii) within 30 days after the animal reaches six (6) months of age, if the animal is not sexually mature at the time of adoption. 
(c)  A releasing agency may extend for 30 days the date by which a dog or cat must be sterilized on presentation of a written report from a veterinarian stating that the life or health of the adopted animal may be jeopardized by sterilization. In cases involving extenuating circumstances, the veterinarian and the releasing agency may negotiate the terms of an extension of the date by which the animal must be sterilized. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the sterilization of a sexually immature dog or cat upon the written agreement of the veterinarian, the releasing agency, and the new owner. 
(e)  Upon the petition of an animal control officer, humane investigator, the State Veterinarian or a State Veterinarian's representative to the district court, the court may order the new owner to take any steps necessary to comply with the requirements of this article. This remedy shall be exclusive of and in addition to any civil penalty which may be imposed under this article. 
(f)  Any person who violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $250. 
(g)  Any agreement used by a releasing agency pursuant to subsection (b) shall contain: 
(1)  The date of the agreement; 
(2)  The names, addresses, and signatures of the releasing agency and the new owner; 
(3)  A description of the dog or cat to be adopted; 
(4)  The date by which the dog or cat is required to be sterilized; and 
(5)  A statement printed in conspicuous, bold print, that sterilization of the dog or cat is required under this article; that a person who violates this article is subject to a civil penalty; and that the new owner may be compelled to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(h)  Each new owner who signs a sterilization agreement shall, within seven (7) days of the sterilization, cause to be delivered or mailed to the releasing agency written confirmation signed by the veterinarian who performed the sterilization. The confirmation shall briefly describe the dog or cat; include the new owner's name and address; certify that the sterilization was performed; and specify the date of the procedure. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $150. 
(i)  If an adopted dog or cat is lost or stolen or dies before the animal is sterilized and before the date by which the dog or cat is required to be sterilized, the new owner shall, within seven (7) days of the animal's disappearance or death, notify the releasing agency of the animal's disappearance or death. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $25. 
(j)  This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  An owner reclaiming his dog or cat from a releasing agency within the city or from a releasing agency receiving funding of any kind from the city. 
(2)  A releasing agency within a locality that has adopted a more stringent mandatory sterilization ordinance; and 
(3)  A local governing body that has disposed of an animal by sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the commonwealth, agency of another state, or licensed federal dealer having its principal place of business located within the commonwealth. 
(k)  An animal control officer, humane investigator, releasing agency, the State Veterinarian or State Veterinarian's representative shall be entitled to bring a civil action for any violation of this article that is subject to a civil penalty. Any civil penalty assessed pursuant to this article shall be paid into the treasury of the city and used for the purpose of defraying the costs of local animal control, including efforts to promote sterilization of cats and dogs. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6574 et seq.  
Sec. 5-8. - Allowing animal to go on land of another and damage property. 
(a)  No person shall suffer or permit any animal belonging to him or under his control to go upon the land of another person and damage or destroy any garden, shrubs, grass or other property thereon. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $20 nor more than $50. Upon a second conviction within the period of one (1) year of a violation of this section involving the same animal, such person shall be fined not less than $30 nor more than $100 and the court may order the owner or custodian of such animal to remove it from the city within a period of two (2) weeks, and upon the failure of such owner or custodian to comply with such order, such animal shall be seized by an animal control officer or law enforcement officer and euthanized or otherwise disposed of in a manner consistent with normal procedures, and the owner shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $500. 
(c)  Any person owning property which is damaged or destroyed by any violation of this section may enter his complaint by a warrant issued against the owner or custodian of the animal involved and the complaint shall be heard by the court as all other complaints under criminal warrants are heard. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-3, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 5-8.1. - Removal of dog excrement required; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or having custody or control of a dog to fail to remove immediately the dog's excrement from any public or private property other than property owned or occupied by the person owning, keeping or having custody or control of said dog. For purposes of this section, the phrase "property owned or occupied by the person owning, keeping or having custody or control of said dog" shall not include the common and limited common elements of condominiums or cooperatives nor property owned or maintained by a homeowner's association or by a property owner's association. Any person who shall violate this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a service dog or to dogs used by police officers for law enforcement or tracking purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1092, 7-14-93; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08)  
Sec. 5-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-0001, adopted Feb. 9, 2011, repealed § 5-9, which pertained to noisy animals or birds and derived from Ord. No. 735, § 4-4, adopted Nov. 10, 1982; Ord. No. 1437, adopted Nov. 15, 2006; Ord. No. 08-0015, adopted Sept. 24, 2008.  
Sec. 5-10. - Dangerous animals, other than dogs. 
(a)  No person shall suffer or permit any animal belonging to him or under his control and known or reasonably suspected of being dangerous to be kept in the city at any time except in strict confinement in such manner as to be safe for the public at large or any person licensed to go on the premises on which such animal is kept. This section shall not apply to dogs. 
(b)  The term "dangerous animal" shall be defined for the purposes of this section has any animal, other than a dog, which attacks a human being or another animal without provocation; or any animal, other than a dog, with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack a human being or another animal without provocation. For purposes of this section, proof that any animal has bitten one (1) or more persons or animals without provocation shall be considered as prima facie evidence that such animal is dangerous. 
(c)  No animal shall be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. No animal shall be declared dangerous if it attacks other animals which are trespassing on the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of an animal control officer or other officer who may find any dangerous animal that is either: not in strict confinement as required by subsection (a); or that has attacked a human being or another animal and whose presence in the city represents a continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or other animals, to forthwith take the dangerous animal in custody and dispose of it in accordance with section 5-38(b) or, in the alternative, to hold the animal until disposition by the court under sections 5-10 and 5-10.1. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-7, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1079, 3-24-93; Ord. No. 1095, 7-14-93; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08) 
Cross reference— Dangerous dogs; penalties, § 5-42.  
Sec. 5-10.1. - Violations. 
(a)  A violation of section 5-10 shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any dangerous animal which attacks a human being or another animal may be ordered destroyed when, in the court's judgment, such dangerous animal represents a continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or other animals. When an animal is dangerous without the knowledge of the owner or keeper, the court may order the animal destroyed without penalizing the owner or keeper. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating section 5-10 shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, and veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of any animal for the protection of the public, and such other expenses as may be required for the destruction of any such animal. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to dogs. 
(Ord. No. 1080, 3-24-93; Ord. No. 1096, 7-14-93; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08) 
Cross reference— Dangerous dogs; penalties, § 5-42.  
Sec. 5-11. - Confinement of reptiles. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any exotic reptile or type of reptile not native to the commonwealth, including but not limited to the American alligator, to keep the reptile in any manner that will permit its escape or to knowingly permit the reptile to run at large. Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-8, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-569.  
Sec. 5-12. - Disposal of dead animals and fowl generally. 
(a)  When the owner of any animal or grown fowl which has died knows of such death, such owner shall forthwith have its body cremated or buried or request such service from an officer or other person designated for the purpose. If the owner fails to do so, any judge of a general district court, after notice to the owner if he can be ascertained, shall cause any such dead animal or fowl to be cremated or buried by an officer or other person designated for the purpose. Such officer or other person shall be entitled to recover of the owner of every such animal so cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed $75, and of the owner of every such fowl so cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed $5, to be recovered in the same manner as officers' fees are recovered, free from all exemptions in favor of such owner. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the burial or cremation of the whole or portions of any animal or fowl which is to be used for food or in any commercial manner. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-5, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-510.  
Sec. 5-13. - Casting or leaving dead or disabled animal in street or allowing dead animal to remain unburied. 
If any person casts any dead animal into a street, alley or sidewalk, or knowingly permits any dead animal to remain unburied upon his property when offensive to the public or, having in custody any maimed, diseased, disabled or infirm animal, leaves it to lie or be in a street or public place, he shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-6, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-323.  
Secs. 5-14—5-23. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate the keeping of animals and fowl, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6544. 
 
Sec. 5-24. - Location and maintenance of poultry and animal yards generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain in the city any poultry or animal yard within 175 feet of any buildings used for residential purposes or within 250 feet of any church or school building; provided, however, that the person maintaining such yard may do so within 175 feet of such person's own personal residence and further provided, that this subsection shall not apply to the keeping of pigeons. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "poultry or animal yard" shall include every yard, pasture, enclosure, shed or structure used to house: 
(1)  Live fowl, including in the term "fowl," ducks, geese and other poultry, except as provided otherwise herein; or 
(2)  One (1) or more of the following animals: Cattle, horses, sheep, goats or other domestic animals, other than dogs or cats. 
(c)  Every person maintaining a poultry or animal yard shall keep the same clean and sanitary and free from all refuse, decaying food and excrement. 
(d)  Every poultry or animal yard, except when located in an area zoned agricultural under any existing zoning ordinances, shall be adequately enclosed and free from any rodents. The presence of any rodent in any poultry or animal yard shall be prima facie evidence that such yard is maintained in violation of this section. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to authorize the keeping of animals of any kind at any place, irrespective of distance from any building, when the keeping of such animals is prohibited by any other ordinance. Conversely, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the keeping of animals of any kind at any place, irrespective of distance from any building, when the keeping of such animals is permitted by any other ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-9, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 13-0018, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 ; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 5-24.1. - Location and maintenance of domestic chickens generally. 
Except as specified in Section 5-24, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep domestic chickens within the city without first demonstrating compliance with this section and applying for and obtaining a permit to do so. 
(a)  Up to six (6) chickens may be kept on lots with a single family residence as the primary use. No chickens shall be allowed on townhouse, duplex, condominium, apartment or manufactured housing park properties. 
(b)  Only hens, no roosters, shall be kept. 
(c)  No slaughter of chickens for consumption or otherwise shall occur on the property. Chickens shall be kept for domestic purposes and no commercial activity such as the selling of eggs or chickens for meat, shall be permitted. 
(d)  Chickens shall be provided with a covered, predator-proof shelter that is thoroughly ventilated, provides adequate sun, shade, protection from the elements and is designed to be easily accessed and cleaned. Such structures shall not be located in the front or side yards. 
(e)  Shelters, pens, coops, or cages shall not be located within the required building setbacks and shall be a minimum of 25 feet away from any neighboring residence or place of business. 
(f)  Shelters, pens, coops, or cages shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times, and must be cleaned on a regular basis so as to prevent odors perceptible at the property boundaries. All feed for the chickens shall be kept in a secure container or location to prevent the attraction of rodents and other animals. 
(g)  No person shall store, stockpile or permit any accumulation of chicken litter and waste in any manner whatsoever that, due to odor, attraction of flies or other pests, or for any other reason diminishes the rights of adjacent property owners to enjoy reasonable use of their property. 
(h)  Any person wishing to keep chickens pursuant to this section shall first obtain a permit. Applications for such permit shall be obtained from the Treasurer for the City of Hampton upon payment of an application fee of $25. Hampton Animal Control shall conduct an investigation of the information contained in the application within a reasonable time and either approve or deny the permit. 
(i)  Violation of any provision of this section may result in the revocation of the permit if, after investigation it is determined that the permittee has not complied with the provisions of this section or has been convicted of two or more violations of this section. Residential chicken-keeping operations shall be subject to periodic inspection to assure compliance with the performance standards established in this section. Any Animal Control Officer is authorized to inspect the shelter, pen, coop or enclosure without prior notice, to determine that it is adequately maintained in a clean and sanitary manner and ensures the security of the chickens. 
(j)  No chicken kept pursuant to the terms of this section shall be deemed a companion animal for the purpose of a determination that any dog attacking same is a dangerous dog. 
(k)  A violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $250. 
(l)  The City Manager or his designee shall develop policies and guidelines to aid in the implementation and enforcement of the requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 13-0018, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0021, 9-10-14 ; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 5-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-0018 , adopted August 14, 2013, repealed § 5-25, which pertained to maintenance of premises where fowl are kept. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 5-26. - Running at large. 
(a)  Agricultural animals. No person shall permit any agricultural animal owned or controlled by such person to run at large within the city limits. 
(b)  Impoundment, holding and redemption of animals. Any animal found running at large in violation of this section shall be taken up by an animal control officer or any police officer and impounded at a place provided by the city for such purpose. Such animal shall be held for a period of five (5) days, during which time the owner may redeem the animal, by proving ownership and paying the costs incurred by the city in impounding and caring for such animal. If the rightful owner of the animal confined may be readily identified, the operator of the pound shall make a reasonable effort to notify such owner within 24 hours of its confinement. 
(c)  Costs. The costs referred to in subsection (b) above shall be established by the city manager, but in no event shall they be less than those established for impounded dogs. Such costs shall be paid to the person in charge of the place of impoundment, for use in financing the operation of the pound, who shall report the same to the city auditor at the end of each month. 
(d)  Disposition of unredeemed animals. If any animal is not redeemed by its owner in accord with subsections (b) and (c) above, within five (5) days of impoundment, disposal of such animal shall be made by allowing it to be adopted by any person willing to pay the costs incurred as determined pursuant to subsection (c) above, along with such sum as is determined by the person in charge of the place of impoundment as a reasonable adoption fee for such animal, or such animal may be humanely destroyed. Any such costs and fee for adoption collected shall be paid to the person in charge of the place of impoundment, for use in financing the operation of the pound, who shall report the same to the city auditor at the end of each month. 
(e)  Responsibility for payment of fines. The impoundment and disposition of any animal under this section shall not relieve any person from the payment of any fine imposed for allowing the animal to run at large in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-11, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6544.  
Secs. 5-27—5-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Dogs prohibited on beaches during certain periods, § 7-49. 
 
Sec. 5-37. - Dogs and cats deemed personal property; rights relating thereto. 
All dogs and cats shall be deemed personal property and may be the subject of larceny and malicious or unlawful trespass, and the owners thereof may maintain any action for the killing of such dogs or cats, or injury thereto, or unlawful detention or use thereof, as in the case of other personal property. The owner of any dog or cat which is injured or killed contrary to the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be entitled to recover the value thereof or the damage done thereto in an appropriate action at law from such person. An animal control officer or other officer finding a stolen dog or cat or a dog or cat held or detained contrary to law shall have authority to seize and hold such dog or cat pending action before the general district court or other court. If no such action is instituted within seven (7) days, the animal control officer or other officer shall deliver the dog or cat to its owner. The presence of a dog or cat on the premises of a person other than its legal owner shall raise no presumption of theft against the owner and the animal control officer may take such dog or cat in charge and notify its legal owner to remove him. The legal owner of a dog or cat shall pay a reasonable charge for the keep of such dog or cat while in the possession of the animal control officer, such charge not to exceed that prescribed in section 5-38. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-12, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6585.  
Sec. 5-38. - Running at large. 
(a)  Dogs. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog owned or kept by him to run or go at large within the city, whether such dog is licensed or not. Any person who permits his dog to run at large, or remain unconfined, unrestricted or not penned up shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this section. 
(2)  The first violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. The second violation on the same animal shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor and subsequent violations on the same animal shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. Any owner cited for three (3) violations of this section, may have his animals impounded or spayed and neutered at the owner's or custodian's expense. 
(3)  A violation of this subsection (a) shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor if the dog, while at large within the city, attacks a human being or another animal without provocation. 
(b)  Cats. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any cat owned or kept by him to run or go at large within the city unless the cat is spayed or neutered and properly licensed in accordance with Article IV, sections 5-51 through 5-60 of the Hampton City Code. 
(2)  However, it shall be unlawful for any person to permit any cat owned or kept by him to run at large if said cat habitually causes destruction or damage to the property of another or habitually creates a nuisance. 
(3)  The first violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. The second violation on the same animal shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor and subsequent violations on the same animal shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. Any owner cited for three (3) violations of this section, may have his animals impounded or spayed and neutered at the owner's or custodian's expense. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of an animal control officer or other officer who may find any dog or cat running at large in violation of section 5-38(a) and (b), respectively, to forthwith take the animal into custody and dispose of it in the following manner: 
(1)  The dog or cat shall be impounded in the animal shelter for a period of not less than five (5) days, such period to commence on the day immediately following the day the animal is initially confined in the facility, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner thereof. The operator or custodian of the animal shelter shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain whether the animal has a collar, tag, license, tattoo, or other form of identification and make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of the animal's confinement within the next 48 hours following its confinement. If such identification is found on the animal, the animal shall be held for an additional five (5) days, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. If the owner or keeper of the dog or cat is known, or the owner can be reasonably ascertained through a collar, tag, license, tattoo or other form of identification, an animal control officer shall issue a summons within 24 hours to such owner directing him to appear in court and answer charges for violation of this section. If the identity of the owner cannot be ascertained at the time of impoundment, then the summons shall be issued at such time as the owner shall reclaim the dog or cat. 
(2)  In all cases under this section, the owner may, upon proof of ownership, redeem the dog within the prescribed period of time as stated in subsection (1) and upon proof of ownership and payment of the actual expenses incurred in keeping the animal impounded. The fee for redeeming the dog shall be the sum of $20 for the first 24 hours or portion thereof and the sum of $5 for each succeeding day or fraction thereof; provided, however, that the minimum payment shall be $20. For each subsequent impoundment within a twelve-month period, the owner may redeem the dog within the prescribed period of time as stated in subsection (1) upon payment of the sum of $25 for the first 24 hours or portion thereof and the sum of $5 for each succeeding day or fraction thereof; provided, however, that the minimum payment in such cases shall be $25. 
(3)  In all cases under this section, the owner may redeem the cat, within the prescribed period of time as stated in subsection (1), upon proof of ownership, payment of the actual expenses incurred in keeping the animal, and proof of proper rabies inoculation in accordance with section 5-100 of the Hampton City Code. The fee for redeeming the cat shall be the sum of $20 for the first 24 hours or portion thereof and the sum of five dollars ($5) for each succeeding day or fraction thereof; provided, however, that the minimum payment shall be $20. For each subsequent impoundment within a twelve-month period, the owner may redeem the cat within the prescribed period of time as stated in subsection (1) upon payment of the sum of $25 for the first 24 hours or portion thereof and the sum of five dollars ($5) for each succeeding day or fraction thereof; provided, however, that the minimum payment in such cases shall be $25. 
(4)  If at the end of the prescribed holding period the dog or cat in question shall have not been redeemed, such animal shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of section 3.2-6546 of the Code of Virginia. No animal shall be released to any person, organization, or agents hereof, for the purposes of scientific or medical experimentation. No provision herein shall prohibit the destruction of a critically ill dog or cat for humane purposes. Any cat disposed of under this section shall be spayed or neutered prior to release for adoption from the animal shelter. 
(5)  Cats identified as part of a managed feral cat colony in accordance with the provisions of section 5-43 shall be exempted from the requirements of section 5-38(b)(1) only. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-14, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 764, § 4-14, 12-14-83; Ord. No. 1128, 9-28-94; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prohibit dogs running at large and to impound such dogs, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.2-6538, 3.2-6546 and 3.2-6525. Authority to impound cats, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6585.  
Sec. 5-39. - Female dogs and cats in heat. 
No person shall permit any female dog or cat in heat to go at large in the streets or remain on his premises to the annoyance of the neighborhood. Each day that a dog or cat is allowed to remain on such person's premises to the annoyance of the neighborhood shall be considered a separate violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-15, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08)  
Sec. 5-40. - Kennels limited to fifty dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or maintain within the city any kennel for more than 50 dogs. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-20, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 5-41. - Dogs riding in motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person who owns or has control of any dog to allow such dog to ride in any motor vehicle in any portion thereof that is open in such a manner as to permit such dog to jump out of the vehicle or to be thrown therefrom by acceleration of, stopping of, or accident involving, such vehicle, including, but not limited to, the open bed of a truck, the interior of a convertible vehicle with the top down or removed, the rear storage portion of a station wagon with the tailgate open, or the trunk or hatchback portion of any vehicle with the trunk or hatchback open. For purposes of this section, the operator of a motor vehicle shall be deemed to have control of any dog riding therein. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) above shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person who owns or has control of any dog and who allows such dog to ride in the prohibited portion of any motor vehicle if such dog is confined to a cage of adequate construction and design to prevent its escape therefrom. 
(2)  Any portion of a motor vehicle which is fully enclosed except for open windows. 
(Ord. No. 1003, 3-27-91; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08)  
Sec. 5-42. - Dangerous dogs; penalties. 
(a)  As used in this section Dangerous dog means: 
(1)  A canine or canine crossbreed that has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a companion animal that is a dog or cat or killed a companion animal that is a dog or cat. A canine or canine crossbreed is not a dangerous dog if, upon investigation, a law-enforcement officer or animal control officer finds that (i) if no serious physical injury, as determined by a licensed veterinarian, has occurred to the dog or cat as a result of the attack or bite; (ii) both animals are owned by the same person; or (iii) such attack occurred on the property of the attacking or biting dog's owner or custodian; or 
(2)  A canine or canine crossbreed that has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person. A canine or canine crossbreed is not a dangerous dog if, upon investigation, a law-enforcement officer or animal control officer finds that the injury inflicted by the canine or canine crossbreed upon a person consists solely of a single nip or bite resulting only in a scratch, abrasion, or other minor injury. 
(b)  No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog as a result of biting, attacking, or inflicting injury on a dog or cat while engaged with an owner or custodian as part of lawful hunting or participating in an organized, lawful dog handling event. No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog if the court determines, based on the totality of the evidence before it, that the dog is not dangerous or a threat to the community. 
(c)  Any law-enforcement officer or animal control officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within his jurisdiction is a dangerous dog may apply to a magistrate serving the jurisdiction for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. If a law-enforcement officer successfully makes an application for the issuance of a summons, he shall contact a local animal control officer and inform him of the location of the dog and the relevant facts pertaining to his belief that the dog is dangerous. The animal control officer shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. If the animal control officer determines that the owner or custodian can confine the animal in a manner that protects the public safety, he may permit the owner or custodian to confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this section. The court upon finding the animal to be a dangerous dog, may order the owner, custodian, or harborer thereof to pay restitution for actual damages to any person injured by the animal or whose companion animal was injured or killed by the animal. The court, in its discretion, may also order the owner to pay all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for such dangerous dog from the time the animal is taken into custody until such time as the animal is disposed of or returned to the owner. The procedure for appeal and trial shall be the same as provided by law for misdemeanors. Trial by jury shall be as provided in Article 4 (§ 19.2-260 et seq.) of Chapter 15 of Title 19.2 of the Code of Virginia. The burden of proof shall be beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(d)  No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor is the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed prohibited. 
(e)  No animal shall be found to be a dangerous dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was (i) committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; (ii) committing, at the time, a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; or (iii) provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. No police dog that was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous dog. No animal that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog. 
(f)  If the owner of an animal found to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(g)  The owner of any animal found to be a dangerous dog shall, within thirty (30) days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the local animal control officer for a fee of $150.00, in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The local animal control officer or treasurer shall also provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag that identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. By January 31 of each year, until such time as the dangerous dog is deceased, all certificates obtained pursuant to this subsection shall be renewed annually for a fee of $85.00 and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. The animal control officer shall post registration information on the Virginia Dangerous Dog Registry. 
(h)  All dangerous dog registration certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence (i) of the animal's current rabies vaccination, if applicable; (ii) that the animal has been neutered or spayed; and (iii) that the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed. In addition, owners who apply for certificates or renewals thereof under this section shall not be issued a certificate or renewal thereof unless they present satisfactory evidence that (a) their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property and (b) the animal has been permanently identified by means of electronic implantation. All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons who present satisfactory evidence that the owner has liability insurance coverage, to the value of at least $100,000, that covers animal bites. The owner may obtain and maintain a bond in surety, in lieu of liability insurance, to the value of at least $100,000. 
(i)  While on the property of its owner, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. While so confined within the structure, the animal shall be provided for according to § 3.2-6503 of the Code of Virginia. When off its owner's property, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(j)  The owner of an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall cause the local animal control officer to be promptly notified of (i) the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners; (ii) all of the means necessary to locate the owner and the dog at any time; (iii) any complaints or incidents of attack by the dog upon any person or cat or dog; (iv) any claims made or lawsuits brought as a result of any attack; (v) chip identification information; (vi) proof of insurance or surety bond; and (vii) the death of the dog. 
(k)  After an animal has been found to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner shall immediately, upon learning of same, cause the local animal control authority to be notified if the animal (i) is loose or unconfined; (ii) bites a person or attacks another animal; or (iii) is sold, is given away, or dies. Any owner of a dangerous dog who relocates to a new address shall, within 10 days of relocating, provide written notice to the appropriate local animal control authority for the old address from which the animal has moved and the new address to which the animal has been moved. 
(l)  Any owner or custodian of a canine or canine crossbreed or other animal is guilty of a: 
(1)  Class 2 misdemeanor if the canine or canine crossbreed previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this section, when such declaration arose out of a separate and distinct incident, attacks and injures or kills a cat or dog that is a companion animal belonging to another person; 
(2)  Class 1 misdemeanor if the canine or canine crossbreed previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this section, when such declaration arose out of a separate and distinct incident, bites a human being or attacks a human being causing bodily injury. 
(3)  Class 6 felony if any owner or custodian whose willful act or omission in the care, control, or containment of a canine, canine crossbreed, or other animal is so gross, wanton, and culpable as to show a reckless disregard for human life, and is the proximate cause of such dog or other animal attacking and causing serious bodily injury to any person. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any animal that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, or when the animal is a police dog that is engaged in the performance of its duties at the time of the attack. 
(m)  The owner of any animal that has been found to be a dangerous dog who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
Whenever an owner or custodian of an animal found to be a dangerous dog is charged with a violation of this section, the animal control officer shall confine the dangerous dog until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian, or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. 
Upon conviction, the court may (i) order the dangerous dog to be disposed of by the city pursuant to § 3.2-6562 of the Code of Virginia or (ii) grant the owner up to thirty (30) days to comply with the requirements of this section, during which time the dangerous dog shall remain in the custody of the animal control officer until compliance has been verified. If the owner fails to achieve compliance within the time specified by the court, the court shall order the dangerous dog to be disposed of by the city pursuant to § 3.2-6562 of the Code of Virginia. The court in its discretion, may order the owner to pay all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for such dangerous dog from the time the animal is taken into custody until such time that the animal is disposed of or returned to the owner. 
(n)  All fees collected pursuant to this section, less the costs incurred by the animal control authority in producing and distributing the certificates and tags required by this section, and the fees due to the state veterinarian for maintenance of the Virginia Dangerous Dog Registry, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund in the treasury of the city for the purpose of paying the expenses of any training course required under Virginia Code § 3.2-6556. 
(o)  This section is enacted pursuant to Virginia Code § 3.2-6540(O). 
(Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 1476, 5-24-07; Ord. No. 1495, 10-25-07; Ord. No. 08-0014, 8-20-08; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 12-0030, 6-13-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16; Ord. No. 17-0007 , 7-12-17) 
State Law reference— Dangerous or vicious dogs, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540.  
Sec. 5-42.1. - Control of vicious dogs; penalties. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
"Serious injury" means an injury having a reasonable potential to cause death or any injury other than a sprain or strain, including serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of bodily function and requiring significant medical attention. 
"Vicious dog" means a canine or canine crossbreed that has (i) killed a person, (ii) inflicted serious injury to a person, or (iii) continued to exhibit the behavior that resulted in a previous finding by a court or, on or before July 1, 2006, by an animal control officer as authorized by ordinance, that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(b)  Any law-enforcement officer or animal control officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within his jurisdiction is a vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate serving the jurisdiction for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before the general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. If a law-enforcement officer successfully makes an application for the issuance of a summons, he shall contact the local animal control officer and inform him of the location of the dog and the relevant facts pertaining to his belief that the dog is vicious. The animal control officer shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian, or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of § 3.2-6562 of the Code of Virginia. The court, upon finding the animal to be a vicious dog, may order the owner, custodian, or harborer thereof to pay restitution for actual damages to any person injured by the animal or to the estate of any person killed by the animal. The court, in its discretion, may also order the owner to pay all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for such vicious dog from the time the animal is taken into custody until such time as the animal is disposed of. The procedure for appeal and trial shall be the same as provided by law for misdemeanors. Trial by jury shall be as provided in Article 4 (§ 19.2-260 et seq.) of Chapter 15 of Title 19.2 of the Code of Virginia. The city shall be required to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(c)  No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor is the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed prohibited. No animal shall be found to be a vicious dog if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who was (i) committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; (ii) committing, at the time, a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; or (iii) provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. No police dog that was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a vicious dog. No animal that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, shall be found to be a vicious dog. 
(d)  Any owner or custodian of a canine or canine crossbreed or other animal whose willful act or omission in the care, control, or containment of a canine, canine crossbreed, or other animal is so gross, wanton, and culpable as to show a reckless disregard for human life and is the proximate cause of such dog or other animal attacking and causing serious injury to any person is guilty of a Class 6 felony. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any animal that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, or when the animal is a police dog that is engaged in the performance of its duties at the time of the attack. 
( Ord. No. 13-0011, 6-12-13, eff. 7-1-13 )  
Sec. 5-43. - Unlawful care of feral cats. 
(a)  Any person intentionally providing food, water, or other forms of sustenance to a feral cat or feral cat colony must furnish a signed statement to the animal control office agreeing to comply with the following conditions. Those persons who have furnished a signed statement to the animal control officer agreeing to comply with the conditions contained in this section are exempt from the requirements of Article IV of this chapter, entitled dog and cat licenses. 
(1)  Annual registration with the animal control office as a person caring for feral cat(s) or a feral cat colony. There will be no costs associated with this registration. The registrant shall be deemed the owner or custodian of the cat(s) for purposes of this chapter. 
(2)  Provide documentation of support by surrounding neighbors of proposed location for feral cat colony. 
(3)  Assure responsibility and arrangements for feeding and providing emergency veterinarian treatment as needed to the cat or cat colony regularly throughout the year, including weekends, holidays and vacations and in the absence of the caregiver. 
(4)  Regular and frequent trapping through use of humane box traps of cats over the age of eight (8) weeks to have them spayed or neutered. 
(5)  It is highly recommended that all trapped cats be tested for feline leukemia, and to have those who test positive humanely euthanized or isolated indoors. 
(6)  Identify all sterile cats by tipping their ears (tipping to be done by a licensed veterinarian); micro chipping is recommended but not required. 
(7)  Arrange to have all trapped cats spayed or neutered and vaccinated for rabies in addition to any other vaccination or immunization requirement imposed by the commonwealth. It is recommended that such cats be vaccinated for distemper. 
(8)  Any animal known to have an infectious, untreated disease shall not be released back to the colony or any other outdoor environment where the disease can be spread to uninfected animals. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of an animal control officer or a to issue notice of noncompliance specifying that the caregiver has 48 hours to provide a written response including how the colony will be brought into compliance within a ninety-day time period. The caregiver shall make weekly progress reports to the animal control office. 
(c)  Failure to comply with any provision of this section shall constitute a violation of this section as well as section 5-38 and subject to penalties thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6538 et seq.; authority of city to adopt ordinance paralleling state dog laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6543.  
Secs. 5-44—5-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DOG AND CAT LICENSES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 18.1. 
 
Sec. 5-51. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog or cat four (4) months old or older in this city, unless such dog or cat is licensed under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-16, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1128, 9-28-94; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6524.  
Sec. 5-52. - Application; applicant must be city resident. 
(a)  Any resident of the city may obtain a dog or cat license by making oral or written application to the city treasurer, accompanied by the amount of the license tax, the certificate referred to in section 5-57 and proof that the dog or cat has been spayed or neutered, when applicable. The treasurer shall only have authority to license dogs or cats of resident owners or custodians who reside within the limits of the city and may require information to this effect from any applicant. 
(b)  It shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to make any false statement in, or present any false evidence with, an application submitted under this section, in order to secure a dog or cat license to which such person is not entitled. 
(Ord. No. 735, §§ 4-19, 4-26, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08)  
Sec. 5-53. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  A license tax is hereby imposed on dogs and cats required to be licensed under this article in the following amounts: 
(1)  Annual license for intact dog or cat ..... $10.00 per year 
(2)  Annual license for unsexed dog or cat (neutered or spayed) ..... $4.00 per year 
(3)  Lifetime license for intact dog or cat ..... $20.00 
(4)  Lifetime license for unsexed dog or cat (neutered or spayed) ..... $10.00 
(5)  Kennel for 10 or less dogs or cats ..... $30.00 per year 
(6)  Kennel for 11 to 30 dogs or cats ..... $40.00 per year 
(7)  Kennel for 31 to 50 dogs or cats ..... $50.00 per year 
Kennel to be defined in accordance with section 5-2 of the Hampton City Code for the purposes of this section. 
(b)  No license tax shall be levied on any dog that is trained and serves as a guide dog for a blind person, that is trained and serves as a hearing dog for a deaf or hearing-impaired person or that is trained and serves as a service dog for a mobility-impaired person. As used in this subsection, the term "hearing dog" means a dog trained to alert its owner by touch to sounds of danger and sounds to which the owner should respond and "service dog" means a dog trained to accompany its owner for the purpose of carrying items, retrieving objects, pulling a wheelchair or other such activities of service or support. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-20, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16; Ord. No. 17-0010 , 10-11-17; Ord. No. 17-0011 , 10-25-17) 
State Law reference— Amount of license tax, Code of Virginia § 3.2-6528.  
Sec. 5-54. - When tax due and payable. 
(a)  The license tax as prescribed in section 5-53 is due no later than thirty (30) days after a dog or cat has reached the age of four months, or not later than thirty (30) days after an owner acquires a dog or cat four months of age or older. Annual licenses expire on December 31 of the year for which they are issued. Any tax prescribed pursuant to section 5-53 for renewal of an annual license shall be due on January 1 and not later than January 31 of each year. 
(b)  Any kennel license tax prescribed pursuant to section 5-53 shall be due on January 1 and not later than January 31 of each year. 
(c)  Failure to pay the license tax as prescribed in section 5-53 when it is due shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. Payment of such license tax subsequent to a summons to appear before a court for failure to do so within the time required shall not operate to relieve such owner from the penalties provided for such failure. 
(d)  Any lifetime license purchased under this article is valid for the lifetime of the dog or cat only as long as the owner resides in the City of Hampton and the animal's rabies vaccination is kept current. Upon expiration of a rabies vaccination, the lifetime license is not valid and the animal is considered to be unlicensed and in violation of this article. The lifetime license will once again be valid upon renewal of the animal's rabies vaccination. 
(e)  Any license tax paid as prescribed in section 5-53 is non-refundable. Any license option purchased is valid only for the animal or kennel for which it was purchased and is not transferable to another animal or kennel. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-21, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1128, 9-28-94; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16; Ord. No. 17-0010 , 10-11-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6530; Offenses involving animals - Class 4 misdemeanors, Code of Virginia 18.2-403.3.  
Sec. 5-55. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-0010 , adopted October 11, 2017 repealed § 5-55, which pertained to failure to pay tax when due, and derived from Ord. No. 735, § 4-18, adopted November 10, 1982; Ord. No. 1385, adopted October 13, 2004; Ord. No. 1437, adopted November 15, 2006; and Ord. No. 08-0015, adopted September 24, 2008.  
Sec. 5-56. - Disposition of taxes collected. 
All taxes collected pursuant to this article shall be used to defray the costs of animal control in accordance with Section 3.2-6534 of the Code of Virginia and shall be kept separate from other funds collected by the treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-20, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08)  
Sec. 5-57. - Issuance, composition and contents of license. 
(a)  Any person may obtain a dog license or cat license by making oral or written application to the treasurer of the locality where such person resides, accompanied by the amount of license tax and current certificate of vaccination as required by this article or satisfactory evidence that such certificate has been obtained. The treasurer or other officer charged with the duty of issuing dog and cat licenses shall only have authority to license dogs and cats of resident owners or custodians who reside within the boundary limits of his county or city and may require information to this effect from any applicant. Upon receipt of proper application and current certificate of vaccination as required by this article or satisfactory evidence that such certificate has been obtained, the treasurer or other officer charged with the duty of issuing dog and cat licenses shall issue a license receipt for the amount on which he shall record the name and address of the owner or custodian, the date of payment, the year for which issued or if it is a lifetime license, the serial number of the tag, whether dog or cat, whether male or female, whether spayed or neutered, or whether a kennel, and deliver the metal license tags or plates provided for herein. The information thus received shall be retained by the treasurer, open to public inspection, during the period for which such license is valid. The treasurer may establish substations in convenient locations in the city and appoint agents for the collection of the license tax and issuance of such licenses. 
(b)  Each dog or cat license shall consist of a license tax receipt and a metal tag. Such receipt shall have recorded thereon the amount of the tax paid, the name and address of the owner or custodian of the dog or cat, the date of payment, the year for which the dog or cat is licensed or if it is a lifetime license, the serial number of the tag and whether the license is for a male, female or unsexed male or female dog or cat or for a kennel. This information shall be retained by the treasurer and shall be open for public inspection during the period for which such license is valid. 
(c)  The metal tag issued under this section shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked to show the name of the city, the calendar year for which issued or if it is a lifetime license, and shall bear a serial number. 
(Ord. No. 735, §§ 4-19, 4-25, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16; Ord. No. 17-0010 , 10-11-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.2-6527, 3.2-6526.  
Sec. 5-58. - Preservation and exhibition of license receipt; tag to be worn by dog; exceptions. 
(a)  A dog or cat license receipt issued under this article shall be carefully preserved by the person to whom issued and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by an animal control officer or other officer. 
(b)  A dog license tag issued under this article shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by the dog for which it was issued. It shall be unlawful for the owner to permit any licensed dog four months old or older to run or roam at large at any time without a license tag. The owner of the dog may remove the collar and license tag required by this section when: 
(1)  The dog is engaged in lawful hunting. 
(2)  The dog is competing in a dog show. 
(3)  The dog has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar. 
(4)  The dog is confined. 
(5)  The dog is under immediate control of the owner. 
(c)  Any dog or cat not wearing a collar bearing a license tag for the proper calendar year or a lifetime license shall be prima facie evidence that the dog or cat is unlicensed and, in any proceeding under this article, the burden of proof of the fact that the dog or cat has been licensed, or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time, shall be on the owner of the dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-22, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 17-0010 , 10-11-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6531.  
Sec. 5-59. - Duplicate tags. 
If a dog or cat license tag shall become lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the treasurer for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the treasurer that the original tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, the treasurer shall issue a duplicate license tag, which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog. The treasurer shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for the duplicate tag for any dog or cat shall be one dollar ($1.00). 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-19, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6532.  
Sec. 5-60. - Disposition of unlicensed dogs and cats found running at large. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any animal control officer or other officer (1) to capture any dog found running at large on which the license tax imposed by this article has not been paid and deliver such animal to the pound or shelter, and (2) to capture any cat found running at large on which the license tax imposed by this article has not been paid and has not been spayed or neutered in accordance with section 5-38(b) and deliver such animal to the pound or shelter. Such animal shall be disposed of in accordance with Virginia Code § 3.2-6546. 
(b)  Any person, animal control officer or other officer euthanizing a dog or cat under this section shall cremate, bury or sanitarily dispose of the same. 
(c)  Prior to the disposition, by euthanization or otherwise, of any dog or cat under this section, all of the provisions of section 5-38 shall be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-23, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1385, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08)  
Secs. 5-61—5-76. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ANIMAL WELFARE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Animal welfare, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6503 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-77. - Cruelty to animals generally. 
(a)  Any person who (i) overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats, abandons, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates, or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; (ii) deprives any animal of necessary food, drink, shelter or emergency veterinary treatment; (iii) sores any equine for any purpose or administers drugs or medications to alter or mask such soring for the purpose of sale, show, or exhibition of any kind, unless such administration of drugs or medications is within the context of a veterinary client-patient relationship and solely for therapeutic purposes; (iv) ropes, lassoes, or otherwise obstructs or interferes with one or more legs of an equine in order to intentionally cause it to trip or fall for the purpose of engagement in a rodeo, contest, exhibition, entertainment, or sport unless such actions are in the practice of accepted animal husbandry or for the purpose of allowing veterinary care; (v) willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; (vi) carries or causes to be carried in or upon any vehicle, vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal, or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or (vii) causes any of the above things, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another, is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection A, the court may, in its discretion, require any person convicted of a violation of subsection A to attend an anger management or other appropriate treatment program or obtain psychiatric or psychological counseling. The court may impose the costs of such a program or counseling upon the person convicted. 
(c)  Any person who: (i) tortures, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly and unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates or kills any animal whether belonging to himself or another; (ii) sores any equine for any purpose or administers drugs or medications to alter or mask such soring for the purpose of sale, show, or exhibit of any kind, unless such administration of drugs or medications is under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian and solely for therapeutic purposes; (iii) ropes, lassoes, or otherwise obstructs or interferes with one or more legs of an equine in order to intentionally cause it to trip or fall for the purpose of engagement in a rodeo, contest, exhibition, entertainment, or sport unless such actions are in the practice of accepted animal husbandry or for the purpose of allowing veterinary care; (iv) maliciously deprives any companion animal of necessary food, drink, shelter or emergency veterinary treatment; (v) instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal set forth in clauses (i) through (iv) or (vi) causes any of the actions described in clauses (i) through (v), or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another; and has been within five years convicted of a violation of this subsection or subsection A, is guilty of a Class 6 felony if the current violation or any previous violation of this subsection or subsection A resulted in the death of an animal or the euthanasia of an animal based on the recommendation of a licensed veterinarian upon determination that such euthanasia was necessary due to the condition of the animal, and such condition was a direct result of a violation of this subsection or subsection A. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle conducted in a reasonable and customary manner. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit authorized wildlife management activities or hunting, fishing or trapping as regulated under other titles of the Code of Virginia, including Title 29.1, or to farming activities as provided under this title or regulations adopted hereunder. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person to kill a domestic dog or cat for the purpose of obtaining the hide, fur or pelt of the dog or cat. A violation of this subsection is a Class 1 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of this subsection is a Class 6 felony. 
(g)  Any person who: (i) tortures, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation or cruelly and unnecessarily beats, maims or mutilates any dog or cat that is a companion animal whether belonging to him or another; and (ii) as a direct result causes the death of such dog or cat that is a companion animal, or the euthanasia of such animal on the recommendation of a licensed veterinarian upon determination that such euthanasia was necessary due to the condition of the animal, is guilty of a Class 6 felony. If a dog or cat is attacked on its owner's property by a dog so as to cause injury or death, the owner of the injured dog or cat may use all reasonable and necessary force against the dog at the time of the attack to protect his dog or cat. Such owner may be presumed to have taken necessary and appropriate action to defend his dog or cat and shall therefore be presumed not to have violated this subsection. The provisions of this subsection shall not overrule Sections 5-42, 5-42.1, or §3.2-6552 of the Code of Virginia. 
(h)  Any person convicted of violating this section may be prohibited by the court from possession or ownership of companion animals. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-35, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 08-0014, 8-20-08; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6570; general authority of city to prevent cruelty to animals, § 3.2-6544; specific authority to adopt above section, § 3.2-6543.  
Sec. 5-78. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5-79. - General duty of owners to provide food, water, shelter, etc. 
(a)  Each owner shall provide for each of his companion animals: 
(1)  Adequate feed; 
(2)  Adequate water; 
(3)  Adequate shelter that is properly cleaned; 
(4)  Adequate space in the primary enclosure for the particular type of animal depending upon its age, size, species, and weight; 
(5)  Adequate exercise; 
(6)  Adequate care, treatment, and transportation; and 
(7)  Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering or disease transmission. 
The provisions of this section shall also apply to every public or private animal shelter, or other releasing agency, and every foster care provider, dealer, pet shop, exhibitor, kennel, groomer, and boarding establishment. This section shall not require that animals used as food for other animals be euthanized. 
(b)  Violation of this section is a Class 4 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of subdivision A 1, 2, 3, or 7 is a Class 2 misdemeanor and a second or subsequent violation of subdivision A 4, 5, or 6 is a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-33, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6503.  
Sec. 5-80. - Tethering prohibited, exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful to tether any companion animal whether or not the animal has been provided adequate space. 
Any facility, entity or activity licensed and/or inspected by the U.S. Department of Agriculture shall be exempt from the provisions of this section provided they are in good standing with the federal agency responsible for licensing or assurance of the facility or activity. 
A violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-17, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 12-0035, 7-11-12, eff. 1-1-13; Ord. No. 14-0001, 1-8-14 )  
Sec. 5-81. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5-82. - Care of animals being transported. 
No owner, railroad or other common carrier when transporting any animal shall allow that animal to be confined in any type of conveyance more than 24 consecutive hours without being exercised, properly rested, fed and watered as necessary for that particular type and species of animal. A reasonable extension of this time shall be permitted when an accident, storm or other act of God causes a delay. Adequate space in the primary enclosure within any type of conveyance shall be provided each animal depending upon the particular type and species of animal. No person shall import into the commonwealth, nor export from the commonwealth, for the purpose of sale or offering for sale any dog or cat under the age of eight (8) weeks without its dam. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-34, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6508.  
Sec. 5-83. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5-84. - Sale, etc., of unweaned or certain immature animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall sell, raffle, or offer for sale as pets or novelties, or offer or give as a prize, premium, or advertising device any living chicks, ducklings, or other fowl under two (2) months old in quantities of less than six (6) or any unweaned mammalian companion animal or any dog or cat under the age of seven (7) weeks without its dam or queen. Dealers may offer immature fowl, unweaned mammalian companion animals, dogs or cats under the age of seven (7) weeks for sale as pets or novelties with the requirement that prospective owners take possession of the animals only after fowl have reached two (2) months of age, mammalian companion animals have been weaned, and dogs and cats are at least seven (7) weeks of age. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale of an unweaned animal (i) as food for other animals or (ii) with the lactating dam or queen or a lactating surrogate dam or queen that has accepted the animal; (iii) due to a concern for the health or safety of the unweaned animal; or (iv) to animal control, a public or private animal shelter, or a veterinarian. 
(b)  Dealers shall provide all dogs and cats with current vaccinations against contagious and infectious diseases, as recommended in writing and considered appropriate for the animal's age and breed by a licensed veterinarian, or pursuant to written recommendations provided by the manufacturer of such vaccines at least five days before any new owner takes possession of the animal. For dogs, the vaccinations required by this subsection shall include at a minimum canine distemper, adenovirus type II parainfluenza, and parvovirus. For cats, the vaccinations required by this subsection shall include at a minimum rhinotracheitis, calicivirus, and panleukopenia. Dealers shall provide the new owner with the dog's or cat's immunization history. 
(c)  A violation of this section is punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-40, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6510.  
Sec. 5-85. - Misrepresentation of animal's condition. 
No person shall misrepresent the physical condition of any animal at the animal's sale, trade, delivery or other method of transfer. For the purposes of this section, misrepresentation shall include selling, trading, delivering or otherwise transferring an animal to another person with the knowledge that the animal has an infection, communicable disease, parasitic infestation, abnormality or other physical defect that is not made known to the person receiving the animal. The sale of an agricultural animal that has external or internal parasites that are not made known to the person receiving the animal shall not be a violation of this section unless the animal is clinically ill or debilitated due to such parasites at the time of sale, trade, delivery or transfer of the animal. A violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-39, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6509.  
Sec. 5-86. - Investigation of complaint of violation of article; corrective action. 
(a)  Upon receiving a complaint of a suspected violation of this chapter, any ordinance enacted pursuant to this chapter or any law for the protection of domestic animals, any animal control officer, law-enforcement officer, or State Veterinarian's representative may, for the purpose of investigating the allegations of the complaint, enter upon, during business hours, any business premises, including any place where animals or animal records are housed or kept, of any dealer, pet shop, groomer, or boarding establishment. 
Upon receiving a complaint of a suspected violation of any law or ordinance regarding care or treatment of animals or disposal of dead animals, any humane investigator may, for the purpose of investigating the allegations of the complaint, enter upon, during business hours, any business premises, including any place where animals or animal records are housed or kept, of any dealer, pet shop, groomer, or boarding establishment. Upon obtaining a warrant as provided for in § 3.2-6568 of the Code of Virginia, the law-enforcement officer, animal control officer, State Veterinarian's representative, or humane investigator may enter upon any other premises where the animal or animals described in the complaint are housed or kept. Attorneys for the Commonwealth and law-enforcement officials shall provide such assistance as may be required in the conduct of such investigations. 
(b)  If the investigation discloses that a violation of Section 5-79 has occurred, the investigating official shall notify the owner or custodian of the complaint and of what action is necessary to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-42, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6564.  
Sec. 5-87. - Impoundment of threatened, neglected, etc., animal. 
When a humane investigator, any law-enforcement officer, an animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian finds that an apparent violation of this article has rendered an animal in such condition as to constitute a direct and immediate threat to its life, safety or health, which the owner or custodian has failed or refuses to remedy, such approved humane officer, law-enforcement officer, animal control officer or licensed veterinarian may take charge of and impound the animal in a facility which will provide the elements of good care set forth in section 5-79 and shall then proceed to take such steps as are required to dispose of the animal pursuant to section 5-88. 
(Ord. No. 735, §§ 4-43, 4-44, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16; Ord. No. 17-0007 , 7-12-17) 
State Law reference— Impoundment; expenses; lien; disposition of animal, Code of Virginia § 3.2-6565.  
Sec. 5-88. - Procedure after impoundment under section 5-87. 
(a)  Any humane investigator, law-enforcement officer or animal control officer may lawfully seize and impound any animal that has been abandoned, has been cruelly treated, or is suffering from an apparent violation of this chapter that has rendered the animal in such a condition as to constitute a direct and immediate threat to its life, safety or health. The seizure or impoundment of an equine resulting from a violation of clause (iii) of subsection (a) or clause (ii) of subsection (c) of section 5-77 may be undertaken only by the State Veterinarian or State Veterinarian's representative who has received training in the examination and detection of sore horses as required by 9 C.F.R. Part 11.7. 
(b)  Before seizing or impounding any agricultural animal, the humane investigator, law-enforcement officer or animal control officer shall contact the State Veterinarian or State Veterinarian's representative, who shall recommend to the person the most appropriate action for effecting the seizure and impoundment. The humane investigator, law-enforcement officer or animal control officer shall notify the owner of the agricultural animal and the local attorney for the Commonwealth of the recommendation. The humane investigator, law-enforcement officer or animal control officer may impound the agricultural animal on the land where the agricultural animal is located if: 
(1)  The owner or tenant of the land where the agricultural animal is located gives written permission; 
(2)  A general district court so orders; or 
(3)  The owner or tenant of the land where the agricultural animal is located cannot be immediately located, and it is in the best interest of the agricultural animal to be impounded on the land where it is located until the written permission of the owner or tenant of the land can be obtained. 
If there is a direct and immediate threat to an agricultural animal, the humane investigator, law-enforcement officer or animal control officer may seize the animal, in which case the humane investigator, law-enforcement officer or animal control officer shall file within five (5) business days on a form approved by the State Veterinarian a report on the condition of the animal at the time of the seizure, the location of impoundment, and any other information required by the State Veterinarian. 
(c)  Upon seizing or impounding an animal, the humane investigator, law-enforcement officer or animal control officer shall petition the general district court for a hearing. The hearing shall be not more than ten (10) business days from the date of the seizure of the animal. The hearing shall be to determine whether the animal has been abandoned, has been cruelly treated, or has not been provided adequate care. 
(d)  The humane investigator, law-enforcement officer, or animal control officer shall cause to be served upon the person with a right of property in the animal or the custodian of the animal notice of the hearing. If such person or the custodian is known and residing within the jurisdiction wherein the animal is seized, written notice shall be given at least five (5) days prior to the hearing of the time and place of the hearing. If such person or the custodian is known but residing out of the jurisdiction where such animal is seized, written notice by any method or service of process as is provided by the Code of Virginia shall be given. If such person or the custodian is not known, the humane investigator, law-enforcement officer, or animal control officer shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction wherein such animal is seized notice of the hearing at least one time prior to the hearing and shall further cause notice of the hearing to be posted at least five (5) days prior to the hearing at the place provided for public notices at the city hall or courthouse wherein such hearing shall be held. 
(e)  The procedure for appeal and trial shall be the same as provided by law for misdemeanors. Trial by jury shall be as provided in Article 4 (§ 19.2-260 et seq.) of Chapter 15 of Title 19.2 of the Code of Virginia. The City shall be required to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(f)  The humane investigator, law-enforcement officer, or animal control officer shall provide for such animal until the court has concluded the hearing. 
If the court determines that the animal has been neither abandoned, cruelly treated, nor deprived of adequate care, the animal shall be returned to the owner. If the court determines that the animal has been (i) abandoned or cruelly treated, (ii) deprived of adequate care, as that term is defined in section 5-2 or (iii) raised as a dog that has been, is, or is intended to be used in dogfighting in violation of section 3.2-6571 of the Code of Virginia, then the court shall order that the animal may be: 
(1)  Sold by a local governing body, if not a companion animal; 
(2)  Disposed of by a local governing body pursuant to subsection D of section 3.2-6546 of the Code of Virginia, whether such animal is a companion animal or an agricultural animal; or 
(3)  Delivered to the person with a right of property in the animal as provided in subsection (g). 
(g)  In no case shall the owner be allowed to purchase, adopt, or otherwise obtain the animal if the court determines that the animal has been abandoned, cruelly treated, or deprived of adequate care. The court shall direct that the animal be delivered to the person with a right of property in the animal, upon his request, if the court finds that the abandonment, cruel treatment, or deprivation of adequate care is not attributable to the actions or inactions of such person. 
(h)  The court shall order the owner of any animal determined to have been abandoned, cruelly treated, or deprived of adequate care to pay all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for such animal from the time the animal is seized until such time that the animal is disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section, to the provider of such care. 
(i)  The court may prohibit the possession or ownership of other companion animals by the owner of any companion animal found to have been abandoned, cruelly treated, or deprived of adequate care. In making a determination to prohibit the possession or ownership of companion animals, the court may take into consideration the owner's past record of convictions under this chapter or other laws prohibiting cruelty to animals or pertaining to the care or treatment of animals and the owner's mental and physical condition. 
(j)  If the court finds that an agricultural animal has been abandoned or cruelly treated, the court may prohibit the possession or ownership of any other agricultural animal by the owner of the agricultural animal if the owner has exhibited a pattern of abandoning or cruelly treating agricultural animals as evidenced by previous convictions of violating sections 3.2-6504 or 3.2-6570 of the Code of Virginia, or section 5-77 of this Code. In making a determination to prohibit the possession or ownership of agricultural animals, the court may take into consideration the owner's mental and physical condition. 
(k)  Any person who is prohibited from owning or possessing animals pursuant to subsection (i) or (j) may petition the court to repeal the prohibition after two years have elapsed from the date of entry of the court's order. The court may, in its discretion, repeal the prohibition if the person can prove to the satisfaction of the court that the cause for the prohibition has ceased to exist. 
(l)  When a sale occurs, the proceeds shall first be applied to the costs of the sale then next to the unreimbursed expenses for the care and provision of the animal, and the remaining proceeds, if any, shall be paid over to the owner of the animal. If the owner of the animal cannot be found, the proceeds remaining shall be paid into the Literary Fund. 
(m)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the humane destruction of a critically injured or ill animal for humane purposes by the impounding humane investigator, law-enforcement officer, animal control officer, or licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-44, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0014, 8-20-08; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 17-0007 , 7-12-17) 
State Law reference— Seizure and impoundment of animals; notice and hearing; disposition of animal; disposition of proceeds upon sale, Code of Virginia § 3.2-6569.  
Sec. 5-89. - Impoundment records. 
An animal control officer or the custodian of the pound, upon taking custody of any animal in the course of his official duties, shall immediately make a record thereof. The record shall include a description of the animal, including color, breed, sex and approximate weight, the reason for seizure, the location of seizure, the owner's name and address, if known, and all license or other identification numbers. Information concerning the disposition of the animal shall be added to the records after disposition of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-41, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08)  
Secs. 5-90—5-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RABIES CONTROL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to adopt ordinances to prevent spread of rabies, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6525. 
 
Sec. 5-100. - Vaccination of dogs and cats. 
(a)  The owner or custodian of all dogs and domesticated cats four (4) months of age and older shall have them currently vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian or licensed veterinary technician who is under the immediate and direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian on the premises. The supervising veterinarian on the premises shall provide the owner or custodian of the dog or cat with a rabies vaccination certificate or herd rabies vaccination certificate and shall keep a copy in his own files. The owner or custodian of the dog or cat shall furnish within a reasonable period of time, upon the request of an animal control officer, humane investigator, law enforcement officer, state veterinarian's representative, or official of the department of health, the certificate of vaccination for such dog or cat. The vaccine used shall be licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that species. If, however, such vaccination would threaten the physical well-being of such dog or cat, the owner of such dog or cat shall obtain a certificate, signed by a licensed veterinarian, certifying such fact; and the owner shall keep such dog or cat in quarantine until the same is vaccinated. 
(b)  Any person transporting a dog or cat into the city from some other jurisdiction shall comply with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section within 30 days subsequent to bringing such dog or cat into the city. 
(c)  A veterinarian vaccinating a dog or cat as required by this section shall issue to the owner of the dog or cat a certificate of vaccination showing: 
(1)  Date of the vaccination; 
(2)  Sex and breed of the dog or cat; 
(3)  The dog's or cat's weight, color and marks; 
(4)  Rabies tag number; 
(5)  Name of the owner; 
(6)  Amount and kind of vaccine injection; and 
(7)  Method of injection. 
(Ord. No. 735, §§ 4-24, 4-25, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 782, 9-12-84; Ord. No. 1128, 9-28-94; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Rabies inoculation of dogs and domesticated cats, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6521.  
Sec. 5-101. - Report of existence of rabid animal. 
Every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal that is suspected to be rabid and that may have exposed a person, companion animal, or livestock to rabies shall report immediately to the health department the existence of such animal, the place where seen, the owner's name, if known, and the symptoms signs suggesting rabies. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-27, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 782, 9-12-84; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6522.  
Sec. 5-102. - Emergency ordinance requiring confinement or restraint of dogs and cats when rabid animal at large. 
When there is sufficient reason to believe that the risk of exposure to rabies is elevated, the city council shall have the power to pass an emergency ordinance, which shall become effective immediately upon passage, requiring owners of all dogs and cats in the city to keep the same confined on their premises, unless leashed under restraint of the owner in such a manner that persons or animals will not be subject to the danger of being bitten by a rabid animal. Any emergency ordinance enacted pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be operative for a period not to exceed 30 days unless renewed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-28, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 782, 9-12-84; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6522.  
Sec. 5-103. - Confinement or destruction of dogs or cats showing signs of, or suspected of having, rabies. 
Any dog or cat showing active signs of rabies or suspected of having rabies that is not known to have exposed a person, companion animal or livestock to rabies shall be confined under competent observation for such a time as may be necessary to determine a diagnosis. If confinement is impossible or impracticable, such dog or cat shall be euthanized by one of the methods approved by the state veterinarian as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-29, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 782, 9-12-84; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6522.  
Sec. 5-104. - Destruction or confinement of dog or cat bitten by rabid animal. 
Any dog or cat, for which no proof of current rabies vaccination is available, and which is exposed to rabies through a bite, or through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane, by an animal believed to be afflicted with rabies, shall be confined in a pound, kennel or enclosure approved by the health department for a period not to exceed six (6) months at the expense of the owner or custodian in a manner and by a date certain as determined by the health director; a rabies vaccination shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian prior to release. Inactivated rabies vaccine may be administered at the beginning of confinement. Any dog or cat so bitten, or exposed to rabies through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane with proof of a valid rabies vaccination, shall be revaccinated by a licensed veterinarian immediately following the exposure and shall be confined to the premises of the owner or custodian, or other site as may be approved by the local health department at the expense of the owner or custodian, for a period of 45 days. If the local health director determines that isolation is not feasible or maintained, such dog or cat shall be euthanized by one of the methods approved by the state veterinarian as provided in § 3.2-6546 of the Code of Virginia. The disposition of such dogs or cats not so confined shall be at the discretion of the local health director. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 4-30, 11-10-82; Ord. No. 782, 9-12-84; Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6522.  
Sec. 5-105. - Confinement or destruction of animal which has bitten person. 
At the discretion of the local health director, any animal that may have exposed a person shall be confined under competent observation for 10 days at the expense of the owner or custodian, unless the animal develops active symptoms of rabies, expires, or is euthanized before that time. A seriously injured or sick animal may be humanely euthanized as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546, and its head sent to the Division of Consolidated Laboratory Services of the Department of General Services, or the local health department, for evaluation. 
(Ord. No. 1437, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 08-0015, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6522.  
ARTICLE VII. - HYBRID CANINES 
 
Sec. 5-106. - Definitions. 
Adequate confinement means that, while on the property of its owner and not under the direct supervision and control of the owner or custodian, a hybrid canine shall be confined in a humane manner in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to: (i) prevent the animal's escape; or if the hybrid canine is determined to be a dangerous dog pursuant to § 3.2-6540 of the Code of Virginia or section 5-42 of this chapter, the structure shall prevent direct contact with any person or animal not authorized by the owner to be in direct contact with the hybrid canine; and (ii) provide a minimum of 100 square feet of floor space for each adult animal. Tethering of a hybrid canine not under the direct supervision and control of the owner or custodian shall not be considered adequate confinement. 
Hybrid canine means any animal that at any time has been or is permitted, registered, licensed, advertised or otherwise described or represented as a hybrid canine, wolf or coyote by its owner to a licensed veterinarian, law-enforcement officer, animal control officer, humane investigator, official of the Department of Health, or State Veterinarian's representative. 
Responsible ownership means the ownership and humane care of a hybrid canine in such a manner as to comply with all laws and ordinances regarding hybrid canines and prevent endangerment by the animal to public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 08-0019, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 5-107. - Permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to import into the city or liberate herein or possess herein any hybrid canine except pursuant to a hybrid canine permit issued by the City of Hampton pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-0019, 9-24-08)  
Sec. 5-108. - Same—Application fee. 
(a)  Any person seeking a hybrid canine permit shall complete an application provided by the City of Hampton including following: 
(1)  Name, address, phone number and age of the applicant. 
(2)  Species, gender, color, age, sex, vaccination history and origin of the hybrid canine. 
(3)  Photographs of the hybrid canine shall be provided by the applicant sufficient (to the satisfaction of the animal control officer) to show the size, color and any identifying marks or characteristics of the hybrid canine. 
(4)  An executed consent form authorizing the animal control officer or designee to inspect the premises where the hybrid canine is confined for the sole reason of ensuring that the owner is in compliance with the permit and this article. 
(b)  Any application for a hybrid canine permit shall be accompanied by payment of an application fee in the amount of $50. 
(Ord. No. 08-0019, 9-24-08; Ord. No. 16-0011 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 5-109. - Same—Duration, scope and conditions. 
(a)  Any hybrid canine permit issued in accordance with this article shall be valid for a period of no more than one (1) year from the date of issuance. The permittee shall have sole responsibility for ensuring that all permit renewals are timely initiated to ensure that a valid permit is continuously in effect throughout the period the permittee's ownership of a hybrid canine within the city. 
(b)  No permittee shall own more than two (2) hybrid canines at any time. A separate permit shall be obtained for each hybrid canine owned by the permittee. 
(c)  All permits issued in accordance with this article shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Each hybrid canine shall wear a collar bearing identification, including the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the hybrid canine. 
(2)  Each hybrid canine shall be maintained in an adequate confinement, as defined in this article. 
(3)  Each hybrid canine shall be muzzled and kept under the control of a competent adult handler, on a leash, lead, rope or chain whenever it is not on the property of its owner. 
(d)  The permit may be revoked or not renewed if the owner has failed to renew any required permit or has violated a provision of the permit or this article or any other law pertaining to the responsible ownership of the hybrid canine, including, but not limited to, the escape of the animal from the confinement or any death, damage or injury caused by the hybrid canine. 
(e)  Any person, whether an owner, agent or employee, violating, causing, or permitting the violation of this article or the conditions of the permit shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor for the first violation and a Class 1 misdemeanor for a second or a subsequent violation. Upon conviction of a violation of this article, the violator shall surrender custody of the hybrid canine to the animal control officer for euthanasia in accordance with section 3.2-6562 of the 1950 Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-0019, 9-24-08)  
ARTICLE VIII. - PROTECTION OF NESTING ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 5-110. - Authority of city manager to post areas due to nesting animals. 
The city manager or his designee is authorized to identify and post as "closed" animal nesting areas within the city identified by a resource management plan. For the purposes of this article animal includes all mammals, birds and fish. 
(Ord. No. 10-0002, 2-10-10)  
Sec. 5-111. - Unlawful to enter or remain upon area posted "area closed"—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or for any person to permit any animal owned by him or under his supervision to enter or remain upon any area in the city posted "area closed" by the city manager or his designee pursuant to section 5-110 of this article. 
A violation of this section shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 10-0002, 2-10-10)  
Sec. 5-112. - Killing, molesting animals in closed areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or injure any animal or destroy or injure the nest or eggs of any animal in an area posted "area closed" by the city manager or his designee pursuant to section 5-110 of this article. 
A violation of this section shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 10-0002, 2-10-10)  
Chapter 6 - BICYCLES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the word "bicycle" means a device propelled solely by human power, upon which a person may ride either on or astride a regular seat attached thereto, having two or more wheels in tandem, including children's bicycles, except a toy vehicle intended for use by young children. 
As used in this chapter, the word "electric power-assisted bicycle" means a vehicle that travels on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and is equipped with (i) pedals that allow propulsion by human power and (ii) an electric motor with an input of no more than 1,000 watts that reduces the pedal effort required of the rider. 
(Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 18-0002 , 2-28-18) 
State Law reference— Similar definition, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100.  
Sec. 6-2. - Parent or guardian not to permit violation of chapter by child or ward. 
Any parent of any child or guardian of any ward who authorizes or knowingly permits such child or ward to violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-274; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 6-3. - Removing, altering, etc., serial number. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any bicycle serial number. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-270; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 6-4. - Adoption of state law. 
Pursuant to the authority of § 46.2-1313 of the Code of Virginia, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia which pertain to use, operation, ownership or storage of bicycles, except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, cannot have application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the city. Reference to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to streets, highways and other public ways within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, which is adopted by this section; provided, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provisions or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-271; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 18-0002 , 2-28-18) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 6-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-0002 , adopted February 28, 2018, repealed § 6-5, which pertained to dealers' report of sales and purchases, and derived from Ord. No. 676, adopted Dec. 10, 1980; Code 1964, § 25.1-272; and Ord. No. 1436, adopted Nov. 15, 2006.  
Secs. 6-6—6-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EQUIPMENT AND OPERATING RULES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21. 
 
Sec. 6-16. - Violations of article generally. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-27; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Traffic infractions treated as misdemeanors for arrest purposes, § 21-7; procedure in traffic infraction cases, § 21-8.  
Sec. 6-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-0002 , adopted February 28, 2018, repealed § 6-17, which pertained to impoundment of bicycle involved in violation of article, and derived from Ord. No. 676, adopted Dec. 10, 1980; Code 1964, § 25.1-273; and Ord. No. 1436, adopted Nov. 15, 2006.  
Sec. 6-18. - Lamps and reflectors. 
(a)  Every bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, and moped when in use between sunset and sunrise shall be equipped with a headlight on the front emitting a white light visible in clear weather from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and a red reflector visible from a distance of at least six hundred (600) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. Such lights and reflector shall be of types approved by the Superintendent of the department of state police of the commonwealth. 
In addition to the foregoing provisions of this section, a bicycle or its rider may be equipped with lights or reflectors. These lights may be steady burning or blinking. 
(b)  Every bicycle, or its rider, shall be equipped with a taillight on the rear emitting a red light plainly visible in clear weather from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the rear when in use between sunset and sunrise and operating on any highway with a speed limit of thirty-five (35) mph or greater. Any such taillight shall be of a type approved by the Superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-281; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1015.  
Sec. 6-19. - Brake. 
Every bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle, and moped, when operated on a highway, shall be equipped with a brake that will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. Every electric personal assistive mobility device, when operated on a highway, shall be equipped with a system that, when activated or engaged, will enable the operator to bring the device to a controlled stop. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, §§ 25.1-166, 25.1-283; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1066.  
Secs. 6-20—6-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-0002 , adopted February 28, 2018, repealed §§ 6-20—6-22, which pertained to bell or other warning device; use of permanent seat; and carrying passengers, and derived from Ord. No. 676, adopted Dec. 10, 1980; Code 1964, §§ 25.1-282; 25.1-278; and 25.1-279; and Ord. No. 1436, adopted Nov. 15, 2006.  
Sec. 6-23. - Applicability of traffic regulations to riders. 
(a)  Every person riding a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, or an animal or driving an animal on a street or highway shall be subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800 et seq. or Chapter 21 of this Code and shall have all of the rights and duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle, unless the context of the provision clearly indicates otherwise. 
(b)  The provisions of subsections A and C of Virginia Code, § 46.2-920, applicable to operation of emergency vehicles under emergency conditions, shall also apply, mutatis mutandis, to bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, and mopeds operated under similar emergency conditions by law-enforcement officers. 
(c)  Every person riding a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, or an animal on a street or highway shall ride in the same direction as all other traffic. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-15; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 18-0002 , 2-28-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800.  
Sec. 6-24. - Compliance with traffic-control devices. 
Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-280; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 6-25. - Duty to ride close to right-hand edge of roadway. 
Any person operating a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped on a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place under conditions then existing shall ride as close as safely practicable to the right curb or edge of the roadway, except under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction; 
(2)  When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway; 
(3)  When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right curb or edge; 
(4)  When avoiding riding in a lane that must turn or diverge to the right; and 
(5)  When riding upon a one-way road or highway, a person may also ride as near the left-hand curb or edge of such roadway as safely practicable. 
For purposes of this section, a "substandard width lane" is a lane too narrow for a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped and another vehicle to pass safely side by side within the lane. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-276; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-905.  
Sec. 6-26. - Riding two or more abreast. 
Persons riding bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, or electric power-assisted bicycles on a highway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast. Persons riding two (2) abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, shall move into a single file formation as quickly as is practicable when being overtaken from the rear by a faster moving vehicle, and, on a laned roadway, shall ride in a single lane. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-276; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-905.  
Sec. 6-27. - Rider not to attach himself or bicycle to vehicle on roadway. 
No person riding on any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, roller skates, skateboards, toys, or other devices on wheels or runners, shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle on a roadway. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-140; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-932.  
Sec. 6-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-0002 , adopted February 28, 2018, repealed § 6-28, which pertained to required use of bicycle paths, and derived from Ord. No. 1436, adopted Nov. 15, 2006; and Ord. No. 16-0008 , adopted April 13, 2016.  
Sec. 6-29. - Riding on sidewalks within public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Whenever any person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalk within public rights-of-way, whether paved or unpaved, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian, and shall ride in single file. Permissive use of a sidewalk within public rights-of-way does not apply where there is a usable bike path. 
(b)  No person except a police officer while on patrol shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk within public rights-of-way, whether paved or unpaved, in (i) any area where the main entrance/exit to a building directly opens onto a sidewalk within public rights-of-way (e.g., certain areas of Phoebus and Downtown), or (ii) any area actively being used for a special public event, or (iii) any area where "no bike riding" signage is conspicuously posted. 
(c)  A violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-93, 25.1-276; Ord. No. 1270, 2-9-00; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 18-0002 , 2-28-18) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit riding bicycles on sidewalks, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-904.  
Sec. 6-30. - Manner of parking. 
Bicycles shall be parked in such a manner that they will not interfere with pedestrians or motor vehicle traffic. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, § 25.1-277; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 6-31. - Exclusion for police bicycle division. 
This chapter shall not apply to the operation of bicycles by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties using bicycles issued by the Hampton Police Division. 
(Ord. No. 1212, 5-27-98; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 6-32. - Bicycle helmets. 
(a)  Every person fourteen (14) years of age or younger shall wear a protective helmet that at least meets the Consumer Product Safety Commission standard whenever riding or being carried on a bicycle, an electric personal assistive mobility device, or an electric power-assisted bicycle on any highway as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, sidewalk, or public bicycle path. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine to twenty-five dollars ($25.00). However, such fine shall be suspended (i) for first-time violators and (ii) for any violator who, subsequent to the violation but prior to imposition of the fine, purchases a helmet of the type required by this section. 
(c)  Pursuant to section 46.2-906.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, violation of this section shall not constitute negligence, or assumption of risk, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence, or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation of any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, or electric power-assisted bicycle, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any civil action. 
(Ord. No. 1253, 7-14-99; Ord. No. 1436, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-906.1.  
Chapter 7 - BOATS, BEACHES AND WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Wharves, docks and other structures erected along waterfront of city declared to be within corporate boundaries, § 1.02. 
Cross reference— License tax on marinas, § 18.1-39; injuring, tampering with, etc., boats, § 24-32; obstructing or polluting drains or waterways, § 24-43; parks, recreation and leisure services, Ch. 26; easements along water courses in subdivisions, § 35-85. 
State Law reference— Waters of the state, ports and harbors, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-6 et. seq.; boating laws, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-700 et seq.; local regulation of operation of vessels, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-744. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 7-2. - Designating and marking of swimming areas. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to designate areas for public swimming and to mark such areas with buoys or other markers. Such markers shall be colored bright orange or yellow in accordance with the international uniform markers and shall be placed offshore and not more than one hundred (100) yards from the mean low-water mark. 
(Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, § 7-1; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-3. - Limitations on use of Hampton Wharf and visitors center wharf and floating dock. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tie or moor any vessel, boat or floating material to the Hampton Wharf, to the approaches thereof, or to the visitors center wharf and floating dock for a period longer than forty-eight (48) hours; provided, however, that when, in the opinion of the city manager, or his designee, it is reasonably necessary for such vessel, boat or material to remain tied or moored to any of these facilities for more than forty-eight (48) hours, such forty-eight (48) hours may be extended by the city manager or his designee in writing for such additional time as shall be reasonably necessary. The forty-eight (48) hours limitation shall not apply to any water-borne tour vessels under contract with the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy the Hampton Wharf or the visitors center wharf and floating dock for the purpose of taking on or discharging any fish, crabs, oysters, clams or any other cargo of any type, or to use the Hampton Wharf for any commercial purpose, or to use the visitors center wharf and floating dock for any commercial purpose other than water-borne tour vessels under contract with the city. 
(c)  The city manager shall be authorized to designate areas for water-borne tour vessel dockage. 
(d)  The city manager shall be authorized to establish rules, regulations and fees for the use of the visitors center wharf and floating dock. 
(e)  This section shall not be construed to prevent the use of the Hampton Wharf or the visitors center wharf and floating dock for the taking on or removing of supplies or equipment from any boat or vessel tied to such wharf or dock. 
(Code 1956, § 15-6; Ord. No. 56; Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, §§ 7-7—7-9; Ord. No. 864, 7-8-87; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-4. - Floating loose logs or timbers in Hampton River or Sunset Creek. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to float loose timbers or logs in the waters of the Hampton River or Sunset Creek. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 6; Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, § 7-10; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-5. - Duty to mark and remove craft wrecked, sunk or abandoned in city waters. 
(a)  Whenever any barge, scow, vessel, or other craft is wrecked, sunk or abandoned in the waters within or adjoining the city, whether voluntarily, carelessly, accidentally or otherwise, the owner or person allowing or causing the craft to be sunk shall immediately mark the craft with a buoy and a lighted lantern at night, shall maintain such markers until the craft is removed, shall commence the immediate removal of the craft, and prosecute such removal diligently. The neglect or failure of such owner or person to so mark and remove the craft shall be a misdemeanor. In addition, in applicable cases, the city may proceed pursuant to section 7-7. 
(b)  Any violation shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If the violation is uncorrected at the time of conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with the ordinance, within a time period established by the court. Failure to remove or abate a violation within the specified time period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and any such failure during any succeeding thirty-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each thirty-day period punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 10, § 6; Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, §§ 7-10, 7-11; Ord. No. 1192, 9-10-97; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1192, adopted Sept. 10, 1997, and Ord. No. 1195, adopted Sept. 24, 1997, repealed former § 7-6, which pertained to the duty of owners of crafts wrecked or sunk in Hampton River or Sunset Creek, and derived from Ord. No. 10, § 6; Ord. No. 186; and Code 1964, § 7-11.  
Sec. 7-7. - Removal or repair of dangerous or obstructing structures or vessels. 
(a)  Whenever the director of the department of public works, public safety, codes and compliance, or a city employee designated thereby, is of the opinion that any vessel has been abandoned or any wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or any other structure or vessel might endanger the public health or safety of other persons or might constitute an obstruction or hazard to the lawful use of the waters within or adjoining the city, he shall ascertain the lawful owner of such property and notify such owner in writing to remove, repair or secure such wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel. If the owner of such property fails to remove, repair or secure the same within thirty (30) days after being given such notice, the city through its own agents or employees, may remove, repair or secure such property. 
(b)  In the event that the city, through its own agents or employees, removes, repairs or secures any wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel, after complying with the notice requirements of subsection (a) above, the cost or expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owners of such property and, to the extent applicable, may be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. 
(c)  If the identity or whereabouts of the lawful owner of any property referred to in subsection (a) above is unknown or not able to be ascertained after a reasonable search and after lawful notice has been mailed to the last known address of any known owner, the city, through its own agents or employees, may repair or remove such wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel, after giving notice by publication once each week for two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where such property is located. 
(d)  Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid, to the extent applicable, shall constitute a lien against the owner's real property, and such lien shall be recorded in the judgment lien docket book in the circuit court of the city. Such lien may also be reduced to a personal judgment against the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1192, 9-10-97; Ord. No. 1273, 4-26-00; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-909.  
Sec. 7-8. - Fishing or crabbing from bridges, bridge abutments, etc., generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fish or crab from any of the public bridges, public bridge abutments or public ways adjacent to waterways within the city, except that it shall be lawful to fish or crab from the following places: 
(1)  The east side of the John P. Mugler bridge over Mill Creek, except where posted signs prohibit; and 
(2)  The west side of the Mercury Boulevard bridge over Mill Creek, except where posted signs prohibit. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby authorized to erect appropriate signs at bridges and their abutments indicating that fishing or crabbing therefrom is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, §§ 27.1-14, 27.1-15; Ord. No. 773, 6-27-84; Ord. No. 1215, 6-10-98; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-9. - Regulations governing shipping offices. 
(a)  Every person licensed under Chapter 18 of this Code to conduct a shipping office shall keep a list of all persons engaged or secured by him for shipment aboard a coastwise or deep-water vessel, and on each Monday morning he shall furnish to the chief of police of the city a copy thereof, together with the name of the vessel in which every person so engaged or secured by him shall have shipped. 
(b)  In no case shall a fee of more than two dollars ($2.00) be charged for engaging or securing any sailor or mariner and if the vessel or the owner thereof shall be required to advance any sum of money on account of any debt incurred by the sailor or seaman to the person engaging or securing him, such creditor shall obtain the signature of such debtor to a certificate showing the amount of such debt, which certificate shall be kept in a book which shall at all times be open to the inspection of the police of the city. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-29; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-10. - Limitations on use of Sunset Creek boat ramp and Gosnold's Hope Park boat ramp. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy the Sunset Creek boat ramp, including its piers, and the Gosnold's Hope Park boat ramp, including its piers, for the purpose of taking on or discharging any fish, crabs, oysters, claims or any other cargo of any type, to use them for any commercial purpose, or to fuel or refuel any boats at these facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1013, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-11. - All watercraft. 
No person shall store a watercraft in the waters of the city for more than ten (10) days in a thirty-day period in any calendar year, except at a private dock or marina, without the express written permission of the chief of police, or his designee. Except as provided above, watercraft aground, sunken, or secured to any mooring or structure without permission of the owner of that mooring or structure, or interfering with the rights of any person, are expressly denied permission. 
(Ord. No. 1273, 4-26-00; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-12. - No permission necessary for first thirty days. 
For its first ten (10) days in city waters in any thirty-day period in any calendar year, any transient watercraft legally anchored and attended shall be deemed to have anchorage permission for provisioning, repairs, tourism, and recreational use, unless such permission is revoked in writing by the chief of police, or his designee, for any of the reasons given below. 
(Ord. No. 1273, 4-26-00; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-13. - Denial or revocation of permission. 
The chief of police, or his designee, may deny or revoke anchorage or mooring permission for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  The watercraft has dragged anchor or is moored at an unregistered mooring, or in a marked channel; 
(b)  The watercraft displays no evidence of current state, federal, or foreign registration, or, when asked by the chief of police, or his designee, the owner or operator of the watercraft fails to present a current Virginia registration, cruising permit, or other official documentation of ownership upon which he or she is named as the owner or operator; 
(c)  The watercraft is left unattended for periods exceeding five (5) days ("unattended" shall mean for the purposes of this section that the owner or operator has not been found on the boat or in its immediate vicinity and has failed to remove, read, and respond to any posting or citation left by the chief of police, or his designee); 
(d)  The watercraft is slept on but is not equipped with a holding tank and smoke detector, or the owner or operator fails to provide the chief of police, or his designee, with receipts for regular weekly pumpouts of its holding tank; 
(e)  The watercraft is in violation of, or can be documented to have been under the control of the same person when in the past it violated any city, state, or federal laws, or has been used as a haven for the violation of any such law by any person, within three hundred sixty-five (365) days prior thereto; 
(f)  The owner or operator of the watercraft, if not aboard, has failed to provide the chief of police, or his designee, with a method of contact when asked, or cannot be reached by the chief of police of his designee; 
(g)  The police have responded to complaints of excessive noise, thefts, firearms violations, controlled substance violations, or other disturbances of possible danger to the environment or any person, emanating from the watercraft or its crew; 
(h)  The watercraft is in a sinking or dilapidated condition; 
(i)  The watercraft is at any time within seventy-five (75) feet of any other legally anchored watercraft, or any private mooring or private dock or marina without the written permission of the owner; 
(j)  If, at the discretion of the chief of police, or his designee, there are safety-related or environmental reasons for denying permission. When necessary, the chief of police, or his designee, may act or may join in action with other agencies to determine and abate any unsafe or environmentally hazardous conditions. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing any person to store any boat in the waters of the city for more than ten (10) days in any thirty-day period in any calendar year without the express written authorization of the chief of police, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1273, 4-26-00; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-14. - Sanctions for violations; fines, seizure; removal of watercraft blocking access to the waterway; abandoned boat act. 
It shall be an infraction punishable by a one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day fine to continue to store the watercraft in city waters after the first ten (10) days without express written anchorage or moorage permission from the chief of police, or his designee. Said fine shall constitute a lien on the watercraft. The chief of police, or his designee, shall post unattended watercraft which are in violation until five (5) infraction violations have been posted. He shall then continue to monitor the violating watercraft until ten (10) days have elapsed from the date of the first posting. If the person in control of the watercraft returns, or contacts the office of the chief of police, and abates the violation within that time, no further actions need to be taken. 
If the owner of any unattended watercraft stored in city waters fails to respond to notices or pay fines and fees as required by this section for more than ten (10) days, the watercraft shall be taken into custody by the chief of police, or his designee, and stored in a safe place of storage out of the water. 
If any unoccupied watercraft is found by the chief of police, or his designee, to be anchored or moored so that any portion of the watercraft is at any time less than seventy-five (75) feet from the berthing place of another watercraft and blocking its access to the waterway or to its berth, permission to anchor shall be considered revoked and the chief of police, or his designee, shall post a one hundred dollar ($100.00) infraction notice upon the unoccupied watercraft. 
The chief of police, or his designee, shall then ascertain when the blocked watercraft actually needs to exercise its right to access. If able to assist in providing sufficient access at that time by shifting the lay of the blocking watercraft while it remains at anchor, the chief of police, or his designee, shall do so and shall have the option to continue to do so on up to five (5) successive days, upon each of which the chief of police, or his designee, shall post an additional infraction notice. If at any time this process becomes impractical, the chief of police, or his designee, may take custody of the unoccupied watercraft, including all appurtenances, and remove it to a safe place of storage at the expense of the owner. After taking custody of the watercraft, the chief of police, or his designee, shall attempt to notify the owner and if unable to locate the owner shall initiate abandoned boat procedures as prescribed under section 7-7. 
(Ord. No. 1273, 4-26-00; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-15. - Aggravated violations. 
If the watercraft is attended but the person in control of the watercraft refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter, after five (5) infractions issued by the chief of police, or his designee, or if the watercraft is blocking the use of the waterway as defined above, continued refusal shall aggravate the offense to a Class 3 misdemeanor. The chief of police, or his designee, shall then accost the violator. If the person in control is still in the vicinity and still refuses to comply with the terms of this chapter, he or she shall then be taken into custody by the police department so that the watercraft may be safely removed to a place of storage. 
(Ord. No. 1273, 4-26-00; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-16. - Release of seized watercraft. 
No watercraft taken into custody by the chief of police, or his designee, shall be released to any person who fails to provide clear proof of identity in the form of a valid passport, or a valid U.S. or Canadian driver's license, or other satisfactory official proof of identity, and clear proof of ownership in the form of a current and valid Virginia registration, Virginia cruising permit, or other official documentation naming that person as registered owner. Proof of payment of all Virginia registration, transfer, and excise taxes due on the watercraft must be presented and must be verified by the chief of police, or his designee, with the Virginia Marine Resources Commission unless a Virginia Marine Resources Commission Officer is present at the time of the release. All fees for fines, towing, storage, publications, and any other fees incurred since the arrival of the watercraft in the city waters must be reimbursed to the city by the registered owner prior to release of the watercraft. 
(Ord. No. 1273, 4-26-00; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-17. - Recurring violations. 
Once any watercraft has been taken into the custody of the police, any subsequent violations by the same owner or operator shall aggravate the offense to a Class 3 misdemeanor with immediate application of the sanctions enumerated above. 
(Ord. No. 1273, 4-26-00; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-18. - Designating city-marked areas restricted to vessel traffic. 
Subject to approval by appropriate state and federal agencies, the city manager may establish and mark boating channels which shall be restricted to vessel travel exclusively. Such boating channels shall be "government marked channels" and crabbing by any person is hereby prohibited in such boating channels. 
(Ord. No. 1273, 4-26-00; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 7-19, 7-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOATING, SKIING AND SURFING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Boating laws, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-700 et seq.; local regulation of operation of vessels, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-744. 
 
Sec. 7-21. - General penalty for violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall be a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 9; Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, § 7-14; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of state boating safety laws, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-746.  
Sec. 7-22. - Arrests for violations of article. 
When any person is arrested for a violation of this article, the arresting officer may comply with the provisions of section 21-4 of this Code in making such arrest. Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear given in accordance with such section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 186; Ord. No. 698, 7-22-81; Code 1964, §§ 7-2.1, 7-15; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-23. - Presumption in cases of violation of article. 
When a violation of the provisions of this article has been observed by any person, the owner of any sailboat, motorboat, water ski, surfboard or similar device involved in such violation shall be presumed to be the operator thereof at the time such violation; provided, however, that such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. 
(Ord. No. 698, 7-22-81; Code 1964, § 7-2.1; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-24. - Article does not prohibit regattas, races and exhibitions. 
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to prohibit regattas or the running of races or exhibitions during an approved, publicly announced, properly supervised and adequately patrolled regatta, speed trial or exhibition. Written approval of such events from the city manager and the United States Coast Guard or from the state board of game and inland fisheries shall be deemed sufficient evidence of approval. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 8, Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, § 7-5; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-25. - Muffling devices for motorboats. 
The exhaust of every internal combustion engine used on any motorboat shall be effectively muffled by equipment so constructed and used as to muffle the noise of the exhaust in a reasonable manner. The muffling device shall exhaust at or below the water line or it shall be equipped with mechanical baffles. The use of cutouts is prohibited, except for motorboats competing in a regattas or boat race approved as provided in section 7-24, and for such motorboats while on trial runs, during a period not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours immediately preceding such regatta or race, and for such motorboats while competing in official trials for speed records during a period of not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours immediately following such regatta or race. 
(Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, § 7-3; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-737.  
Sec. 7-26. - Speed limit in portion of Hampton River and in Sunset Creek. 
The speed of all commercial and pleasure boats, vessels and other watercraft entering, leaving or moving about in that part of the Hampton River south of the Queen Street Bridge or in Sunset Creek shall not exceed five (5) miles per hour, and in no event shall any boat or craft, including outboards, be operated in such a manner as to create a wake to the injury of other boats or crafts anchored, tied up or plying in such portion of the Hampton River or in Sunset Creek, or to the fastening thereof. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 4; Ord. No. 44; Ord. No. 186; Ord. No. 432; Code 1964, § 7-13; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-27. - Towing skiers or surfboarders without observer or life preserver. 
No person shall operate a vessel on any waters of the city for towing a person on water skis or a surfboard or similar device, unless there is in such vessel, a person, in addition to the operator, in a position to observe the progress of the person being towed, or unless the person being towed wears a life preserver. 
(Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, § 7-4; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-742(A).  
Sec. 7-28. - Skiing or surfboarding prohibited during certain hours. 
No person shall operate a vessel on any water of this city towing a person on water skis, a surfboard or similar device, nor shall any person engage in water skiing or any similar activity, at any time between the hours from one (1) hour after sunset to one (1) hour before sunrise. 
(Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, § 7-4; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-742(B).  
Sec. 7-29. - Exceptions from sections 7-27 and 7-28. 
The provisions of sections 7-27 and 7-28 shall not apply to a performer engaged in a professional exhibition or a person engaged in an activity authorized under section 7-24. 
(Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, § 7-4; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-742(C).  
Sec. 7-30. - Boating, skiing, etc., prohibited in marked swimming areas. 
No person shall operate a motorboat or manipulate water skis, surfboards or similar devices within the area of water designated and marked as provided in section 7-2. Persons violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, § 7-2; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-734(D).  
Sec. 7-31. - Boating, skiing, etc., prohibited near certain fishing piers. 
(a)  No person shall operate or manipulate a sailboat, motorboat, water ski, surfboard or similar device within four hundred (400) feet of the end or three hundred (300) feet of the sides of the Buckroe Beach Fishing Pier or the Grandview Fishing Pier, while such pier is open to the public, without the consent of the owner of such pier or his agent. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 698, 7-22-81; Code 1964, § 7-2.1; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 7-32. - Skiing prohibited in portion of Hampton River and in Sunset Creek. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to water ski, or for any person to operate a boat towing any person skiing, within that portion of the Hampton River south of the Queen Street Bridge or within Sunset Creek. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 5; Ord. No. 44; Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, § 7-12; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-33. - Reckless boating, skiing, etc. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motorboat or vessel, or manipulate any skis, surfboard or similar device, in a reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. A violation of this subsection shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  No person shall operate or manipulate any vessel, tow rope or other device by which the direction or location of water skis, a surfboard or similar device may be affected or controlled in such a way as to cause the water skis, surfboard or similar device or any person thereon to collide with any object or person. A violation of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, §§ 7-4, 7-6; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Provisions similar to subsection (a) above, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-738.03; provisions similar to subsection (b) above, §§ 29.1-742(D), 29.1-744.3.  
Sec. 7-34. - Operating boat, skis, etc., while intoxicated or under influence of drugs. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motorboat or vessel, or manipulate any water skis, surfboard or similar device, while intoxicated or under the influence of any narcotic drug, barbiturate or marijuana. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 186; Code 1964, § 7-6; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-738.  
Sec. 7-35. - Reimbursement of expenses incurred in responding to DUI incidents involving watercraft. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of section 7-34 of this Code above, or Virginia Code section 29.1-738, both pertaining to operation of watercraft while impaired by alcohol or drugs, when his operation of watercraft while so impaired is the proximate cause of any accident or incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response by the city, shall be liable to the city in a separate civil action for the reasonable expenses thereof, in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in the aggregate, for a particular accident or incident occurring in the city. 
(b)  An "appropriate emergency response" includes all costs of providing law enforcement, firefighters, rescue and emergency medical services. 
(Ord. No. 1214, 5-27-98; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Reimbursement of expenses incurred in responding to DUI and related incidents, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1716.  
Secs. 7-36—7-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BEACH REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Responsibilities of director of parks relative to public beaches, § 26-4; obscene or indecent exposure on public beaches, § 26-36; consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages on public beaches, § 26-37. 
 
Sec. 7-46. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 7-47. - Barbecuing, charcoaling or cooking restricted to designated areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any sand beach or portion thereof, open to the public, for barbecuing, charcoaling or cooking, except in areas specifically set aside for and marked by appropriate signs for such barbecuing, charcoaling or cooking. 
(Ord. No. 202; Code 1964, § 34-2.1; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 1482, 7-18-07)  
Sec. 7-48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1482, adopted July 18, 2007, repealed § 7-48, which pertained to certain beverage containers and coolers prohibited. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 7-49. - Dogs prohibited during certain period. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, having control of or harboring any dog to cause, suffer or permit such dog to be on the public sand beaches within the city, Buckroe Beach Boardwalk, or in those areas in Buckroe Beach Park designated by the parks, recreation and leisure services director, during the period from May fifteenth through September fifteenth of each year. 
The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to "hearing dogs" or "service dogs," as used by a blind or deaf person pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 51.5-44(E). 
(Ord. No. 181; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 482; Ord. No. 494; Ord. No. 688, 5-13-81; Code 1964, § 27A-7; Ord. No. 755, § 27A-7(j), 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1250, 6-9-99; Ord. No. 1284, 9-27-00; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16) 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 5.  
Sec. 7-50. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or leave paper cups, napkins, picnic litter or trash of any type on or upon any sand beach used by the public. 
(Ord. No. 42; Code 1964, § 34-2; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Improper disposal of solid waste, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1418.1.  
Sec. 7-51. - Removal of sand generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry away or remove, or to cause to be carried away or removed, any sand from any public beach. 
(Ord. No. 103; Ord. No. 480; Code 1964, § 34-3; Ord. No. 1446, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 7-52. - Repealed.  
Sec. 7-53. - Public beach hours. 
The hours of the public beaches of the city shall be from sunrise to sunset. 
(Ord. No. 1482, 7-18-07)  
Secs. 7-54—7-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - (REPEALED)  
Chapter 8 - BONDSMEN[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 882, adopted March 23 1988, repealed Ch. 8, §§ 8-1—8-7, pertaining to bondsmen, which derived from Ord. No. 100, §§ 1, 3—7; Code 1964, §§ 17-6, 17-9—17-15; Ord. No. 600, adopted Dec. 13, 1978 and Ord. No. 835, adopted Sept. 10, 1986. Ord. No. 883, adopted March 23, 1988, enacted new provisions designated as a new Ch. 8, §§ 8-1—8-4 to read as herein set out. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1460, adopted January 14, 2007, amended Ch. 8 in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Licensing, certification, etc., of bondsmen, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3724. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
Except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Bail bond; bond. The term "bail bond" or "bond" shall include every recognizance or acknowledgement of indebtedness conditioned upon the appearance of any person charged with violation of law before any court or judicial officer having criminal jurisdiction. 
Bondsman. The word "bondsman" shall mean every person who, for compensation, enters into any bond recognizance as surety. 
Principal. The word "principal" shall mean the person charged with violation of law and whose appearance is required in any bond. 
Surety. The word "surety" shall mean every person, firm or corporation, other than a corporation licensed to do business as a bonding as a bonding company, who, for compensation, enters into any recognizance or bond, other than as principal. 
(Ord. No. 1460, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 8-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, any surety who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof for the first offense, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. The license of any surety who is convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter may be revoked by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Ord. No. 883, 3-23-88; Ord. No. 1460, 1-14-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 2 and 3 misdemeanors, § 1-11.  
Sec. 8-3. - Licenses. 
Every person who shall, for compensation, enter into any bond or bonds for others, whether as a principal or surety, shall obtain a revenue license, the amount of which shall be prescribed in section 18-59 of this Code. No such professional bondsman or his agent shall enter into any such bond or bonds in the City of Hampton until he shall have obtained such license. Except as otherwise provided by law, no such license shall be issued by the authorities of the City of Hampton unless and until the applicant shall have first obtained a bail bondsman license from the state department of criminal justice services as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 9.1-185 et seq. and 58.1-3724, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 883, 3-23-88; Ord. No. 999, 3-13-91; Ord. No. 1460, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 8-4. - Maximum fees. 
No bondsman shall receive compensation for executing any bail bond in excess of the following amounts: 
(1)  For bonds up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)—Fifteen (15) percent of the bond. 
(2)  For bonds in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)—Ten (10) percent of the excess over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(3)  An administrative fee as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1460, 1-14-07)  
Chapter 9 - BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 14; approval of plans required prior to construction or alteration of food establishment, § 15-21; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 20; restrictions on building operations at night, § 22-8; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 30; stormwater management, Ch. 33.1; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 34; street numbers for buildings, § 34-111 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 35; swimming pools, Ch. 36; water supply, Ch. 39; wetlands zoning ordinance, § 41.1-5 et seq.; general zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to building regulations, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1117, 36-97 et seq.; Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the term "building code" shall mean the Uniform Statewide Building Code and building regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant thereto as adopted by section 9-26. 
As used in section 9-2(b) of this chapter, the term "owner" shall mean the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, or lessee in control of a building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1053, 6-24-92; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-97.  
Sec. 9-2. - Violations. 
(a)  General penalty for violations of chapter. Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(b)  Building code and related violations. Any owner or any other person who shall violate any provision of the building code, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the building code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
In addition, if the building code violation concerns a residential unit and if the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the building code. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six (6) months of the date of conviction. 
(c)  Fines. The following minimum fines shall apply only to convictions for building code violations which cause a building or structure to be unsafe or unfit for human habitation. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five (5) years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five (5) to ten (10) years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(d)  Violations restrained, prohibited or enjoined. Any violation of this chapter may also be restrained, prohibited, or enjoined by appropriate proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1058, 6-24-92; Ord. No. 1094, 7-14-93; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar penalty provision, Code of Virginia, § 36-106(A); abatement or removal of nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-900.  
Sec. 9-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1164, adopted April 24, 1996, repealed § 9-3, which pertained to registration and bonding of contractors, and which derived from Ord. No. 428, § 8.2-22; and Code 1964, § 8.1-63.  
Sec. 9-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 862, adopted July 8, 1987, repealed § 9-4 establishing fire limits, which derived from Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-3; Ord. No. 669, adopted Sept. 24, 1980; Code 1964, § 8.1-3 and Ord. No. 732, adopted Sept. 22, 1982.  
Sec. 9-5. - Permits required to move building on streets, alleys, etc. 
No person shall move any building or part of any building through or across any sidewalk, street, alley or highway within the city limits, without first obtaining a building permit from the building official and a moving or hauling permit from the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-21; Code 1964, § 8.1-21; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Overweight vehicle permits, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1139 et seq.  
Sec. 9-6. - Deposit of building materials in public places. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to deposit, drop, scatter or leave, or cause to be deposited, dropped, scattered or left, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, parking or other public place in the city, building material of any kind; provided, however, that in cases where it is unusually difficult or impossible to get building material to the premises without depositing same in some public place, a permit shall be obtained from the city manager and the person obtaining the permit shall give notice of such permit to the division of police. 
(Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 561, 2-15-78; Code 1964, § 20-19; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 9-7. - Determination of lot lines as prerequisite to issuance of building permit; duty of building official as to street encroachments. 
No permit shall be issued under the building code for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building in such a manner as to affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has determined his lot lines. It shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon in any manner whatsoever, except as provided for in the building code. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-20; Code 1964, § 8.1-20; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1025, adopted Nov. 13, 1991, repealed § 9-8, which pertained to unsafe buildings erected prior to Sept. 1, 1973, and derived from Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-126; Ord. No. 445, § 6; Ord. No. 524; Code 1964, § 8.1-126.  
Sec. 9-9. - Standards for preconstruction soil treatment against termites. 
The standards of the National Pest Control Association shall be deemed as approved in respect to preconstruction soil treatment against termites. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-123; Code 1964, § 8.1-123; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— State regulation of pesticides Code of Virginia, § 3.2-3906.  
Sec. 9-10. - Site grading of lots. 
It shall be the responsibility of the building contractor, upon completion of construction, to grade off existing sites or lots. Such grading shall meet all required grade elevations as described in or on the developer's subdivision plan or site plan. The area below all buildings (crawl space) is to be included. 
The lowest elevation of the ground in the crawl space shall not be lower than the finish grade on the exterior of the building measured at the foundation walls. The building official may require a certified statement made by a professional engineer or land surveyor stating that the grading of the lot and the crawl space meet requirements of the approved subdivision plan, site plan and this section. The statement must be presented to the building official prior to the issuance of an occupancy certificate. 
(Ord. No. 774, 6-27-84; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-11. - Removal of power wires during fire, disaster, etc. 
At the request of the fire chief or his authorized agent, a power company doing business in the city shall have present at any fire, disaster or emergency, a qualified representative to disconnect or remove, from any building, structure or pole, all wires belonging to such company. 
(Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 14.  
Sec. 9-12. - Use of power and telephone poles by city. 
The city shall have the right to place its traffic lights, fire or police alarm circuits and signal wires on any pole carrying power or telephone circuits. Attachments shall be made as mutually agreed upon by the city manager and the parties involved; such use shall not interfere with the proper use of such pole and the fixtures thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Secs. 9-13—9-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Certificate of occupancy to be issued under building code prior to operation of food establishment in existing building, § 15-22. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-26. - Adoption and enforcement. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations applicable to and governing buildings, structures and appurtenances, the Uniform Statewide Building Code (including the maintenance of existing buildings); Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Regulations; Virginia Manufactured Home Safety Regulation; Virginia Amusement Device Regulations; Virginia Certification Standards; Virginia Standards Governing Operation of Individual and Regional Code Academies promulgated by the State Board of Housing and Community Development. Such codes are hereby made a part hereof to the same extent as if set out herein at length. 
(b)  The building official shall have authority to enforce the provisions of the building code, and all codes, regulations, and standards set forth in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-23; Code 1964, § 8.1-23; Ord. No. 839, 10-8-86; Ord. No. 886, 4-27-88; Ord. No. 1005, 3-27-91; Ord. No. 1026, 11-13-91; Ord. No. 1057, 6-24-92; Ord. No. 1103, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1116, 4-27-94; Ord. No. 1146, 8-9-95; Ord. No. 1184, 5-28-97; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq.  
Sec. 9-27. - Availability of copies. 
Copies of the building code are obtainable during regular business hours in the department of community development. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-25; Code 1964, § 8.1-25; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 12-0020, 3-14-12)  
Sec. 9-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1056 repealed § 9-28, which pertained to violations and did not carry a history note.  
Sec. 9-29. - Plan review fee. 
(a)  A non-refundable fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for review of plans by the department of community development before the person submitting such plans makes application for a permit required by the building code. 
(b)  The fee prescribed by this section shall not apply to one- and two-family (R-4) drawings. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-26.3; Ord. No. 469; Ord. No. 551, 11-9-77; Ord. No. 619, 6-27-79; Code 1964, § 8.1-26.3; Ord. No. 765, § 8.1-26.1(p), 12-14-83; Ord. No. 1301, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 12-0020, 3-14-12) 
State Law reference— Fees authorized, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.  
Sec. 9-30. - Fee for appeals. 
For each appeal to the building code board of appeals, as provided for in the building code, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-26.3; Ord. No. 469; Ord. No. 551, 11-9-77; Ord. No. 619, 6-27-79; Code 1964, § 8.1-26.3; Ord. No. 765, § 8.1-26.3(q), 12-14-83; Ord. No. 1301, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Fees authorized, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.  
Sec. 9-31. - Emergency action. 
In addition to the authority granted to the building official in providing temporary safeguards and emergency repairs set forth in the building code the building official, in cases of emergency which, in his opinion, involve immediate danger of collapse or failure of a building, any part of a building, wall or any other structure, which would endanger life, or when a violation of the building code results in a hazard that creates an immediate, serious and imminent threat to the life and safety of the occupants, he shall promptly cause such building or portion thereof to be made safe or removed. For this purpose he may at once enter such building or structure or land on which it stands, or abutting land or structures, with such assistants and at such cost as he may deem necessary. He may vacate adjacent structures and protect the public by appropriate fences or such other means as may be necessary, and for this purpose may close a public or private way. 
(Ord. No. 1027, 11-13-91; Ord. No. 1127, 7-13-94; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-32. - Charges collected as taxes. 
After reasonable notice and reasonable time to remove, repair or secure a building, wall, or structure is given to the owner and lien holder of such property, costs and expenses incurred by the city acting pursuant to the building code or section 9-31, in the removal, repair, or securing of a building, wall or any other structure shall be chargeable to and paid by the owners of such property and may be collected as taxes and levies are collected. Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided by law. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the city from collecting such costs and expenses in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1027, 11-13-91; Ord. No. 1089, 5-26-93; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Secs. 9-33—9-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to levy fees to defray cost of building code enforcement, Code of Virginia, § 36-105. 
 
Sec. 9-41. - Payment prerequisite to initiation, issuance or amendment of permit; technology surcharge, no refunds. 
(a)  No permit to begin any work covered by the building code shall be issued until the fees prescribed in this division have been paid to the department of community development, nor shall an amendment to a permit necessitating an additional fee because of an increase in the amount of work involved be approved until the additional fee has been paid. No permit fees prescribed in this division shall be refunded except those prescribed in section 107 of the Virginia Construction Code. 
(b)  Prior to the initiation of an application or prior to the issuance of final approval of a permit required under this article, satisfactory evidence must be provided by the applicant or the applicant's agent that any delinquent real estate taxes, nuisance charges, stormwater management utility fees, and any other charges that constitute a lien on the subject property, that are owed to the city, which have been properly assessed against the subject property, have been paid. 
(c)  Each and every permit issued under this division shall incur a $10.00 technology surcharge. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-26; Code 1964, § 8.1-26; Ord. No. 1358, 9-10-03; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 12-0020, 3-14-12; Ord. No. 12-0028, 5-9-12; Ord. No. 15-0012, 4-22-15 )  
Sec. 9-42. - Building fees generally. 
The following fees shall be charged for permits and inspections provided for in the building code with respect to work for which fees are not prescribed by other sections of this division. Beginning work without first obtaining the necessary permit shall result in a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(a)  Minimum permit fee ..... $50.00 
(b)  Reinspection fee, each ..... 50.00 
(c)  Basic permit fee: 
(1)  Usable area under roof, per building or structure (includes all new construction, finished or unfinished): 
a.  Buildings 0—40,000 square feet, per square foot ..... 0.13 
b.  Buildings 40,000 square feet and above, per square foot ..... 0.14 
c.  All structures not under roof (including patios, decks, ramps, loading docks, etc.) per square foot ..... 0.10 
(d)  Demolition permit fee: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and structures, each ..... 50.00 
(2)  All other buildings and structures, each ..... 50.00 
(e)  Moving structures permit fee: 
(1)  Moving structures to a location outside of the city limits: Same as prescribed in (d)(1) and (d)(2) above. 
(2)  Moving structures to a location within the city limits: Same as the basic fee prescribed in (c)(1) above. 
(f)  Industrialized building permit fee: (excluding mobile units): Same as the basic fee prescribed in (c)(1) above. 
(g)  Module construction permit fee: Same as the basic fee in (c)(1) above. 
(h)  Mobile homes and other mobile units permit fee: Fifty dollars ($50.00) each. This includes inspecting unit, foundation, blocking, tie-downs, anchoring, water line connection, drain connection and electrical cord connection and HVAC connection. 
(i)  Sign permit: 
Base fee, each ..... $50.00 
In addition to the main sign for the address, the base fee includes all signs with a total square foot sign face area of ten (10) square feet or less for each sign (includes entrance, exit and directional signs.) 
For erection and/or relocation of signs, fee is determined by base fee plus area fee. Area fee shall be determined by total square foot area of all sign faces of each sign. 
Area 	Fee 
0—24 square feet ..... 	$ 6.00 
25—49 square feet ..... 	8.00 
50—74 square feet ..... 	10.00 
75—99 square feet ..... 	12.00 
100—299 square feet ..... 	25.00 
300 square feet and over ..... 	30.00 
Replacing, altering existing sign faces, each sign ..... 	50.00 
 
(j)  Tents and other temporary structures permit fee: Fifty dollars ($50.00) each. 
(k)  Chimney's, fireplaces, wood and coal stoves and other solid-fuel burning heaters, per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or fraction thereof ..... $9.00 
NOTE: Fireplaces, heaters and chimneys shall be included in new construction permit fees only if so noted at the time of issuing the permit. 
(l)  All other structures as defined in the Building Code not included in the above fee schedule (includes piers, trestles, fences, bulkheads, exterior siding, fire damage, general repairs, pools, towers, steeples and alterations to a previously finished space), per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or fraction thereof ..... $11.00 
(m)  Plans examination: A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for the review of plans prior to making application for a permit (nonrefundable). 
Exception: One-and two-family (R-4) drawings. 
(n)  For each appeal to the building code board of appeals, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(o)  Temporary certificate of occupancy ..... $35.00 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-26.3; Ord. No. 469; Ord. No. 551, 11-9-77; Ord. No. 619, 6-27-79; Code 1964, § 8.1-26.3(a)—(n), 12-14-84; Ord. No. 833, 5-28-86; Ord. No. 889, 6-8-86; Ord. No. 995, 1-9-91; Ord. No. 1210, 5-13-98; Ord. No. 1302, 5-9-01); Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 10-0007, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 9-43. - Electrical fees. 
The following fees shall be charged for permits and inspections provided for in the building code with respect to electrical work. Beginning work without first obtaining the necessary permit shall result in a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(a)  Minimum permit fee ..... $50.00 
(b)  Reinspection fee, each ..... 50.00 
(c)  New service equipment permit fee (new construction fee based on total ampacity of service equipment and subpanels feeder overcurrent protection, includes all work): 
(1)  Single-phase: 
0 amps to 125 amps ..... $50.00 
126 amps to 150 amps ..... 55.00 
151 amps to 200 amps ..... 60.00 
Over 200 amps ..... 60.00 
Plus per 50 amps or fraction thereof ..... 20.00 
(2)  Three-phase: 
0 amps to 125 amps ..... 50.00 
126 amps to 150 amps ..... 55.00 
151 amps to 200 amps ..... 60.00 
Over 200 amps ..... 60.00 
Plus per 50 amps or fraction thereof ..... 20.00 
(d)  Service increases (includes all work): 
(1)  Single-phase: 
Up to 200 amps increase ..... 50.00 
Over 200 amps increase ..... 50.00 
Plus per 50 amps or fraction thereof ..... 20.00 
(2)  Three-phase: 
Up to 200 amps increase ..... 50.00 
Over 200 amps increase ..... 50.00 
Plus per 50 amps or fraction thereof ..... 20.00 
(e)  Temporary service, each ..... 50.00 
(f)  Add-ons, to existing service and all other work not included in this section, per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or fraction thereof ..... 9.00 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-26.1; Ord. No. 619, 6-27-79; Code 1964, § 8.1-26.1; Ord. No. 765, § 8.1-26(a)—(j), 12-14-83; Ord. No. 833, 5-28-86; Ord. No. 889, 6-8-86; Ord. No. 995, 1-9-91; Ord. No. 1210, 5-13-98; Ord. No. 1225, 7-15-98; Ord. No. 1302, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 1314, 7-11-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 10-0007, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 9-44. - Mechanical and gas fees. 
The following fees shall be charged for permits and inspections provided for in the building code with respect to mechanical and gas work. Beginning work without first obtaining the necessary permit shall result in a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(a)  Minimum permit fee ..... $50.00 
(b)  Reinspection fee, each ..... 50.00 
(c)  Basic permit fee: 
EXCEPTIONS: Domestic cooking equipment and space heaters in dwelling units are exempt from mechanical permit fees. Inspections of this equipment are required. 
(1)  First $1,000.00 value ..... 30.00 
(2)  Over $1,000.00 value ..... 30.00 
Plus, per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof ..... 10.00 
(d)  Fuel piping permit fee application when permit is issued for fuel piping work only, per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) valuation or fraction thereof ..... 8.00 
(e)  L.P.G. (i.e. butane, propane, etc.) tanks and associated piping permit fee (total water capacity in gallons): 
0—500 ..... $50.00 
501—2,000 ..... 55.00 
Over 2,000 ..... 60.00 
(f)  Tanks and associated piping for flammable liquids permit fee (capacity in gallons per tank): 
0—10,000 ..... $50.00 
10,001—20,000 ..... 55.00 
20,001—50,000 ..... 60.00 
Over 50,000 ..... 65.00 
(g)  Removal of fuel storage tanks, minimum, each tank ..... 50.00 
(h)  Gas connection inspection (where a permit is not required) ..... 25.00 
(i)  Fire suppression system permit fee (includes standpipes): same as basic fee prescribed in (c) above. 
(j)  Elevators, dumbwaiters, moving stairways, moving walks, construction personnel hoist and conveying equipment permit fee: same as basic fee prescribed in (c) above. 
(k)  Annual certificates of compliance for elevators (per car), escalators (per floor), dumbwaiters and man lifts ..... 25.00 
(l)  Amusement rides and devices: 
(1)  Kiddie rides ..... $25.00 
(2)  Major rides ..... 35.00 
(3)  Spectacular rides ..... 55.00 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-26.2; Ord. No. 619, 6-27-79; Code 1964, § 8.1-26.2; Ord. No. 833, 5-28-86; Ord. No. 863, 7-8-87; Ord. No. 889, 6-8-88; Ord. No. 904, 8-10-88; Ord. No. 995, 1-9-91; Ord. No. 1210, 5-13-98; Ord. No. 1302, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 10-0007, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 9-45. - Plumbing fees. 
The following fees shall be charged for permits and inspections provided for in the building code with respect to plumbing work. Beginning work without first obtaining the necessary permit shall result in a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(a)  Minimum permit fee ..... $50.00 
(b)  Reinspection fee, each ..... 50.00 
(c)  Basic permit fee: 
(1)  Fixtures, appliances and appurtenances, each ..... $9.00 
(2)  Water distribution system, each (includes water service on new construction) ..... 9.00 
(3)  Water service pipe, each ..... 9.00 
(4)  Building drain connection (laterals), each ..... 9.00 
(5)  Water mains, each ..... 9.00 
(d)  Site plumbing only: Sewers (storm and sanitary), manholes, area drains or devices permit fee, each ..... 20.00 
(e)  Individual sewage disposal system permit fee: 
(1)  New, each ..... 50.00 
(2)  Repair, each ..... 50.00 
(f)  Individual potable water supply system permit fee, each ..... 50.00 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-26.4; Ord. No. 619, 6-27-79; Code 1964, § 8.1-26.4; Ord. No. 765, § 8.1-26.4(a)—(f), 12-14-83; Ord. No. 833, 5-28-86; Ord. No. 889, 6-8-88; Ord. No. 995, 1-9-91; Ord. No. 1210, 5-13-98; Ord. No. 1302, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 10-0007, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Cross reference— Sewer connection fees, § 30-23.  
Sec. 9-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0007, adopted May 12, 2010, effective July 1, 2010, repealed § 9-46, which pertained to permit reissuance fee and derived from Ord. No. 428, §§ 8.1-26.1—8.1-26.4; Ord. No. 619, adopted June 27, 1979; Code 1964, §§ 8.1-26.1—8.1-26.4; Ord. No. 765, §§ 8.1-26.1(k), 8.1-26.2(j), 8.1-26.3(o), 8.1-26.4(g), adopted Dec. 14, 1983; Ord. No. 1302, adopted May 9, 2001; Ord. No. 1468, adopted March 28, 2007.  
Secs. 9-47—9-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 9-61—9-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-0005, adopted May 8, 2013, repealed Art. IV, §§ 9-131—9-150, 9-166—9-171, which pertained to site plans and derived from Ord. No. 194, as amended. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. The user's attention is directed to § 35.1-1 et seq. for similar provisions. 
 
Secs. 9-131—9-189. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HOUSING IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 9-190. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this section. 
Assessed value: The value of the building, exclusive of the land value. 
Building official: The director of codes compliance. 
Dwelling unit: A structure or portion thereof containing one (1) or more rooms, including bathroom and kitchen facilities, which are arranged, designed, or used as living and sleeping quarters for one (1) family. 
Major deterioration: Decline or degradation requiring major work in order to comply with the property maintenance code (e.g., replacing rotten wood or correcting structural problems with a floor, roof, or porch). 
Minor deterioration: Decline or degradation requiring minor work in order to comply with the property maintenance code (e.g., painting of trim, windows, or dwelling). 
Neighborhood: Each neighborhood district (of which there are ten (10)) in the City of Hampton shall be considered a "neighborhood" for the purpose of establishing a neighborhood rate of deterioration. 
Owner: The owner of record or the owner's agent. 
Property Maintenance Code: The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended. 
Substandard: Structure does not meet property maintenance code requirements and is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for occupancy. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in chapter 2 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hampton: duplex dwelling, duplex unit, family, lot width, manufactured home, mobile home, multi-family dwelling, rooming house, townhouse, and two-family dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 1132, 11-9-94; Ord. No. 1156, 12-13-95; Ord. No. 1180, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1291, 1-24-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-191. - Intent. 
The goals of the program are to maintain the existing housing stock within the City of Hampton; improve the appearance of neighborhoods; provide the incentives to homeowners and landlords to comply with existing codes and to upgrade their property; and to provide assistance to the citizens of Hampton in maintaining a safe, healthy environment. 
(Ord. No. 1132, 11-9-94; Ord. No. 1156, 12-13-95; Ord. No. 1180, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1291, 1-24-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-192. - Identification of risk factors. 
Dwelling units with the highest degree of risk of deterioration will be selected based on the following: 
(a)  Only dwelling units, which are, assessed points under the primary risk factors will be considered for inspection. 
(b)  Only dwelling units which are assessed points under the primary risk factors will be assessed points under the secondary risk factors. 
(c)  The number of dwelling units subject to inspection on an annual basis will be equal to the "city-wide deterioration rate" or two (2) percent of the city's dwelling units, whichever is less. The "city-wide deterioration rate" will be established on an annual basis and will be the percentage of dwelling units in the City of Hampton with exterior major deterioration. 
(d)  Primary risk factors. 
(1)  Exterior condition: 
a.  Ten (10) points for major deterioration; 
b.  Fifteen (15) points for sub-standard conditions. 
(2)  Prior violations related to property maintenance from the departments of codes compliance and fire, not to exceed the past five (5) years: 
a.  Two (2) points if one (1) violation; 
b.  Five (5) points if two (2) violations; 
c.  Eight (8) points if three (3) or more violations. 
(3)  Boarded-up buildings: 
a.  Fifteen (15) points if building is boarded-up. 
(e)  Secondary risk factors. Points for secondary risk factors will be assigned only to units which are assessed points under the primary risk factors. 
(1)  Deterioration: 
a.  Four (4) points if the property is located in a neighborhood with deterioration at or above the city average. 
b.  Six (6) points for minor exterior deterioration. 
(2)  Single-family lot width: 
a.  Two (2) points if the lot width is less than thirty-one (31) feet. 
(3)  Dwelling type: 
a.  Five (5) points for manufactured/mobile homes; 
b.  Three (3) points for multi-family dwellings inhabited by more than two (2) families but less than thirty (30) families; 
c.  Eight (8) points for rooming houses. 
(4)  Age of dwelling unit: 
a.  Two (2) points if twenty-one (21) to forty (40) years old; 
b.  Three (3) points if over forty (40) years old. 
(5)  Assessed value of dwelling unit, not including land value: 
a.  Single-family: 
i.  One (1) point if between eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00) and ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00); 
ii.  Two (2) points if between seventy thousand dollars ($70,000.00) and seventy-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($79,999.00); 
iii.  Three (3) points if between fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and sixty-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($69,999.00); 
iv.  Four (4) points if under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
b.  Multi-family: 
i.  One (1) point if between thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) and forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00); 
ii.  Two (2) points if between thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) and thirty-four thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($34,999.00); 
iii.  Three (3) points if between twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and twenty-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($29,999.00); 
iv.  Four (4) points if under twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1132, 11-9-94; Ord. No. 1156, 12-13-95; Ord. No. 1180, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1291, 1-24-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-193. - Inspections. 
Properties attaining a degree of risk as specified in section 9-192 shall be subject to inspections by the building official to determine and encourage compliance with the property maintenance code. Interior inspections will be performed under one (1) of the following circumstances; 1) the owner requests an interior inspection or 2) an administrative search warrant is obtained for the following reasons; (i) consensual search of the premises has been denied or is unattainable, (ii) a representative of the City of Hampton has personally inspected the property to the extent possible and believes that entry to the premises is necessary and (iii) that notice of the city's intent to seek issuance of an administrative search warrant was sent to the owner or resident at least ten (10) days prior to request of the administrative search warrant. 
Exterior inspections will be performed in all cases. 
Information on housing rehabilitation assistance programs available through the Hampton Redevelopment and Housing Authority (HRHA) will be included with the notification. 
(Ord. No. 1132, 11-9-94; Ord. No. 1156, 12-13-95; Ord. No. 1180, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1291, 1-24-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-194. - Inspection fees. 
No fee shall be charged for inspections conducted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1132, 11-9-94; Ord. No. 1156, 12-13-95; Ord. No. 1180, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1291, 1-24-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-195. - Violations and notifications. 
After conducting an inspection and determining that violations are present, the owner or the owner's agent will receive a notice specifying the required repairs or improvements to be made to the building. Unless these violations pose an imminent threat to public safety, the owner will be given forty-five (45) days from the date of a registered letter to either begin corrective action or to submit a written plan or letter describing the proposed corrective action or to submit a written plan or program that demonstrates a good faith effort to comply within six (6) months of the cited date. 
Failure to correct the violation shall result in issuance of a summons pursuant to the property maintenance code. Any violations may also be restrained, prohibited, or enjoined by appropriate proceedings. 
Once a dwelling unit has been inspected and corrected under this program, the points assessed under section 9-192(d) primary risk factors will be dropped. 
(Ord. No. 1132, 11-9-94; Ord. No. 1156, 12-13-95; Ord. No. 1180, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1291, 1-24-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-196. - Appeals. 
The owner of the structure, the owner's agent or any other person involved in the design, construction or maintenance of the structure may appeal the building official's decision concerning application of the Uniform Statewide Building Code covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration, repair, or maintenance of that structure. The applicant shall submit a written request for appeal, indicating specific requirements, to the board of building code appeals within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the receipt of the decision to be appealed. The application shall contain the name and address of the owner of the structure and the person appealing, if not the owner. A copy of the building official's decision shall be submitted along with the application for appeal and maintained as part of the record. Failure to submit an application for appeal within the time limit established by this section shall constitute acceptance of the building official's decision. 
(Ord. No. 1132, 11-9-94; Ord. No. 1156, 12-13-95; Ord. No. 1180, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1291, 1-24-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-197. - Penalties. 
Penalties of violations of the property maintenance code shall be in accordance with section 9-2 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1132, 11-9-94; Ord. No. 1156, 12-13-95; Ord. No. 1180, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1291, 1-24-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-198. - Effect on agreements between owners and occupants, etc. 
The provisions of this article shall not affect any obligation, responsibility or liability imposed by any agreement between any owner or occupant and another, as between parties to any such agreement; provided, however, that no such agreement shall relieve any such owner or occupant of the respective duties, responsibilities and liabilities imposed upon them by the provisions of this article, or by the property maintenance code. 
(Ord. No. 1132, 11-9-94; Ord. No. 1156, 12-13-95; Ord. No. 1180, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1291, 1-24-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-199. - Enforcement. 
The building official and his/her designated representatives (one (1) for each of the ten (10) neighborhood districts) are authorized to enforce all the provisions of this article, to act pursuant to the authority contained herein and to perform all the duties required hereby. 
(Ord. No. 1132, 11-9-94; Ord. No. 1156, 12-13-95; Ord. No. 1180, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1291, 1-24-01; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Secs. 9-200, 9-201. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1364, adopted Feb. 25, 2004, repealed §§ 9-200 and 9-201, which pertained to evaluation of program and effective date. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Secs. 9-202—9-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BARBED WIRE 
 
Sec. 9-206. - Enforcement of article. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-207. - Violations of article. 
Any person erecting or maintaining any barbed wire contrary to the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 102; Code 1964, § 5-5; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 9-208. - Exceptions from article. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to premises upon which cattle or other farm animals are enclosed. 
(Ord. No. 102; Code 1964, § 5-3; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-209. - Article does not permit fences not otherwise permitted by zoning ordinance. 
Nothing in this article shall be taken or construed as permitting the erection or maintenance of any fence in the city not otherwise permitted by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 102; Code 1964, § 5-4; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 ) 
Cross reference— Electric fences prohibited, § 24-40.  
Sec. 9-210. - Use generally. 
No barbed wire shall be used for the purpose of wholly or partially enclosing any lot or premises within the city, except that barbed wire may be used on top of any wall or fence wholly or partially enclosing any lot or premises in any commercial or manufacturing district or the Special Public Interest—Hampton Roads Center West (SPI-HRCW) district, as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city, and barbed wire may be used on top of any wall or fence wholly or partially enclosing any public school, park or recreational or playground site in any residential, commercial or manufacturing district as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 102; Code 1964, § 5-1; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 15-0009, 3-25-15 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 ) 
Cross reference— Barbed wire fences not to be used in mobile home parks, § 20-89.  
Sec. 9-211. - Specifications and requirements for permitted use. 
When barbed wire is used for a purpose permitted under section 9-210, the wall or fence upon the top of which the barbed wire is used shall be at least six (6) feet in height, the barbed wire shall be installed on arms or brackets extending from the top of such wall or fence over the private property which is to be wholly or partially enclosed, not more than three (3) strands of barbed wire shall be so installed and the first strand shall be at least six (6) inches from the face of the wall or fence. 
(Ord. No. 102; Code 1964, § 5-2; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Secs. 9-212—9-219. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ROOMINGHOUSES; BOARDINGHOUSES 
 
Sec. 9-220. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be to provide minimum standards to ensure the public safety, health and welfare for this segment of Hampton's housing stock. 
(Ord. No. 1196, 9-10-97; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-221. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Boardinghouse. The words "boardinghouse" shall be construed to mean a building or premises where meals are regularly served by prearrangement for compensation for five (5) or more persons, not open to transient guests in contradistinction to hotels, restaurants and tourist homes, which are open to transients. 
Roominghouse. The words "roominghouse" shall be construed to mean a building or premises other than a hotel where lodging is offered by prearrangement for definite periods for compensation, of five (5) or more persons, not open to transient guests, in contradistinction to hotels, motels, or tourist homes open to transients. This does not include adult care residences or tourist homes as defined in the City of Hampton Zoning Ordinance. 
Rooming unit. The words "rooming unit" shall be construed to mean a single, sleeping room within a roominghouse. 
Person. The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a roominghouse or boardinghouse. 
(Ord. No. 1196, 9-10-97; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-222. - Compliance with article. 
No person shall operate a roominghouse or a boardinghouse, occupy or let to another for occupancy any unit in any roominghouse or boardinghouse, except in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1196, 9-10-97; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-223. - Operating permit generally. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall operate a roominghouse or a boardinghouse unless they hold a valid roominghouse or boardinghouse permit issued by the director of codes compliance in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The owner of the property shall apply to the director of codes compliance for such permit, which shall be issued upon the operator's compliance with the applicable provisions of this article and after an inspection performed by the director of codes compliance to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and other applicable codes. The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at all times within the roominghouse or boardinghouse. The permit shall not be transferable. 
(b)  Notice of sale or transfer. Every person holding a permit under this section shall give notice in writing to the director of codes compliance within twenty-four (24) hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in or control of the roominghouse or boardinghouse for which the permit was issued. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such roominghouse or boardinghouse. 
(c)  Validity. Every roominghouse or boardinghouse permit shall expire at the end of one (1) year following its date of issuance. The permit shall be renewable from year-to-year upon inspection by the director of codes compliance unless suspended or revoked. 
(d)  Appeal. Any person whose application for a permit to operate a roominghouse or boardinghouse is denied for failure to comply with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and other applicable codes, within ten (10) days following the action of the director of codes compliance may request a hearing on the matter by the board of building code appeals. After such hearing, the board may uphold the denial or order the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1196, 9-10-97; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-224. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever, upon inspection of any roominghouse or boardinghouse, the director of codes compliance finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of this article, the Uniform Statewide Building Code or other applicable codes, the director shall give notice in writing to the operator of such roominghouse or boardinghouse that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, the operator's roominghouse or boardinghouse permit will be suspended. At the end of such period, the director of codes compliance shall inspect such roominghouse or boardinghouse, and if it is found that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the director shall either extend the time to correct the violations or give notice in writing to the operator that the permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such operator shall immediately cease operation of such roominghouse or boardinghouse and no person shall occupy, for sleeping, eating or living purposes, any rooming unit therein. 
(b)  Appeal. Any person whose permit to operate a roominghouse or boardinghouse has been suspended, or who has received notice from the director of codes compliance that their permit will be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at said roominghouse or boardinghouse are corrected, within ten (10) days following the action of said director may request a hearing by the board of building code appeals. If no request for a hearing is filed within the prescribed time following the day on which such permit is suspended, such permit shall be automatically revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1196, 9-10-97; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-225. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1196, 9-10-97; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 9-226. - Initial compliance. 
Those roominghouses or boardinghouses in existence on the date of adoption of this article shall have ninety (90) days to apply for the operating permit. 
(Ord. No. 1196, 9-10-97; Ord. No. 1468, 3-28-07)  
ARTICLE VIII. - IDENTIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF RENTAL DWELLING UNITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-230. - Purpose and intent. 
This article is hereby adopted to implement a program for identification and inspection of rental dwelling units in compliance with Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, § 36-105.1:1. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Sec. 9-231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Certificate of Compliance" means the document issued by the Director that allows occupancy of a residential rental dwelling unit. The term of this Certificate shall be twelve (12) months and contain the issue date and the expiration date. 
"Conditions which immediately affect safe, decent and sanitary living conditions of persons occupying a residential rental dwelling unit" include items that violate fire safety; lack of or poor condition of sanitary facilities; absence of adequate heating systems or equipment; items which affect the safe operation of electrical and mechanical systems; items which affect structural integrity of the building and/or the ability of the building envelope to keep out weather, or one or more other conditions that if not corrected would be reasonably expected to become conditions that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions of the occupants. 
"Department" means the Community Development Department. 
"Director" means the Director of the Community Development Department or his designee(s). 
"Disqualifying Violation" includes those conditions which affect safe, decent and sanitary living conditions of persons occupying a residential rental dwelling unit, or other conditions that violate the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, or multiple building code violations that indicate in their totality that the dwelling unit is not being properly maintained. Conditions which alone, constitute disqualifying violations are set forth below: 
Building Exterior: 
1.1  Foundations with severe structural defects indicating the potential for collapse or foundations that allow significant entry of ground water. 
1.2  Stairs, porches, balconies or decks with severe structural defects or broken, rotting or missing steps or absence of railings around a porch or balcony that is 30 inches or more above ground. 
1.3  Roof has serious defects such as serious buckling, sagging indicating the potential of structural collapse. There are large holes or other defects that would result in significant air or water infiltration. 
1.4  Exterior surfaces have serious buckling, sagging indicating the potential of structural collapse. There are large holes or other defects that would result in significant air or water infiltration. 
1.5  Chimney is leaning or showing evidence of serious disintegration (i.e. many missing bricks). 
1.6  Mobile home is not securely anchored by a tie-down device which distributes and transfers the loads imposed by the unit to appropriate ground anchors to resist wind overturning and sliding. 
Building Interior: 
2.1  There are not at least 2 working outlets or one working outlet and 1 working light fixture. 
2.2  Electrical hazards such as broken wiring, frayed wiring, wires lying in or located near standing water, light fixtures hanging from electric wiring, without other firm support, exposed fuse box connections are present. 
2.3  Window no longer has the capacity to keep out the wind and the rain or is a cutting hazard. Examples are missing or broken panes, dangerously loose or cracked panes, windows that will not close. 
2.4  Presence of such serious defects in the ceiling that either a potential exists for structural collapse or that large cracks or holes allow significant drafts to enter the unit. Severe bulging or buckling, large holes. 
2.5  Serious defects in the walls such that the structural safety of the building is threatened such as severe buckling, bulging or leaning; damaged or loose structural members; large holes. 
2.6  Presence of such serious defects in the floor system that a potential exists for structural collapse or other threats to safety or that large cracks or holes allow substantial drafts from below the floor. Severe buckling or damaged or missing members. 
2.7  There is not at least 1 working smoke detector in the vicinity of each sleeping room (unless the situation can be remedied and re-inspected the same day). 
3.1  The water supply system, sanitary drainage system and its associated piping have serious leaks. 
3.2  The unit is not served by an approved public or private water supply system. 
3.3  The unit is not connected to an approved public or private sewage disposal system. The following constitutes evidence of severe backup: strong sewage gas smell, numerous clogged drains. 
3.4  A permanently attached sink is not present or it does not have running hot and cold water and a properly connected and properly working drain. 
3.5  The toilet is not connected to a sewer, the connections are faulty to the extent that severe leakage occurs. 
3.6  Neither a tub nor a shower is present. 
3.7  The water heater does not have a temperature-pressure relief valve and discharge line, and is not vented into a properly installed flue (electric does not require venting). 
3.8  There is a broken bathroom fixture with a sharp edge. 
Heating & Cooling: 
4.1  The heating equipment is not capable of providing adequate heat to all the room. 
4.2  There is breakage or damage to the system such that there is a potential for fire or other threats to safety including improper connection of flue, improper installation of equipment (absence of safety devices), evidence of heavy soot build-up in the chimney. 
4.3  The ventilation system is not working or the windows do not open. 
4.4  There are large cracks in the fire-brick, missing mortar, absence of hearth extensions in the fireplace. 
Health & Fire Safety: 
5.1  The unit cannot be entered without having to go through another unit. 
5.2  The unit does not have a means of exit that is not blocked (not usable due to debris, storage, nailed shut). 
5.3  There is an excessive accumulation of trash, garbage or other debris. 
5.4  There is the presence of severe infestation of mice or vermin (roaches). 
5.5  There are loose, broken or missing steps, absence of handrails or guardrails on the interior stairs. 
"Dwelling unit" means a building or structure or part thereof that is used for a home or residence by one or more persons who maintain a household. The term "dwelling unit" shall not include hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes or similar facilities providing medical care to the aged, infirm or disabled. 
"48-Month Certificate of Compliance" means the document issued by the Director that allows occupancy of a residential rental dwelling unit for a period of forty-eight (48) months and contains the issue date and the expiration date. 
"Inspection District" means an individual rental inspection district established by City Council by duly adopted ordinance or resolution. 
"Multiple-Family Complex" means any development, consisting of 10 or more dwelling units under common ownership and occupied for valuable consideration. The term "multiple-family complex" shall not include mobile homes under common ownership in a mobile home park or subdivision; nor shall such term include single family detached dwellings, duplex dwellings, or townhouse dwellings under common ownership. 
"Owner" means the person or entity shown on the current real estate assessment books or current real estate assessment records of the City or the fee simple titleholder of the property if ownership has changed since such tax assessment records were last updated. 
"Residential rental dwelling unit" means a dwelling unit that is leased or rented to one or more tenants month to month or for any period in excess of thirty (30) days including, but not limited to, condominiums, manufactured or mobile homes, single family detached dwellings, duplex dwellings, townhouse dwellings, or multifamily dwellings (which shall include efficiency apartments and condominiums). However, a dwelling unit occupied in part by the owner thereof shall not be construed to be a residential rental dwelling unit unless a tenant occupies a part of the dwelling unit which has its own cooking and sleeping areas, and a bathroom, unless otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance or the Hampton City Code. 
"Virginia Maintenance Code" means Part III of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Secs. 9-232—9-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RENTAL INSPECTION DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 9-241. - Establishment of rental inspection districts. 
(a)  City Council may establish by resolution or ordinance one or more rental inspection districts within the City. Prior to establishing or amending any such district, Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed district. Notice of the hearing shall be given as required by section 36-105.1:1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  No rental inspection district shall be established until City Council finds: 
(1)  There is a need to protect the public health, safety and welfare of occupants of dwelling units inside the designated rental inspection district; 
(2)  The residential dwelling units within the designated rental inspection district are either: 
(a)  Blighted or in the process of deteriorating; or 
(b)  The residential rental dwelling units are in need of inspection by the Department to prevent deterioration, taking into account the number, age and condition of the residential dwelling rental units inside the proposed rental inspection district; and 
(3)  The inspection of the residential rental dwelling units inside the proposed rental inspection district is necessary to maintain safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants and other residents living in the proposed rental inspection district. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Sec. 9-242. - Rental inspection districts. 
Based upon the findings of City Council as set forth in section 9-241 above, the following areas are included and hereby declared to be rental inspection districts which are subject to the requirements of this article immediately: 
North Phoebus District —starting at the intersection of Old Buckroe Rd. and W. Taylor Ave. running northeast on Old Buckroe Ave., proceeding 335 ft. past the intersection of Old Buckroe Rd. and W. Sherwood Ave., running southeast on an imaginary line along the boundary of parcels that share a boundary with Jane Bryan Elementary School (LRSN 12005514) to N. Mallory St., running southwest on N. Mallory St. to its intersection with Corey Circle, proceeding southeast along Corey Circle 200 ft. past its intersection of N. Mallory St., running southwest on an imaginary line along the back of parcels that front N. Mallory St., running southeast on an imaginary line along the back of parcels that front Sherwood Ave. to its intersection with Perry St., running southwest along Perry St. to its intersection with E. Sherwood Ave., running southwest on an imaginary line along the back of parcels that front Perry St. and E. Hygeia Ave., running southwest along N. Hope St. to its intersection with E. Mercury Blvd., running northwest along E. Mercury Blvd. to its intersection with N. Mallory St., running northeast along N. Mallory St. to its intersection with W. Taylor Ave., running northwest on W. Taylor Ave. to the point and place of beginning. 
Shell Road Corridor and South Wythe District —starting at the intersection of Settlers Landing Rd. and Armistead Ave.; running south along S. Armistead Ave. to its intersection with Victoria Blvd.; running south-west along Victoria Blvd. to its intersection with Cottonwood Ave.; running south-east along Cottonwood Ave. which turns into Claremont Ave. to its intersection with Chesapeake Ave.; running south-west along Chesapeake Ave. to its intersection with Pear Ave.; running north-west along Pear Ave. to its intersection with Victoria Blvd.; running south-west along Victoria Blvd. to its intersection with the boundary between Hampton and Newport News; running north-west along boundary line to its intersection with Aberdeen Rd.; running north-west along Aberdeen Rd. to its intersection with I-664; running north-east along I-664 to its intersection with Kiwanis St.; running south along Kiwanis St. to its intersection with Plum Ave.; running ease then south along Plum Ave. to its intersection with W. Pembroke Ave.; running north-east along W. Pembroke Ave. to its intersection with Settlers Landing Rd.; running east along Settlers Landing Rd. to the point and place of beginning. 
South Phoebus District —starting at the intersection of S Mallory St. and Mellen St.; running south-east along Mellen St. to its intersection with Willard Ave.; running south-west along S Willard Ave. to its intersection with National Ave.; running north-west along National Ave. to its terminus at S. Curry St. continue north-west on an imaginary line parallel with I-64 to its intersection with S Mallory St.; running north-east along S Mallory St. to the point and place of beginning. 
Sussex District —starting at the intersection of Kecoughtan Rd. and Clyde St.; running south along Clyde St. to its intersection with Catesby Jones Dr.; running east along Catesby Jones Dr. for 125 ft. then running south on an imaginary line behind the properties on the east side of Clyde St. to its intersection with Roads View Ave.; running south-west along Roads View Ave. to its intersection with Clyde St.; running south-east along Clyde St. to its intersection with Chesapeake Ave.; running south-west along Chesapeake Ave. to the eastern property line of 3805 Chesapeake Ave; running north-west along an imaginary line to its intersection with Roads View Ave.; running south-west along the southern property line of 99 Armstrong Dr. to its intersection with unnamed creek; running north along unnamed creek to its intersection with Kecoughtan Rd.; running east along Kecoughtan Rd. to the point and place of beginning. 
Based upon the findings of City Council as set forth in section 9-241 above, the following areas are included and hereby declared to be rental inspection districts which are subject to the requirements of this article on and after May 1, 2014: 
Hampton Club and Magruder Heights District —starting at the intersection of Hampton Roads Center Pkwy. and Coliseum Dr.; running south along Coliseum Dr. to its intersection with Marcella Rd.; running west along Marcella Rd. to its intersection with Lake Tower Dr.; running south along Lake Tower Dr. to its intersection with I-64; running north-west along I-64 to its intersection with Magruder Blvd.; running north along Magruder Blvd. to its intersection with Hampton Roads Center Pkwy.; running east along Hampton Roads Center Pkwy. to the point and place of beginning. 
Holly Homes and Fordham District —starting at the intersection of Andrews Blvd. and Nickerson Blvd.; running east along Nickerson Blvd. to Old Buckroe Rd.; running south along Old Buckroe Rd. to Shelton Rd.; running west along Shelton Rd. to its intersection with Grimes Rd; running north-west along Grimes Rd. to its intersection with Andrews Blvd.; running north-east along Andrews Blvd. to its intersection with Nickerson Blvd. to the point and place of beginning. 
Olde Hampton District —starting at the intersection of W. Pembroke Ave. and Armistead Ave.; running south along Armistead Ave. to its intersection with Settlers Landing Rd.; running west along Settlers Landing Rd. to its intersection with W. Pembroke Ave.; running north-east along W. Pembroke Ave. to the point and place of beginning. 
Old North Hampton and Langley District —starting at the intersection of LaSalle Ave. and W. Mercury Blvd.; running east along W. Mercury Blvd. to its intersection with Seldendale Dr.; running north along Seldendale Dr. to its dead end; running east to its intersection with Quinn St. and N. King St.; running south along N. King St. to its intersection with E. Mercury Blvd.; running east along E. Mercury Blvd. to its intersection with Herberts Creek; running south-east along Herberts Creek to its intersection with Hampton River; running south along Hampton River to its intersection with Brights Creek; running south-west along Brights Creek to its intersection with I-64; running west along I-64 to its intersection with LaSalle Ave.; running north along LaSalle Ave. to the point and place of beginning. 
Based upon the findings of city council as set forth in section 9-241 above, the following area is hereby declared to be a rental inspection district which is subject to the requirements of this article on and after September 10, 2014: 
Foxhill Townhomes District —starting at the south-east corner of 1777 Old Buckroe Rd., proceed west 160 ft., then north 90 ft., then west 550 ft., then south-west 455 ft. along the back of 13, 15, 16 Rosser Dr., then proceed 600 ft. south-south-east, then proceed south-east 410 ft. along the back of 77, 76, 74 Manilla Ln. and 66 Franktown Rd., proceed south 185 ft. then east 395 ft. then north-east 265 ft. and east 155 ft. along the boundary of the City of Hampton soccer fields and parking lot where it meets Old Buckroe Rd. Proceed north along the west side of Old Buckroe Rd. to the point and place of beginning. 
A map showing the rental inspection districts described above is hereby adopted as a part of this article and shall be available for public inspection in the Department. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0023, 9-24-14 ; Ord. No. 17-0006 , 6-14-17)  
Sec. 9-243. - Buildings or structures located outside of inspection district. 
A residential rental dwelling unit located outside of an inspection district shall nevertheless be subject to the terms of this article on the following basis: City council makes a separate finding after a public hearing for said individual residential rental dwelling unit that (i) there is a need to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the occupants of that individual residential rental dwelling unit; (ii) the individual residential rental dwelling unit is either (a) blighted or (b) in the process of deteriorating; or (iii) there is evidence of violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for occupants of such individual residential rental dwelling units. Upon such finding by the city council, the residential rental dwelling unit shall be subject to this article, notwithstanding its location outside the inspection districts. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Sec. 9-244. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to residential rental dwelling units located within the rental inspection districts identified in section 9-242 of this article and shall further apply to certain structures located outside of such districts, which meet the requirements of section 9-243 above. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Secs. 9-245—9-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - NOTIFICATION AND INSPECTION 
 
Sec. 9-251. - Notification. 
(a)  Not later than sixty (60) days following adoption of this ordinance by city council or the approval of any new or revised rental inspection district, the department shall give written notice by first class U.S. mail to all property owners located within the inspection districts of the requirement to notify the department of any real property of the owner located in an inspection district that is a residential rental property as defined in section 9-231. The mailing of said notice by the director shall be deemed sufficient notice for purposes of this article. 
(b)  The owner of any residential rental dwelling unit located within an inspection district shall notify the department in writing no later than sixty (60) days following the date of the notice referred to in paragraph (a) above that said property is a residential rental dwelling unit. Such notice and information shall be submitted on a form provided by the department. The form shall require the following information: 
(1)  Address of the residential rental dwelling unit. 
(2)  The name(s) of each owner of the residential rental dwelling unit, the street address(es) of the primary residence of each owner of the residential rental dwelling unit and the telephone number of each owner of the residential rental dwelling unit. 
(3)  The name and street addresses of any responsible party or designee other than the owner. 
(c)  Upon receipt from an owner of the notice set forth in section 9-251(b), the department shall send the owner a copy of the list of disqualifying violations promulgated pursuant to section 9-231. 
(d)  Within thirty (30) days of giving the notification required under section 9-251(b), the owner shall contact the department and arrange a time for an initial inspection of the residential rental dwelling unit by the director. If after reasonable attempts, the department is unable to contact the owner by telephone, the department may set a time and date for the inspection and notify the owner by first class mail with a copy addressed to the tenant at the street address of the residential rental dwelling unit. If the time and date is inconvenient for the owner and the owner requests to reschedule the inspection to a more convenient time, the department shall cooperate with the owner; however, the department shall not be obligated to reschedule the inspection more than once. It will be the owner's responsibility to notify the tenant of an initial and any rescheduled inspections. 
(e)  The owner/seller of any residential rental unit located in an inspection district shall within thirty (30) days of title transfer, notify the department of any change of ownership of the residential rental dwelling unit. 
(f)  Any owner who fails to timely give any notice as required by this section shall be in violation of section 9-251(b) and shall be subject to such penalties and enforcement remedies as provided in section 9-268(b) of this article. However, failure to give timely notice in accordance with section 9-251(b) shall not be deemed a violation if the department has not complied with section 9-251(a). 
(g)  lf subsequent to the establishment of a rental inspection district and the giving of notice under section 9-251(a), an owner converts owner occupied property to residential rental property, the director or the department shall give the owner of the converted property the notice required by section 9-251(a). Once that notice is given, all terms of this ordinance shall apply to the owner of the converted property. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Sec. 9-252. - Inspections. 
(a)  The owner of each residential rental dwelling unit located in an inspection district shall obtain an initial inspection and subsequent inspections of such residential rental dwelling unit as provided in this section. Inspections under this article shall be conducted by the department that is charged with the enforcement of this article. If the unit to be inspected is occupied at the time of a required inspection, it shall be the duty of the owner to notify the occupants of such inspection. 
(b)  No annual inspection pursuant to this article shall take place more than one time each year, calculated from the date of the first inspection, regardless of whether additional inspections are necessary to achieve compliance. However, nothing in this article shall modify the authority of the director to conduct any other inspections, as allowed under the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and inspections for obtaining a certificate of compliance under this article do not supplant or preclude any other inspection authorized under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(c)  The initial inspection of each residential rental dwelling unit which is subject to inspection under this article, unless the initial inspection is delayed under subsection 9-252(a), shall take place no later than ninety (90) days after the later of the date that the department communicates with owner about scheduling the inspection or the date of the written notice setting the date of inspection. However, should the owner of a residential rental dwelling unit which is subject to inspection under this article, fail to give timely notice as required by subsection 9-251(b) the director shall inspect such unit within a reasonable time of becoming aware of such unit. Each residential rental unit for which a certificate of compliance or 48-month certificate of compliance as described in subsection 9-253(a) has been issued shall be again inspected within thirty (30) days from the expiration of the certificate or earlier revocation of a 48-month certificate of compliance. 
(d)  Prior to expiration of the certificate of compliance or 48-month certificate of compliance, the owner of the residential rental dwelling unit covered thereby shall contact the department and arrange for an inspection of such unit. Should the date scheduled for inspection be after expiration of the current certificate and more than thirty (30) days from the day on which the owner contacted the department to schedule inspection, a 30-day temporary certificate of compliance shall be issued. The inspection shall take place no later than thirty (30) days from the date of application for the inspection. Temporary certificates of compliance shall expire upon the earlier of their stated expiration date or the completion of an inspection which finds all violations satisfactorily remedied. 
(e)  Provided the owner has given the department the notice required by subsection 9-251(b), requests for inspection under subsection 9-252(d) may be made by telephone, email or fax. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0014, 8-13-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0023, 9-24-14 )  
Sec. 9-253. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a)  Unless a residential rental unit in an inspection district is exempted from inspection under this article, or receives a 48-month certificate of compliance, the term of a certificate of compliance issued for any residential rental dwelling unit in an inspection district, shall be for twelve (12) months beginning with the first day of the month next following the month of issuance. 
(b)  If an inspection reveals that a residential rental dwelling unit has no disqualifying violations, the director shall issue a 48-month certificate of compliance for such unit. If an inspection in a multifamily complex reveals that the complex has no disqualifying violations, the director shall issue a 48-month certificate of compliance for such complex. 
(c)  If one or more violations of the Virginia Maintenance Code are found that do not constitute a disqualifying violation, the existence of such non-disqualifying violations shall be noted on the 48-month certificate of compliance together with the date by which such non-disqualifying violations must be remedied, which date shall be determined by the director and which date shall be reasonable. 
(d)  If a follow-up inspection reveals that the owner has failed to remedy the noted violations by the specified date, the director shall issue a notice of violation, revoke the 48-month certificate of compliance and the unit shall then be subject to annual inspections. 
(e)  If a residential rental dwelling unit covered by a 48-month certificate of compliance is found in violation of the Virginia Maintenance Code during the term of such 48-month certificate of compliance, the director may revoke such 48-month certificate of compliance and such unit shall then become subject to annual inspections. 
(f)  If an annual certificate of compliance is issued after the inspection necessitated by the violation of the Virginia Maintenance Code or revocation of the 48-month certificate of compliance, then the residential rental dwelling unit shall again be eligible for a 48-month certificate of compliance only after the annual certificate of compliance has expired and as of the first subsequent annual inspection when no disqualifying violations are found. 
(g)  If inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit reveals one or more disqualifying violations, the director shall not issue a certificate of compliance until the disqualifying violations are satisfactorily remedied. If conditions warrant, however, the director may require that the residential rental dwelling unit be vacated or remain unoccupied until brought into compliance, pursuant to the authority under Code of Virginia, (1950), as amended, section 36-98, et seq., the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Upon compliance the director shall issue a certificate of compliance. 
(h)  Should a residential rental dwelling unit be sold, or the title to the unit be otherwise transferred to another owner during the term of a certificate of compliance or a 48-month certificate of compliance issued for such unit, the term of such certificate shall end as of the last day of the month next following the month of transfer of ownership and the new owner shall contact the department and arrange for inspection of the unit; provided, however, that if the last inspection of the unit pursuant to this article occurred during the calendar year of transfer of ownership, the existing certificate shall not expire until the end of such calendar year. 
(i)  The issuance of a certificate of compliance or a 48-month certificate of compliance shall not be evidence of a lack of any and all building code violations, and shall not prevent the director from conducting follow up inspections regarding building code violations in the residential rental unit. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Sec. 9-254. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this article for the time periods indicated: 
(1)  No inspection of a newly constructed residential rental dwelling unit located in an inspection district shall be required within forty-eight (48) months of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such newly constructed unit. Thereafter said unit shall in all respects become subject to the requirements of this article. 
(2)  All hotels, motels, inns, bed and breakfast establishments, and other similar facilities to the extent occupied by transients shall be exempt from compliance with this article. 
(3)  All residential rental dwelling units owned by or leased by an agency or political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia or of the City of Hampton, shall be exempt from compliance with this article so long as said dwelling units are operated by such entity in carrying out its public purpose and for a period of forty-eight (48) months thereafter following a change in ownership or termination of the leasehold. 
(4)  All residential rental dwelling units regularly inspected pursuant to the authority of an agency or political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia or of the City of Hampton and for a period of forty-eight (48) months thereafter following the cessation of any such regular inspections. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Sec. 9-255. - Violations. 
If the dwelling unit fails to comply with any one or more provisions of the Virginia Maintenance Code, and any amendments to that code, the director shall furnish the owner with a written list of specific violations. Failure to list any violation shall not be deemed a waiver of such violation. Upon the completion of all corrections and repairs, the owner shall arrange a reinspection of the residential rental dwelling unit. Reinspection shall be for the purpose of determining compliance by the owner with the written list of specific violations furnished to the owner by the director. However, if upon reinspection, the director discovers other violations that were not listed on the written list of specific violations previously furnished to the owner, the director shall furnish the owner with a supplemental list of violations and shall provide the owner a reasonable opportunity to correct same. This provision, however, shall not preclude the director from revoking the 48-month certificate of compliance if the subsequently discovered violations are disqualifying violations or if the non- disqualifying violations have not been corrected pursuant to section 9-252 and section 9-253. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Sec. 9-256. - Occupancy. 
(a)  Two hundred and ten (210) days after establishment of any rental inspection district, it shall be unlawful to permit anyone to occupy a residential rental dwelling unit as a tenant within the rental inspection district unless a current certificate of compliance is in force for such unit. 
(b)  Should an owner convert owner-occupied property to residential rental property under section 9-251(g), then one hundred and fifty (150) days after the department gives the owner of the converted property the notice required by section 9-251(a), it shall be unlawful to permit anyone to occupy a residential rental dwelling unit as a tenant within the rental inspection district unless a current certificate of compliance is in force for such unit. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Sec. 9-257. - Multi-family complexes. 
(a)  If a multifamily complex contains more than ten (10) residential rental dwelling units, in the initial and annual inspections, the department shall inspect not less than two units and not more than ten (10) percent of the residential rental dwelling units. 
(b)  If the director determines upon inspection of the dwelling units in accordance with (a) above that there are within one or more of such units or the building housing same, violations of the Virginia Maintenance Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such multifamily complex, the director may inspect as many dwelling units as he deems reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the building code, in which case, the fee shall be based upon a charge per dwelling unit inspected. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Secs. 9-258—9-265. - Reserved.  
Sec. 9-266. - Fees. 
(a)  There shall be no fee for the initial inspection of each dwelling unit. 
(b)  If minor violations are noted and repairs or corrections are deemed necessary by the director, and a reinspection is required, no additional fee shall be charged for the reinspection. 
(c)  If major or disqualifying violations are noted and a re-inspection is required, there shall be a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per dwelling unit for each reinspection until the violation is corrected. No reinspection shall be performed, nor any certificate of compliance be issued, unless and until all fees have been paid. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Sec. 9-267. - Appeals; effects. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any determination or decision of the director made pursuant to this article shall have the right to appeal such determination or decision in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and its amendments. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit, impair, alter or extend the rights and remedies of persons in their relationship of landlord and tenant as such rights and remedies exist under applicable law. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve or exempt any person from otherwise complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, standards and regulations pertaining to the condition of buildings and other structures. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the authority of the director to perform property maintenance inspections in accordance with all other applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 )  
Sec. 9-268. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing to comply with this article or the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be subject to the penalties established in section 9-2 of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person willfully failing to comply with the notice requirements of subsection 9-251(b) of this article shall be subject to a fifty-dollar ($50.00) civil penalty to be assessed for each property for which they fail to provide notice of ownership of a residential rental dwelling unit which is subject to this article. 
(c)  The remedies set forth in (a) of this section are not the exclusive remedies for non-compliance with the requirements of this article. The director shall take such further actions as allowed by applicable law in order to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article including, but not limited to seeking injunctive relief under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1432 and/or obtaining inspection warrants as provided in Code of Virginia, § 36-105C3. 
( Ord. No. 13-0020, 10-23-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0014, 8-13-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0023, 9-24-14 )  
Chapter 9.1 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1462, adopted January 14, 2007, amended Ch. 9.1, in its entirety, to read as set out in §§ 9.1-1—9.1-23. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1474, adopted April 11, 2007, amended Ch. 9.1 to read as herein set out in §§ 9.1-1—9.1-28. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Tax on purchase of cable television service, § 37-345 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local regulation of cable television, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.1:1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9.1-1. - Declaration of findings and purpose. 
(a)  The federal Cable Communications Policy Action of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982 & Supp. V. 1987)) as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104 (1996) as it may, from time to time, be amended, allows the city to grant franchises to construct, operate, and maintain cable systems within the city. 
(b)  Virginia law has been amended to establish a mechanism under which providers can obtain a cable franchise pursuant to either a negotiated cable franchise or an Ordinance Cable Franchise, Va. Code Ann. § 15.2-2108.9, et seq. as amended. 
(c)  This Code is intended to conform to the Virginia laws concerning the granting of either a negotiated cable franchise or an ordinance cable franchise, while preserving the full extent of its police power authority in order to promote competition in the provision of cable services and to protect the public and the public rights-of-way, in a manner consistent with federal and state law. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-2. - Title. 
This chapter shall be entitled "Master Cable Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-3. - Applicability. 
This chapter establishes the general franchise requirements for all cable service providers. The amended Chapter 9.1 shall be applicable to all prior existing cable service franchises to the extent not inconsistent with the specific terms of such franchises, and shall apply to all new franchises for cable services to be awarded by the city on and after its date of adoption. Further, this chapter modifies and amends the City Code in order to establish the criteria and procedures by which a provider of cable services may obtain permission to operate in the city pursuant to either a negotiated cable franchise or an ordinance cable franchise. The city may continue to grant a negotiated cable franchise in accordance with Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and as provided by state law. The ability to obtain a negotiated cable franchise shall be available to any qualified applicant. The ability to obtain an ordinance cable franchise shall be to: 
(a)  A cable provider with previous consent to use the public rights-of-way to provide cable services whose negotiated franchise is up for renewal; 
(b)  A certificated provider of telecommunications services with previous consent to use the public rights-of-way in the city through a franchise. 
(c)  A certificated provider of telecommunications services that lacked previous consent to provide cable service in the city but provided telecommunications services over facilities leased from an entity having previous consent to use of the public rights-of-way in the city through a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-4. - Preservation of police power authority. 
Any rights granted pursuant to this chapter, and pursuant to any franchise authorized hereunder, are subject to the authority of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Operators shall be subject to and comply with all applicable laws enacted by the city pursuant to its police and regulatory powers, to the extent not in conflict with Virginia or federal law. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to waive a right, if any, that any party may have to seek judicial or regulatory review as to the provisions herein or as to action of the parties under applicable federal, state, or local law currently in effect or as may hereinafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-5. - Compliance with laws. 
In performing activities and exercising its rights and obligations under any franchise, the cable operator shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, regulations and policies, including, but not limited to, all laws, ordinances, regulations and policies relating to construction and use of public streets. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-6. - Defined terms. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth below, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended or unless otherwise more specifically defined in another chapter or Code of the City of Hampton. All terms used herein, unless otherwise defined, shall have the same meaning as set for in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq. 
Act means the federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended. 
Applicant means any person that applies for a cable franchise. 
Cable operator means any person or group of persons that (i) provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system or (ii) otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system. cable operator does not include a provider of wireless or direct-to-home satellite transmission service. 
Cable service or service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming or (ii) other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. Cable service does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d). 
Cable system or cable television system or system means any facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, except that such definition shall not include (i) a system that serves fewer than twenty (20) subscribers; (ii) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; (iii) a facility that serves only subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (iv) a facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric systems; (vi) any portion of a system that serves fewer than fifty (50) subscribers in any locality, where such portion is a part of a larger system franchised in an adjacent locality; or (vii) an open video system that complies with § 653 of Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 573. 
Certified provider of telecommunications services means a person holding a certificate issued by the state corporation commission to provide local exchange telephone service. 
City or locality means the City of Hampton, Virginia. 
Ordinance cable franchise means an ordinance granting a franchise to the cable operator pursuant to applicable provisions of the Virginia Act and this chapter. 
Street means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, communications or public utility easement, or other public rights-of-way or public places. 
Subscriber means any person or entity receiving service provided by a franchisee pursuant to the authority of a franchise. 
Transfer means any transaction in which (i) an ownership or other interest in the cable operator is transferred, directly or indirectly, from one (1) person or group of persons to another person or group of persons, so that majority control of the cable operator is transferred; or (ii) the rights and obligations held by the cable operator under the cable franchise granted under this chapter are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons. However, notwithstanding clauses (i) and (ii) of the preceding sentence, a transfer of the cable franchise shall not include (a) transfer of an ownership or other interest in the cable operator to the parent of the cable operator or to another affiliate of the cable operator; (b) transfer of an interest in the cable franchise granted under this chapter or the rights held by the cable operator under the cable franchise granted under this chapter to the parent of the cable operator or to another affiliate of the cable operator; (c) any action that is the result of a merger of the parent of the cable operator; (d) any action that is the result of a merger of another affiliate of the cable operator; or (e) a transfer in trust, by mortgage, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the cable operator in the cable franchise or the system used to provide cable in order to secure indebtedness. 
Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to, programming provided by a television broadcast station. 
Virginia Act means Va. Code Ann. § 15.2-2108.9, et seq. as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-7. - Authority to grant franchises. 
(a)  The council is empowered and authorized to issue, in accordance with the Virginia Act and the City Charter, nonexclusive franchises to install, construct, operate and maintain cable systems in the city's streets, as well as to regulate these activities. 
(b)  The council has determined that the granting of franchises for cable systems in the city will promote the public interest, enhance the health and welfare and safety of the public and stimulate commerce by assuring that: 
(1)  Cable systems are responsive to the needs and interests of the city and its residents; 
(2)  Cable systems provide, and are encouraged to provide, the widest diversity of information and service to the public; and 
(3)  There is an orderly process for the granting or renewal of franchises, and oversight of the services provided pursuant to franchises. 
(c)  No person shall construct, operate, maintain, or continue to operate or maintain a cable system which occupies any part of the city's streets without the authority of a franchise granted by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  No provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed to require the granting of a franchise by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-8. - Procedures to obtain a cable franchise. 
(a)  Franchise required. No person shall construct, operate, maintain, or continue to operate or maintain a cable system which occupies any part of the city's streets or rights-of-way without the authority of either a negotiated franchise pursuant to applicable law or an ordinance cable franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Request to negotiate. In order to obtain either a negotiated franchise or an ordinance cable franchise, an applicant shall first file with the city a request to negotiate the terms and conditions of a negotiated cable franchise under § 15.2-2108.20 of the Virginia Act. 
(c)  Application. As part of the request, an applicant for an initial cable franchise shall file an application with the city in a form and containing such information as is requested by the city and shall be in a form as determined by the city attorney and shall contain, where applicable: 
(1)  A statement as to the proposed franchise area; 
(2)  Resume of prior history of applicant, including the legal, technical, and financial expertise of applicant in the cable television field; 
(3)  List of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each shareholder, if a corporation; 
(4)  List of officers, directors, and managing employees of applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person; 
(5)  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant; 
(6)  A current financial statement of applicant verified by a CPA audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete, and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city (submission of the most recent U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Annual Report Form 10-K prepared by applicant) shall be deemed as a satisfactory compliance of this requirement; and 
(7)  A proposed construction and service schedule, shall include, but not be limited to, the following: a description of the tiers of service, programming to be offered, maintenance capability (number of staff, staffing hours, etc.) policies and practices. 
(d)  Evaluation of application. Applicants may be evaluated according to the following criteria after the city deems the application is complete. A negotiated franchise may then be adopted at the earliest date as permitted by then applicable city requirements. 
(1)  Consideration may be given to an installation plan that would provide the flexibility needed to adjust to new developments, maintenance practices, and services that would be available to the subscriber and the community immediately and in the future. 
(2)  The evidence of financial ability required in the applicant's proposal will be such as to assure the ability to complete the entire system as proposed within a timely manner. The city will also consider the applicant's ability to operate the system and provide the necessary services. 
(3)  Consideration may be given to evidence of the applicant's experience in operating a cable system, where such evidence would show or tend to show or confirm the ability of the applicant to furnish sufficient and dependable service to the potential public and private users. 
(4)  Consideration may be given to the applicant's ability to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. 
(5)  To the extent allowed by applicable law, in making any determination hereunder as to any application, the council may consider the impact on the city's rights-of-way with the addition of the proposed cable system. 
(6)  The city may require the applicant for an initial franchise to reimburse the city for its reasonable costs to review the application, including costs for technical assistance to aid the city in understanding the nature and effect of the application. 
(7)  Prior to the issuance of a negotiated franchise, the council shall hold a public hearing, following reasonable notice to the public, at which every applicant and its proposal shall be examined and the public and all interested parties afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard. Applicant(s) shall bear any publication costs. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-9. - Ordinance cable franchise. 
(a)  An applicant shall request and make itself available to participate in cable franchise negotiations at least forty-five (45) calendar days prior to filing a notice electing an ordinance cable franchise unless the applicant already holds a negotiated cable franchise from the locality or the city elects not to negotiate. 
(b)  If after the initial forty-five (45) days of negotiations, an applicant elects to pursue an ordinance cable franchise, the president or chief executive officer of the applicant shall file notice with the city that it elects to receive an ordinance cable franchise at least thirty (30) days prior to offering cable service within the city. The notice shall be accompanied by a map or a boundary description showing: 
(1)  The initial service area in which the cable operator intends to provide cable service in the locality within the three-year period required for an initial service area; and 
(2)  The area in the city in which the cable operator has its telephone facilities. The map or boundary description of the initial service areas may be amended by the cable operator by filing with the city a new map or boundary description of the initial service area. 
(c)  The city shall adopt an ordinance cable franchise within one hundred twenty (120) days of the applicant filing the notice required in the subsection above. An ordinance adopted under this section that relates to a cable operator's provision of cable service shall apply to such cable operator retroactively to the date on which the cable operator began to offer cable service in the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  Notice of the public hearing for any such ordinance cable franchise shall be advertised once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. The advertisement shall include a statement that a copy of the full text of the ordinance is on file in the office of the clerk of council. All costs of such advertising shall be assessed against the applicant. 
(e)  Unless otherwise prohibited by applicable law, notwithstanding the election of an ordinance cable franchise, applicant shall be required to complete an application and reimburse the city for its reasonable costs of reviewing the application, system designs and grant of franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-10. - Franchise renewals. 
Franchise renewals shall be according to applicable local, state and federal law, including, but not necessarily limited to, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, the Virginia Act and this chapter. Based on receipt of a request for renewal and applicable local, state and federal law, the city shall have the right to establish procedures for review, approve any such renewal request, and require reimbursement of reasonable costs as may be permitted by law. The city and a franchisee, may, by mutual consent, enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of an existing franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-11. - Acceptance and duration of franchise. 
(a)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall become effective in accordance with the terms and conditions approved by the council; provided, that a franchisee has filed with the clerk of council a written instrument addressed to the council accepting the franchise, within the time specified by the city council, and agreeing to comply with all provisions of this chapter and the franchise. 
(b)  The term of a franchise shall be stated in the franchise granted, but shall in no event exceed fifteen (15) years. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-12. - Limitation upon grant. 
(a)  No privilege or exemption is granted or conferred by the issuance of a franchise pursuant to this chapter, except as specifically prescribed in the franchise. 
(b)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is a privilege personal to the original franchisee. The cable operator shall not transfer a franchise granted hereunder without the prior written consent of the city, provided that such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, delayed, or conditioned. The transfer shall be made to a person, group of persons or affiliate that is legally, technically, and financially qualified to operate the cable system and satisfy the franchise obligations. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-13. - Construction of system. 
Each franchise, whether negotiated or granted pursuant to this chapter, shall contain cable system construction requirements and obligations related to build-out and provisions of cable service pursuant to the provisions of the Virginia Act and all other applicable federal and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-14. - Repair of streets and public ways. 
(a)  Any and all streets and public ways in the city which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of a cable system shall be repaired by the franchisee at its expense and to a condition as good as that prevailing before such work. 
(b)  Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of the franchisee to cause any work or other act required by law, this chapter or the franchise to be properly completed or performed, after notice to the franchisee, the council may cause this work or other activity to be completed or performed, in whole or in part, to the satisfaction of the city. Upon so doing, the city shall submit to the franchisee an itemized statement of the cost thereof. The franchisee shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the statement, pay to the city the entire amount thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-15. - Removal or abandonment of franchise property. 
(a)  In the event that the use of any franchise property is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, any franchise property has been installed in a street without complying with the requirements of this chapter and a franchise, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or has expired, the franchisee, at its expense, shall, at the demand of the city, remove promptly from the streets all franchise property other than any which the city may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of any such removal, the franchisee shall promptly restore, to a condition as nearly as possible to its prior condition, the street or other public places in the city from which franchise property has been removed. 
(b)  Franchise property to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in the manner prescribed by the city. Upon the permanent abandonment of any franchise property in place, the franchisee shall deliver to the city executive an instrument transferring to the city the ownership of the franchise property abandoned. It shall be in the council's discretion to accept or reject such transfer of franchise property. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-16. - Changes required by public improvements. 
The franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street, alley, or public place, or remove from any street, alley or public place any franchise property when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway grade, installation of sewers, drains and tracts, or any other type of construction or improvement, including, but not limited to, placement of structures and improvements underground by governmental agencies when acting in a governmental or proprietary capacity; provided, however, that the franchisee shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon franchise property in place, as provided in section 9.1-15. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-17. - System maintenance. 
The franchisee shall: 
(a)  Put, keep and maintain all parts of the communications system in good condition throughout the entire period of the franchise. 
(b)  Render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service to subscribers only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice given to subscribers and the city executive twenty-four (24) hours in advance, and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the communications system. 
(c)  Upon request by the council, make a demonstration satisfactory to the council that the technical quality of the services provided by the communications system meets any and all standards set forth in the franchise and any applicable regulations of the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-18. - Local office required for addressing complaints and customer service. 
(a)  Each franchise shall require that the franchisee maintain a local business office, or agent, which subscribers may telephone during regular business hours, without incurring added message or toll charges, so that complaints regarding the service provided pursuant to a franchise may be promptly reported to the franchisee. Should a subscriber have an unresolved complaint regarding such service, the subscriber shall be entitled to file its complaint with the city executive, who has primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and the procedures for resolving complains, and thereafter to meet jointly with a representative of the city and a representative of the franchisee within thirty (30) days to fully discuss and resolve such matters. The franchisee shall notify each subscriber, at the time of initial subscription or contract for service with the franchisee, of the procedures for reporting and resolving such complaints. 
(b)  All franchises shall obligate the franchisee to comply with city adopted customer service standards to the extent allowed under applicable law, as they may now exist or may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-19. - Additional services; route maps; compliance with national standards. 
(a)  Additional services. As permitted by state and federal law, each franchise may require a franchisee to provide facilities and services to public schools and community colleges within the city, and to fire and police stations and other buildings owned and controlled by the city used for public nonresidential purposes. 
(b)  Public, educational, and governmental access channels. Consistent with applicable federal and state law, all franchises shall obligate the franchisee to non-discriminatory obligations with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channels. 
(c)  System maps and layout. The franchisee shall have, at all times, up-to-date route maps showing the location of the communications system adjacent to the streets. The franchisee shall make all maps available for review by the appropriate city personnel. 
(d)  System construction and equipment standards. The communications system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with standard good engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the National Electrical Safety Code and the FCC's rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-20. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  As permitted by state and federal law, a franchisee may be required to pay to the city a franchise fee, as set forth in the franchise, in compensation for the use of the city's streets pursuant to the franchise, and to reimburse the city for its costs associated with the evaluation of an application and grant of franchise. 
(b)  If a franchise requires payment of a franchise fee, each such franchise shall authorize the city to require an audit, at the franchisee's expense, of the franchisee's financial records and accountings relating to the franchise fee. The franchisee shall furnish the city, upon reasonable request, such data as needed to conduct such audit in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(c)  The city and its representatives shall have the right to inspect the franchisee's financial records during normal business hours to determine whether the franchisee has properly paid all sums due to the city pursuant to the terms of the franchise. 
(d)  Any neglect, omission or refusal of the franchisee to cooperate with the city in reviewing its financial information for the purpose of auditing payment of the franchise fee, or to pay the franchisee fee in full, at the time and in the manner provided in the franchise, which neglect, omission or refusal shall continue for more than thirty (30) days following written notice thereof to the franchisee from the city, shall be grounds for the termination of this franchise, as provided for in section 9.1-23 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-21. - Inspection of property. 
At all reasonable times, the franchisee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the city of all franchise property, together with any appurtenant property of the franchisee situated within or without the city. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-22. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  The franchisee shall pay all damages and penalties which the city may legally be required to pay as a result of granting a franchisee's franchise. 
(b)  The franchisee shall pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned above. The expenses shall include all costs, such as attorney's fees. 
(c)  In order for the city to assert the rights to be indemnified, defended and held harmless, the city must: 
(1)  Promptly notify the grantee of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to such right; 
(2)  Afford the grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of such claim or proceeding; unless, however, the city, in its sole discretion, determines that its interests cannot be represented in good faith by the grantee; and 
(3)  Fully cooperate with the reasonable requests of the grantee, at the grantee's expense, in its participation in, and control, compromise, settlement or resolution, or other disposition of, such claim or proceeding subject to subsection (2) above. 
(d)  The franchisee shall be required to secure and maintain in force, for the duration of the franchise, general comprehensive liability insurance insuring against all damages charged to the city or the franchisee resulting from the installation, development, maintenance or expansion of a franchisee's communications system. The city shall be named in all such policies as a co-insured, or added thereon by endorsement as a named insured. A certificate of insurance for each policy, as well as a copy of each policy, shall be filed with the city clerk. Each certificate shall provide that if the policy it covers shall be canceled by the insurance company, or the franchisee during the term of the policy, thirty (30) days' written notice prior to the effective date of cancellation shall be given to the council. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-23. - Termination of franchise. 
(a)  The city may terminate any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter in the event of the failure, refusal or neglect by the franchisee to do or comply with any material requirement or limitation contained in this chapter or in the franchise. 
(b)  Prior to termination of a franchise, the city shall make written demand that the franchisee do or comply with the requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation of which the franchisee is in default. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the franchisee to comply continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand, a request for termination of the franchise may be placed upon the council meeting agenda. The city shall give written notice to the franchisee, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such council meeting, of its intent to terminate the franchise, and the time and place of the meeting. 
(c)  The council shall consider its intent to terminate the franchise and shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the franchisee to comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter or the franchise was with just cause. 
(d)  If such failure, refusal or neglect by a franchisee to comply was with just cause, the council shall direct the franchisee to comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter or the franchise within such time and in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as are determined by the council. 
(e)  If the council shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by a franchisee to comply was without just cause, then the council may pass its ordinance declaring that the franchise of such franchisee shall be terminated and forfeited, unless there is compliance by the franchisee within such period as the council may establish in such ordinance. 
(f)  The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the city under the franchise, this chapter, or any provision of law. 
(g)  No sanction shall be invoked or franchise revoked where the failure or delay was due to acts of God or events beyond the reasonable control of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-24. - Compliance with laws, rules and regulations. 
Any of the provisions or terms of this chapter may be amended by the council in order to be made consistent with any new or amended law, rule or regulation of governmental authorities with jurisdiction to regulate communications systems. Where amendment to laws, rules or other regulatory standards requires modification of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the modifications necessary to effect compliance with such laws, rules or regulations shall be made within one (1) year of the effective date of such change, or at the time of renewal of the franchise, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-25. - New developments. 
It shall be the policy of the city to liberally amend this chapter, upon application of a franchisee, when necessary to enable the franchisee to take advantage of any developments in the field of communications systems which will afford an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve its subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-26. - Costs of publication. 
The franchisee shall assume any cost of publication of its franchise, as such publication may be required by law, and such is payable upon the franchisee's filing of acceptance of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-27. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of any franchise granted under this chapter, is for any reason held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Sec. 9.1-28. - Confidentiality. 
All information of a financial or personal nature provided to the council for the purposes of this chapter or a franchise shall be used only for the purposes prescribed by this chapter or the franchise and, further, shall not be published or provided orally or in writing to any person, entity, or agency, except as required by law or court order. 
(Ord. No. 1474, 4-11-07)  
Chapter 10 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cemeteries generally, Code of Virginia, § 57-22 et seq.; authority of city to provide and operate cemeteries, § 15.2-1121; authority of city to regulate and inspect cemeteries, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1111. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
Cemetery means any land or structure used or intended to be used for the interment of human remains. The sprinkling of ashes or their burial in a biodegradable container on church grounds or their placement in a columbarium on church property shall not constitute the creation of a cemetery. 
Grave means a below-ground right of interment. 
Interment means all forms of final disposal of human remains including but not limited to, earth burial, mausoleum entombment and niche or columbarium inurnment. The sprinkling of ashes on church grounds shall not constitute interment. 
Memorials, markers or monuments means an item used to identify the deceased and or their place of interment. 
Operator means any agent, contractor, employee, individual, officer of a firm, company, corporation, association, club, institution, or any other person or entity responsible for operating a cemetery. 
Perpetual care means the provision of care, maintenance, administration and embellishment of the cemetery in perpetuity. 
Person means any individual, firm, owner, operator, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, governmental body, municipal corporation, executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, agent, occupant or other legal entity. 
Place of interment means a place within a cemetery that is intended as, marked and maintained as the final resting place for an individual's human remains, including but not limited to grave, mausoleum, and niche or columbarium inurnment. 
(Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-2. - Compliance with chapter. 
In addition to the requirements of the state law and the zoning ordinance of the city, any cemetery established or enlarged wholly or partly within the city and the owner(s) and operator(s) thereof, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 73; Code 1964, § 10-2; Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 ) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate and inspect cemeteries, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1111.  
Sec. 10-3. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 10-4. - Exemptions from chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the enlargement or expansion of cemeteries owned by any recognized church or religious organization, which cemeteries were in existence on September 27, 1961. 
(Ord. No. 73; Code 1964, § 10-1; Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-5. - Administration. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter including the appointment of a superintendent of cemetery code compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-6. - Area requirements. 
Each cemetery established or enlarged wholly or partly within the city shall comprise an area of not less than twenty (20) acres nor more than seventy-five (75) acres. However, in the case of an accessory use to a church, the minimum shall be one (1) acre and the maximum shall be seventy-five (75) acres (exclusive of the acreage containing other improvements and structures including but not limited to buildings and parking lots). The acreage described herein shall be designated and used exclusively as a cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 73, Code 1964, § 10-5; Ord. No. 1049, 6-10-92; Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 09-0022, 12-9-09)  
Sec. 10-7. - Street specifications. 
The streets of any cemetery established or enlarged wholly within the city shall be built to conform to the standards established by the state department of transportation for construction of a secondary road and shall have a paved width of not less than eighteen (18) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-8. - Interments to be in established cemeteries only. 
No person shall inter or cause to be interred the body of any deceased person in any area within the city except in such grounds as are known and used as a cemetery and then only in a space that is identified as a place of interment by the "development plan" or if the cemetery was established prior to the requirement of a "development plan", an interment shall occur in a place of interment as identified by section 10-13. 
(Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-9. - Interment generally. 
(a)  No interment shall be made which shall disturb the remains of the dead or which shall permanently displace or injure any monument or marker. 
(b)  Graves shall be not less than sixty (60) inches deep. Said measurement shall be from the bottom of the grave to the surface. 
(c)  The owner or operator of any cemetery shall not permit the interment of any body on top of or within twelve (12) inches of another place of interment, unless such body is contained within a vault. For the purposes of this section a "vault" means a burial receptacle, which is usually constructed of reinforced concrete, inside which the casket is placed. 
(d)  Exception to subsections (b) or (c), above may be granted in writing by the city manager or his designee prior to interment. 
(Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-10. - Permit required for interment or disinterment in cemeteries not regulated by Virginia Code § 54.1-2310, et seq. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone other than a cemetery company regulated by Virginia Code § 54.1-2310, et seq. and duly authorized to conduct business within the City of Hampton, to offer or sell places of interment or to inter or disinter within the City of Hampton without first obtaining a permit from the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  An applicant for a permit must provide information to the city manager or his designee on a form to be provided. All applications for permits to inter shall be accompanied with a statement of the plan for the perpetual care of the cemetery where the interment is to occur. 
(c)  A fee for this permit shall be set by the city manager or his designee and assessed to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-11. - Record of owners of places of interment. 
The owner or operator of a cemetery established or enlarged wholly or partly within the city shall maintain a permanent record indicating the name and address of each purchaser or owner by any means, including gift, of a place of interment within that cemetery. This record shall also include the date upon which the grave was sold or transferred, and the amount for which it sold. This record shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by any city official or person who has purchased or owns a place of interment. 
(Ord. No. 73; Code 1964, § 10-3; Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-12. - Record of interments. 
(a)  The owner or operator of a cemetery established or enlarged wholly or partly within the city shall maintain a permanent record indicating the name and date of interment of each person interred. Such record shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by any city official or person who has purchased or owns that place of interment. 
(b)  Each interment shall be identified by a permanent marker attached to the outermost container, or if no container, the body of the deceased. Such permanent marker shall include a name and/or number that is noted in the written record required by this section. 
(c)  Said record required by subsection (a), shall be filed with the city manager or his designee on or before June 30, annually. 
(Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-13. - Map of places of interment. 
(a)  The owner or operator of a cemetery established or enlarged wholly or partly within the city shall maintain a map of all places of interment therein including but not limited to graves and a permanent record of the owner(s) thereof and/or person(s) buried therein. 
(b)  Such map shall include the information required by section 10-12 above. This map shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by any city official or person who has purchased or owns a place of interment therein. 
(c)  A copy of said map shall be filed with the city manager or his designee on or before June 30, annually. 
(Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-14. - Places of interment—Markers. 
All interments in a cemetery established or enlarged wholly or partly within the city shall have markers of each interment for identification thereof. The owner or operator of a cemetery shall place a permanent, above ground marker at the bottom left corner of an interment. This identification shall correspond with and be noted in the record required by section 10-12. This requirement of a marker shall be in addition to any marker, monument or memorial that may be placed on a grave by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 73; Code 1964, § 10-6; Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-15. - When interments may be made. 
Interment in a cemetery established or enlarged wholly or partly within the city shall only be made between one (1) hour after sunrise and one (1) hour before sunset. 
(Ord. No. 73; Code 1964, § 10-9; Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 10-16. - Owners/operators responsible for upkeep of cemetery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or any other person who is responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the real estate upon which a cemetery exists to permit the accumulation on such real estate of garbage, trash, rubbish, debris, litter or other refuse or to permit the accumulation of grass, weeds, underbrush or other plant material cut or uncut within twenty (20) feet of any place of interment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or any other person who is responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the real estate upon which a cemetery exists to permit the grass or other plant material within twenty (20) feet of any place of interment to exceed six (6) inches in height. 
(c)  In the event that the owner, operator or any other person responsible shall fail or refuse to remove any accumulation referred to in paragraph (a) the city manager or his designee shall issue a notice to the owner, operator or person responsible to remove such accumulation within seven (7) days. Failure to comply with such notice shall be a violation of this section. 
(d)  In addition, if the notice referred to in (c), above cannot reasonably be given to the owner, operator or person responsible, or when such notice is mailed to their last known address and the owner, operator or person responsible fails to comply with such notice within seven (7) days of the date of such notice, the land may be cleared off, cut or cleaned by the city and the necessary expenses of such clearing, cutting and removal shall be chargeable to the owner, operator or person responsible. The city manager or his designee shall certify such expenses to the city treasurer. Such expenses when so certified, together with a fifty dollar ($50.00) service charge, shall be collected pursuant to the same procedures and in the same manner as real estate taxes and shall be a real estate tax lien upon such real estate. 
(Ord. No. 1322, 2-27-02; Ord. No. 1444, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 10-17—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-0040, adopted Dec. 12, 2012, repealed Art. II, §§ 10-26—10-31, which pertained to permit to establish or enlarge and derived from Ord. No. 73; Code 1964, §§ 10-10—10-15; Ord. No. 1050, adopted June 10, 1992; Ord. No. 1322, adopted Feb. 27, 2002; Ord. No. 1444, adopted Nov. 15, 2006. 
 
Secs. 10-26—10-31. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED CEMETERIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1322, adopted Feb. 27, 2002, added Article III (title) to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 10-32—10-40. - Reserved.  
Chapter 11 - EDUCATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Department of education, Ch. 7. 
Cross reference— Display of flags at public schools, § 2-10; operation of sound trucks near schools, § 22-26; certain provisions governing conduct in public parks and recreation areas also applicable to school grounds, § 26-38. 
State Law reference— Education, Code of Virginia, § 22.1-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Adoption of state law relative to compulsory school attendance. 
Sections 22.1-254 to 22.1-269.1 of the Code of Virginia, providing for the compulsory attendance of children of school age as specified in such sections, shall be in effect and in force within the city. 
(Ord. No. 678, 1-14-81; Code 1964, § 13-1; Ord. No. 1438, 11-15-06)  
Chapter 12 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Elections, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-100 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Precincts and voting places generally. 
The election precincts and voting places in the city shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-2. - Central absentee voter precinct. 
Pursuant to authority vested in the city council by § 24.2-712 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby established a central absentee voter precinct for the city, for the purpose of receiving, counting and recording absentee ballots in all elections, both general and special. The polling place shall be located in the Hampton Roads Convention Center, located at 1610 Coliseum Drive, Hampton, Virginia, 23666. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 1485, 8-15-07)  
Secs. 12-3—12-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PRECINCT BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 12-21. - Wythe precinct. 
The Wythe precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line touches the waters of Hampton Roads; running thence in a northerly direction along the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line to the point of intersection with Hampton Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Hampton Avenue to the point of intersection with Claremont Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Claremont Avenue to the point of intersection with Kecoughtan Road; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Kecoughtan Road to the point of intersection with a branch of a tributary of Indian River between Pochin Place and Little Farms Avenue; meandering thence in a northeasterly direction along such tributary to the point of intersection with Victoria Boulevard; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Victoria Boulevard to the point of intersection with Hampton Roads Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Hampton Roads Avenue to the point of intersection with Chesapeake Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Chesapeake Avenue to the point of intersection with Powhatan Parkway; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Powhatan Parkway to the point of intersection with Maynard Street; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Maynard Street extended to the point of intersection with the waters of Hampton Roads, meandering thence in a westerly direction along the waters of Hampton Roads to the point of intersection with the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-22. - Armstrong precinct. 
The Armstrong precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at a point where the centerline of Maynard Street touches the waters of Hampton Roads; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Maynard Street to the point of intersection with Chesapeake Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Chesapeake Avenue to the point of intersection with Hampton Roads Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Hampton Roads Avenue to the point of intersection with Victoria Boulevard; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Victoria Boulevard to the point of intersection with Ivy Home Road; running thence in a southerly and easterly direction along the centerline of Ivy Home Road extended to the point of intersection with the waters of the Hampton River; meandering thence in a southerly direction along the waters of the Hampton River to the point of intersection with the waters of Hampton Roads; meandering thence in a westerly direction along the waters of Hampton Roads to the point of intersection with the extension of Maynard Street, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-23. - Phenix precinct. 
The Phenix precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point of intersection of the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line and Hampton Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line and meandering in a westerly and southerly direction, and meandering thence in a westerly and northerly direction to the point of intersection with West Pembroke Avenue; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of West Pembroke Avenue to the point of intersection Aberdeen Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Aberdeen Road to the point of intersection with Interstate 664; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Interstate 664 to the point of intersection with an extension of "G" Street; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of "G" Street to the point of intersection with West Pembroke Avenue; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Pembroke Avenue to the point of intersection with Powhatan Parkway; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Powhatan Parkway to the point of intersection with Shell Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Shell Road to the point of intersection with Hampton Roads Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Hampton Roads Avenue to the point of intersection with Victoria Boulevard; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Victoria Boulevard to the point of intersection with a branch of a tributary of Indian River between Pochin Place and Little Farms Avenue; meandering thence in a southeasterly direction along such tributary to the point of intersection with Kecoughtan Road; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Kecoughtan Road to the point of intersection with Claremont Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Claremont Avenue to the point of intersection with Hampton Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Hampton Avenue to the point of intersection with the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-24. - Bassette precinct. 
The Bassette precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of Victoria Boulevard intersects the centerline of Hampton Roads Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Hampton Roads Avenue to the point of intersection with Shell Road; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Shell Road to the point of intersection with Powhatan Parkway; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Powhatan Parkway to the point of intersection with West Pembroke Avenue; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of West Pembroke Avenue to the point of intersection with "G" Street; running thence in a northerly direction along an extension of the centerline of "G" Street to the point of intersection with Interstate 664; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Interstate 664 to the point of intersection with West Queen Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Queen Street to the point of intersection with West Pembroke Avenue; continuing thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Settlers Landing Road to the point of intersection with LaSalle Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of LaSalle Avenue to the point of intersection with Victoria Boulevard; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Victoria Boulevard to the point of intersection with Hampton Roads Avenue, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-25. - Lindsay precinct. 
The Lindsay precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line intersects the centerline of West Pembroke Avenue; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line to the point of intersection with Briarfield Road; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Briarfield Road to the point of intersection with Aberdeen Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Aberdeen Road to the point of intersection with Newmarket Creek; meandering thence in an easterly direction along the waters of Newmarket Creek to the point of intersection with Interstate 664; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Interstate 664 to the point of intersection with Aberdeen Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Aberdeen Road to the point of intersection with West Pembroke Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of West Pembroke Avenue to the point of intersection with the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-26. - Mallory precinct. 
The Mallory precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of Martha Lee Drive intersects the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard; running thence in a easterly direction along West Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with Pennwood Drive; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Pennwood Drive to the point of intersection with West Weaver Road; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Weaver Road to the point of intersection with Aberdeen Road; thence running in a southerly direction along the centerline of Aberdeen Road to the point of intersection with Briarfield Road; running thence in a westerly direction then southwesterly along the centerline of Briarfield Road to the point of intersection with the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line to the point of intersection with West Weaver Road; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Weaver Road to the point of intersection with Martha Lee Drive; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Martha Lee Drive to the point of intersection with West Mercury Boulevard, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-27. - Aberdeen precinct. 
The Aberdeen precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of Aberdeen Road intersects Newmarket Creek; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Aberdeen Road to the point of intersection with West Weaver Road; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of West Weaver Road to the point of intersection with Pennwood Drive; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Pennwood Drive to the point of intersection with Butternut Drive; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Butternut Drive to the point of intersection with Gumwood Drive; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Gumwood Drive to the point of intersection with West Mercury Boulevard; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with North Armistead Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of North Armistead Avenue to the point of intersection with LaSalle Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of LaSalle Avenue to the point of intersection with Interstate 64; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Interstate 64 to the point of intersection with Newmarket Creek; meandering thence in a westerly direction along the waters of Newmarket Creek to the point of intersection with Aberdeen Road, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-28. - Kraft precinct. 
The Kraft precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at a point where the centerline of Big Bethel Road intersects with the centerline of Todds Lane; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Big Bethel Road to the point of intersection with Interstate 64; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Interstate 64 to the point of intersection with Cunningham Drive; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Cunningham Drive to the point of intersection with an extension of Lake One Drive; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Lake One Drive to the point of intersection with Lynnhaven Lake; meandering thence southerly and westerly along the shoreline of Lynnhaven Lake to the point of intersection with the southwestern corner of Lynnhaven Lake; running thence in a southerly direction to an extension of Lynnhaven Lake to the point of intersection with Todds Lane; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Todds Lane to the point of intersection with Old Mallory Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Old Mallory Road to the point of intersection with Berkshire Terrace; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Berkshire Terrace to the point of intersection with Deep Run Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Deep Run Road to the point of intersection with Blue Ridge Hunt Road; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Blue Ridge Hunt Road to the point of intersection with Middleburg Hunt Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Middleburg Hunt Road to the point of intersection with Concord Drive; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Concord Drive to the point of intersection with Springdale Way; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Springdale Way to the point of intersection with Berkshire Terrace; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Berkshire Terrace to the point of intersection with Winchester Drive; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Winchester Drive to the point of intersection with Todds Lane; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Todds Lane to the point of intersection with Big Bethel Road, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-29. - Tucker-Capps precinct. 
The Tucker-Capps precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of West Weaver Road intersects the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line; meandering thence in a westerly and northerly direction along the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line to the point of intersection with Todds Lane; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Todds Lane to the point of intersection with Big Bethel Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Big Bethel Road to the point of intersection with Roberta Drive; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Roberta Drive to the point of intersection with Martha Lee Drive; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Martha Lee Drive to the point of intersection with West Weaver Road; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of West Weaver Road to the point of intersection with the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-30. - Bethel precinct. 
The Bethel precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line intersects Todds Lane; meandering thence in a northerly direction along the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line to the point of intersection with Hampton Roads Center Parkway; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Hampton Roads Center Parkway to the point where the same intersects with Big Bethel Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Big Bethel Road to the point of intersection with Todds Lane; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Todds Lane to the point of intersection with the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-31. - Cooper precinct. 
The Cooper precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard intersects Interstate 64; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Interstate 64 to the point of intersection with Magruder Boulevard; running thence in a northerly direction along Magruder Boulevard to the point of intersection with Nettles Lane; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Nettles Lane to the point of intersection with North Armistead Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of North Armistead Avenue to the point of intersection with West Mercury Boulevard; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with Interstate 64, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-32. - Burbank precinct. 
The Burbank precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of North Armistead Avenue intersects West Mercury Boulevard; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of North Armistead Avenue to the point of intersection with Tide Mill Creek; meandering thence in a northeasterly direction along the waters of Tide Mill Creek to the point of intersection with the unnamed creek; running thence in a westerly direction to the western boundary of Langley Air Force Base; meandering thence along the western boundary of Langley Air Force Base to the point of intersection with North Armistead Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of North Armistead Avenue to the point of intersection with Commander Shepard Boulevard; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Commander Shepard Boulevard to the point of intersection with Magruder Boulevard; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Magruder Boulevard to the point of intersection with the Hampton City-York County Limits Line; meandering thence in a northeasterly direction along the Hampton City-York County Limits Line to the point of intersection with the Poquoson City Limits Line; meandering thence in an easterly direction along the Poquoson City Limits Line to a point of intersection with the Northwest Branch of the Back River; meandering thence in an easterly direction along the waters of Northwest Branch of the Back River to the point of intersection with the Southwest Branch of the Back River; meandering thence in a southerly direction along the waters of Southwest Branch of the Back River to the point of intersection with an extension of Eagle Point Road; running thence in a southeasterly direction along a straight line from such point to the point of intersection with the terminus of Seldondale Drive, running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Seldondale Drive to the point of intersection with West Mercury Boulevard; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with North Armistead Avenue, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-33. - Tyler precinct. 
The Tyler precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard intersects Seldondale Drive; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Seldondale Drive to its terminus; running thence in a northwesterly direction along a straight line from such point to the point of intersection with an extension of Eagle Point Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Eagle Point Road to the point of intersection with West Gilbert Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Gilbert Street to the point of intersection with Westover Street; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Westover Street to the point of intersection with Keith Road; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Keith Road to the point of intersection with West Gilbert Street; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of West Gilbert Street to the point of intersection with Roane Drive; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Roane Drive to the point of intersection with Salem Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Salem Street to the point of intersection with West Mercury Boulevard; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with Seldondale Drive, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-34. - Thomas precinct. 
The Thomas precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of Interstate 664 intersects Interstate 64; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Interstate 64 to the point of intersection with LaSalle Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of LaSalle Avenue to the point of intersection with North Armistead Avenue; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of North Armistead Avenue to the point of intersection with West Mercury Boulevard; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with North King Street; and continuing in an easterly direction along the centerline of East Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with the Hampton River; meandering thence in a southerly direction along the waters of Hampton River to the point of intersection with Brights Creek; meandering thence in a westerly and southerly direction along the waters of Brights Creek to the point of intersection with the C & 0 Railroad tracks; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the C & 0 Railroad tracks to the point of intersection with West Queen Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of West Queen Street to the point of intersection with Interstate 664; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Interstate 664 to the point of intersection with Interstate 64, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 09-0008, 6-10-09)  
Sec. 12-35. - Booker precinct. 
The Booker precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of Pine Grove Terrace intersects the centerline of Fox Hill Road; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Pine Grove Terrace to the point of intersection with Cedar Drive; running thence in an northeasterly direction along the centerline of Cedar Drive to the point of intersection with Walnut Street; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Walnut Street to the point of intersection with East Little Back River Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of East Little Back River Road to the point of intersection with Harris Creek Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Harris Creek Road to the point of intersection with Fox Hill Road; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Fox Hill Road to the point of intersection with Pine Grove Terrace, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-36. - Phillips precinct. 
The Phillips precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point of intersection of Fox Hill Road and Harris Creek Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Harris Creek Road to the point of intersection with East Little Back River Road; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of East Little Back River Road to the point of intersection with Shelby Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Shelby Avenue extended to the point of intersection with the waters of the Southwest Branch of the Back River; and continuing in a northerly direction along the waters of Southwest Branch of the Back River to the point of intersection with Back River; meandering thence in an easterly direction along Back River to the point of intersection with the mouth of Harris River; meandering thence in a southerly direction along waters of Harris River to the point of intersection with a drainage ditch; meandering thence in a southerly direction along the drainage ditch to the point of intersection with Fox Hill Road; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Fox Hill Road to the point of intersection with Harris Creek Road, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-37. - Kecoughtan precinct. 
The Kecoughtan precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of Fox Hill Road intersects the centerline of Woodland Road; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Fox Hill Road to the point of intersection with Old Buckroe Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Old Buckroe Road to the point of intersection with Andrews Boulevard; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Andrews Boulevard to the point of intersection with Grimes Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Grimes Road to the point of intersection with Hastings Drive; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Hastings Drive to the point of intersection with Woodland Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Woodland Road to the point of intersection with Fox Hill Road, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-38. - Asbury precinct. 
The Asbury precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of Old Buckroe Road intersects the waters of the Salt Ponds; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Old Buckroe Road to the point of intersection with Boykin Lane; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Boykin Lane to the point of intersection with Andrews Boulevard; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Andrews Boulevard to the point of intersection with Old Buckroe Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Old Buckroe Road to the point of intersection with Fox Hill Road and the Harris River Creek; meandering thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Harris River Creek to the point of intersection with Harris River; meandering thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Harris River to the point of intersection with the Back River; meandering thence in an easterly direction along the waters of the Back River to the point of intersection with the Chesapeake Bay; meandering thence in a southerly direction along the waters of the Chesapeake Bay to the point of intersection with the waters of the Salt Ponds; meandering thence in a westerly and southwesterly direction along the waters of the Salt Ponds to the point of intersection with Old Buckroe Road, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-39. - Bryan precinct. 
The Bryan precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of West Sherwood Avenue intersects with North Mallory Street; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of West Sherwood Avenue to the point of intersection with Old Buckroe Road; running thence along the centerline of Old Buckroe Road in a northeasterly direction to the point of intersection with East Pembroke Avenue; thence running in an easterly direction along the centerline of East Pembroke Avenue to the point of intersection with Atlantic Avenue; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Atlantic Avenue to the point of intersection with Old Buckroe Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Old Buckroe Road to the point of intersection with the waters of the Salt Ponds; meandering thence in an easterly direction then northeasterly along the centerline of the waters of the Salt Ponds to the point of intersection with the Chesapeake Bay; running thence in a southerly direction then southwesterly turning northwest along the waters of the Chesapeake Bay to the point of intersection with Mill Creek; meandering thence in a northeasterly direction along the waters of Mill Creek to the point of intersection with an extension of Weber Lane; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Weber Lane to the point of intersection with Perry Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Perry Street to the point of intersection with East Sherwood Avenue; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of East Sherwood Avenue to the point of intersection with West Sherwood Avenue and North Mallory Street, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-40. - Smith precinct. 
The Smith precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of East Mercury Boulevard intersects the Hampton River; meandering thence in a northeasterly direction along the waters of the Hampton River to the point of intersection with the drainage ditch between Elizabeth Lake Drive and Woodside Drive; meandering thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of such drainage ditch to the point of intersection with Woodland Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Woodland Road to the point of intersection with Hastings Drive; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Hastings Drive to the point of intersection with Grimes Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Grimes Road to the point of intersection with East Pembroke Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of East Pembroke Avenue to the point of intersection with Old Buckroe Road; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Old Buckroe Road to the point of intersection with West Sherwood Avenue; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of West Sherwood Avenue to the point of intersection with North Mallory Street; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of North Mallory Street to the point of intersection with East Mercury Boulevard; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of East Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with the Hampton River, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-41. - Phoebus precinct. 
The Phoebus precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point of intersection of the waters of Hampton Roads and the waters of Johns Creek; meandering thence in a northeasterly direction along the waters of Johns Creek to the point of intersection with South Mallory Street; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of South Mallory Street to the point of intersection with North Mallory Street; continuing thence along the centerline of North Mallory Street in a northeasterly direction to the point of intersection with East Sherwood Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of East Sherwood Avenue to the point of intersection with Perry Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Perry Street to the point of intersection with Weber Lane; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Weber Lane extended to the point of intersection with the waters of Mill Creek; meandering in a southwesterly direction along the waters of Mill Creek to its intersection with the waters of the Chesapeake Bay; meandering thence in a westerly direction along the waters of the Chesapeake Bay to its intersection with the waters of Hampton Roads, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-42. - Main Library precinct. 
The Main Library precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point of intersection of Kecoughtan Road and Ivy Home Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Kecoughtan Road to the point of intersection with Chapel Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Chapel Street to the point of intersection with South Armistead Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of South Armistead Avenue to the point of intersection with West Queen Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Queen Street to the point of intersection with North King Street; continuing in an easterly direction along the centerline of East Queen Street to the point of intersection with Eaton Street; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Eaton Street to the point of intersection with East Pembroke Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of East Pembroke Avenue to the point of intersection with the waters of Hampton River; meandering thence in a southerly direction along the waters of the Hampton River to the point of intersection with an extension of Ivy Home Road; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Ivy Home Road to the point of intersection with Kecoughtan Road, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-43. - Langley precinct. 
The Langley precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of Salem Street and West Mercury Boulevard; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with North King Street; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of North King Street to the point of intersection with Old Fox Hill Road; running thence in an northeasterly direction along the centerline of Old Fox Hill Road to the point of intersection with Fox Hill Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Fox Hill Road to the point of intersection with Pine Grove Terrace; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Pine Grove Terrace to the point of intersection with Cedar Drive; running thence in an northeasterly direction along the centerline of Cedar Drive, to the point of intersection with Walnut Street; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Walnut Street to the point of intersection with East Little Back River Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of East Little Back River Road to the point of intersection with Shelby Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along an extension of the centerline of Shelby Avenue to the point of intersection with the waters of Back River; and continuing in a northerly direction to the waters of the Southwest Branch of the Back River; meandering thence in a southwesterly direction along the waters of the Southwest Branch of the Back River to the point of intersection with an extension of Eagle Point Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Eagle Point Road to the point of intersection with West Gilbert Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Gilbert Street to the point of intersection with Westover Street; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Westover Street to the point of intersection with Keith Road; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Keith Road to the point of intersection with West Gilbert Street; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of West Gilbert Street to the point of intersection with Roane Drive; running thence in a southerly and westerly direction along the centerline of Roane Drive to the point of intersection with Salem Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Salem Street to the point of intersection with West Mercury Boulevard, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-44. - Syms precinct. 
The Syms precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard and North King Street; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of North King Street to the point of intersection with Old Fox Hill Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Old Fox Hill Road to the point of intersection with Fox Hill Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Fox Hill Road to the point of intersection with Woodland Road; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Woodland Road to the point of intersection with a drainage ditch between Elizabeth Lake Drive and Woodside Drive; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of such drainage ditch to the point of intersection with the waters of Hampton River; meandering thence in a southwesterly direction along the waters of the Hampton River to the point of intersection with East Mercury Boulevard; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of East Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with North King Street, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-45. - City Hall precinct. 
The City Hall precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of Kecoughtan Road and Ivy Home Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Kecoughtan Road to the point of intersection with Chapel Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Chapel Street to the point of intersection with South Armistead Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of South Armistead Avenue to the point of intersection with West Queen Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Queen Street to the point of intersection with North King Street; continuing in an easterly direction along the centerline of East Queen Street to the point of intersection with Eaton Street; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Eaton Street to the point of intersection with East Pembroke Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of East Pembroke Avenue to the point of intersection with the waters of Hampton River; meandering thence in a northerly direction along the waters of Hampton River to the point of intersection with the waters of Brights Creek; meandering thence in a southwesterly direction along the waters of Brights Creek to the point of intersection with the C & O Railroad tracks; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of the C & O Railroad tracks to the point of intersection with West Queen Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Queen Street to the point of intersection with West Pembroke Avenue; continuing thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Settlers Landing Road to the point of intersection with LaSalle Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of LaSalle Avenue to the point of intersection with Victoria Boulevard; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Victoria Boulevard to the point of intersection with Ivy Home Road; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Ivy Home Road to the point of intersection with Kecoughtan Road, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-46. - Machen precinct. 
The Machen precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of North Armistead Avenue and Tide Mill Creek; meandering thence in an easterly direction along the waters of Tide Mill Creek to the point of intersection with the unnamed creek that marks the western boundary of Langley Air Force Base; meandering thence in a northerly direction along the waters of said creek to the point of intersection with Commander Shepard Boulevard; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Commander Shepard Boulevard to the point of intersection with Magruder Boulevard; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Magruder Boulevard to the point of intersection with the Hampton City-York County Limits Line; running thence in a westerly direction along the Hampton City-York County Limits Line to the point of intersection with the waters of the Big Bethel Reservoir; running thence in a westerly direction along the waters of the Big Bethel Reservoir to the point of intersection with Big Bethel Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Big Bethel Road to the point of intersection with Interstate 64; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Interstate 64 to the point of intersection with Magruder Boulevard; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Magruder Boulevard to the point of intersection with Nettles Lane; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Nettles Lane to the point of intersection with North Armistead Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of North Armistead Avenue to the point of intersection with Tide Mill Creek, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-47. - Forrest precinct. 
The Forrest precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of Martha Lee Drive intersects West Mercury Boulevard; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard to its intersection with Pennwood Drive; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Pennwood Drive to the point of intersection with Butternut Drive; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Butternut Drive to the point of intersection with Gumwood Drive; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Gumwood Drive to the point of intersection with West Mercury Boulevard; running thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with Interstate 64; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Interstate 64 to the point of intersection with Cunningham Drive; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Cunningham Drive to the point of intersection with Lake One Drive; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Lake One Drive to the point of intersection with Lynnhaven Lake; meandering thence southerly and westerly along the shoreline of Lynnhaven Lake to the point of intersection with an unnamed creek which originates at the southwestern corner of Lynnhaven Lake; meandering thence in a southeasterly direction along said creek to the point of intersection with Todds Lane; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Todds Lane to the point of intersection with Old Mallory Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Old Mallory Road to the point of intersection with Berkshire Terrace; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Berkshire Terrace to the point of intersection with Deep Run Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Deep Run Road to the point of intersection with Blue Ridge Hunt Road; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Blue Ridge Hunt Road to the point of intersection with Middleburg Hunt Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Middleburg Hunt Road to the point of intersection with Concord Drive; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Concord Drive to the point of intersection with Springdale Way; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Springdale Way to the point of intersection with Berkshire Terrace; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Berkshire Terrace to the point of intersection with Winchester Drive; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Winchester Drive to the point of intersection with Todds Lane; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Todds Lane to the point of intersection with Big Bethel Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Big Bethel Road to the point of intersection with Roberta Drive; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Roberta Drive to the point of intersection with Martha Lee Drive; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Martha Lee Drive to the point of intersection with West Mercury Boulevard, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-48. - Jones precinct. 
The Jones precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the centerline of Grimes Road intersects with Andrews Boulevard; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Andrews Boulevard to the point of intersection with Boykin Lane; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Boykin Lane to the point of intersection with Old Buckroe Road; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Old Buckroe Road to the point of intersection with Atlantic Avenue; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Atlantic Avenue to the point of intersection with East Pembroke Avenue; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of East Pembroke Avenue to the point of intersection with Grimes Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Grimes Road to the point of intersection with Andrews Boulevard, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-49. - East Hampton precinct. 
The East Hampton precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point of intersection of the waters of Hampton Roads and the waters of the Johns Creek; meandering thence in a westerly direction along the waters of Hampton Roads to the point of intersection with the Hampton River; meandering thence in a northerly direction along the water of the Hampton River to the point of intersection with East Mercury Boulevard; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of East Mercury Boulevard to the point of intersection with North Mallory Street; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of North Mallory Street to the point of intersection with South Mallory Street; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of South Mallory Street to the point of intersection with the waters of the Johns Creek, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-50. - Sandy Bottom precinct. 
The Sandy Bottom Precinct shall be composed of all the territory situate within the following described boundaries: Commencing at the point where the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line intersects with Hampton Roads Center Parkway; meandering thence in a northerly direction along the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line to the point of intersection with the waters of the Big Bethel Reservoir; running thence in an easterly direction along the waters of the Big Bethel Reservoir to the point where the same intersects with Big Bethel Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Big Bethel Road to the point of intersection with Hampton Roads Center Parkway; running thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Hampton Roads Center Parkway to the point of intersection with the Hampton-Newport News City Limits Line, the point or place of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 12-51—12-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRECINCT VOTING PLACES 
 
Sec. 12-56. - Wythe precinct. 
The voting place in the Wythe precinct shall be located at the Senior Citizens Center, 3501 Kecoughtan Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0013, 12-14-11)  
Sec. 12-57. - Armstrong precinct. 
The voting place in the Armstrong precinct shall be located at Armstrong School, 3401 Matoaka Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-58. - Phenix precinct. 
The voting place in the Phenix precinct shall be located at the Kenny Wallace Resource Center, 2315 Victoria Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-59. - Bassette precinct. 
The voting place in the Bassette precinct shall be located at A.W.E. Bassette School, 671 Bell Street. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-60. - Lindsay precinct. 
The voting place in the Lindsay precinct shall be located at the C. Alton Lindsay Middle School, 1636 Briarfield Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-61. - Mallory precinct. 
The voting place in the Mallory precinct shall be located at Francis Mallory School, 331 Big Bethel Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-62. - Aberdeen precinct. 
The voting place in the Aberdeen precinct shall be located at Aberdeen School, 424 Aberdeen Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-63. - Kraft precinct. 
The voting place in the Kraft precinct shall be located at Christopher Kraft School, 600 Concord Drive. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-64. - Tucker-Capps precinct. 
The voting place in the Tucker-Capps precinct shall be located at Tucker-Capps School, 106 Wellington Drive. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-65. - Bethel precinct. 
The voting place in the Bethel precinct shall be located at Bethel High School, 1067 Big Bethel Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-66. - Cooper precinct. 
The voting place in the Cooper precinct shall be located at William M. Cooper School, 200 Marcella Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-67. - Burbank precinct. 
The voting place in the Burbank precinct shall be located at Paul Burbank School, 40 Tide Mill Lane. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-68. - Tyler precinct. 
The voting place in the Tyler precinct shall be located at John Tyler School, 57 Salina Street. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-69. - Thomas precinct. 
The voting place in the Thomas precinct shall be located at the Y. H. Thomas Recreational Facility, 1300 Thomas Street. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 09-0009, 6-10-09)  
Sec. 12-70. - Booker precinct. 
The voting place in the Booker precinct shall be located at Booker School, 160 Apollo Drive. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-71. - Phillips precinct. 
The voting place in the Phillips precinct shall be located at Phillips School, 703 LeMaster Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-72. - Kecoughtan precinct. 
The voting place in the Kecoughtan precinct shall be located at Kecoughtan High School, 522 Woodland Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-73. - Asbury precinct. 
The voting place in the Asbury precinct shall be located at Francis Asbury School, 140 Beach Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-74. - Bryan precinct. 
The voting place in the Bryan precinct shall be located at Jane H. Bryan School, 1021 North Mallory Street. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-75. - Smith precinct. 
The voting place in the Smith precinct shall be located at Captain John Smith School, 379 Woodland Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-76. - Phoebus precinct. 
The voting place in the Phoebus precinct shall be located at the Phoebus Branch Library, 1 South Mallory Street. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-77. - Main Library precinct. 
The voting place in the Main Library precinct shall be located at the Hampton Public Library, 4207 Victoria Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-78. - Langley precinct. 
The voting place in the Langley precinct shall be located at Samuel P. Langley School, 16 Rockwell Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-79. - Syms precinct. 
The voting place in the Syms precinct shall be located at Benjamin Syms Middle School, 170 Fox Hill Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-80. - City Hall precinct. 
The voting place in the City Hall precinct shall be located at Hampton City Hall, 22 Lincoln Street. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-81. - Machen precinct. 
The voting place in the Machen precinct shall be located in Luther W. Machen School, 20 Sacramento Drive. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-82. - Forrest precinct. 
The voting place in the Forrest precinct shall be located in Alfred S. Forrest School, 1406 Todds Lane. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-83. - Jones precinct. 
The voting place in the Jones precinct shall be located in Jones Magnet Middle School, 1819 Nickerson Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-84. - East Hampton precinct. 
The voting place in the East Hampton precinct shall be located at Phoebus High School, 100 Ireland Street. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0002 , 1-13-16)  
Sec. 12-85. - Sandy Bottom precinct. 
The voting place in the Sandy Bottom precinct shall be located at the Nature Center, Sandy Bottom Nature Park, 1255 Big Bethel Road. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 12-86—12-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SCHOOL BOARD 
 
Sec. 12-91. - Voting districts for school board members. 
There shall be seven (7) members of the school board. All members shall be elected at large by all the voters of the City of Hampton and shall represent all areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1320, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 11-0012, 11-9-11; Ord. No. 14-0024, 10-22-14 )  
Sec. 12-92. - Election and terms of members of the school board. 
There shall be a general election of the school board every two (2) years, held on the first Tuesday of May, with candidates receiving the highest number of votes for the seats being declared elected and with [the] terms of school board members elected at such elections beginning July 1, following their election and continuing for four (4) years. 
The school board shall be a continuing body and no measure pending before it shall abate or be discontinued by reason of the expiration of the term of office or the removal of the members of the body or any of them. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 14-0024, 10-22-14 )  
Sec. 12-93. - Nomination of candidates for members of the school board. 
Candidates for member of the school board shall be qualified voters and residents of the city. Candidates shall file their notice of candidacy and be nominated only by petition in the manner prescribed by law for non-party candidates and not by caucus, primary, convention or other party-affiliated proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 14-0024, 10-22-14 )  
Sec. 12-94. - Party designation and ballots in school board elections. 
The ballot used in the election of members of the school board shall be without any distinguishing party name, mark or symbol. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 12-95. - Selection of chairperson. 
The chairperson of the elected school board shall be selected by the members of the school board from the members of the school board at the board's annual meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1319, 12-13-01; Ord. No. 1447, 11-15-06)  
Chapter 13.1 - LAND DISTURBING OPERATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY AND EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13.1-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. Except as otherwise defined herein, the definitions set forth in chapter 33.2 of the city stormwater management ordinance shall control the meaning of any terms or phrases used herein. 
Agent. The community development department of the city. 
Agreement in lieu of a plan. A contract between the city and the owner which specifies conservation measures that must be implemented in the construction and demolition of a single-family residence and supplemental structures thereto. This agreement may be submitted in lieu of a formal site plan. 
Best management practice or BMP. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation District. Any land designated by the Hampton City Council pursuant to Part III of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Designation and Management Regulations, 9VAC25-830-70, et seq., and Virginia Code, § 62.1-44.15:72 of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, and pursuant to chapter 9, article II of the city zoning ordinance. A Chesapeake Bay Preservation District shall consist of a resource protection area or intensely developed area, and resource management area. 
Clearing. Any activity which removes the vegetative ground cover, including but not limited to, the removal of root mat or topsoil. 
Control measure. Any best management practice or stormwater facility or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
Department. The department of public works of the city. 
Development. Land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation, or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
Director. The director of the department of public works or his designee. 
Excavating. Any digging, scooping, or other methods of removing earth materials. 
Filling. Any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
Grading. Any excavating, filling, leveling, or sloping of earth materials, or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated, filled, leveled, or sloped condition. 
Hazardous waste. A solid waste or combination of solid waste which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Land disturbance or land-disturbing activity. A man-made change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including clearing, grading, or excavation, except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in section 13.1-3 of this chapter. 
Natural channel design concepts. The utilization of engineering analysis and fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows larger flows to access its bankfull bench and its floodplain. 
Owner. The person vested with fee ownership, dominion, or title of property, i.e., the proprietor. This term also may include a tenant if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property and any representative of the owner or tenant, including a developer. 
Peak flow rate. The maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a particular location. 
Permit. A permit issued by the city for the purpose of engaging in a land-disturbing activity as controlled by this chapter. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town, or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Representative. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, or corporation authorized to act on behalf of the owner. 
Responsible land disturber. An individual holding a certificate of competence issued by the Department of Environmental Quality who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity in accordance with the approved plan. The responsible land disturber may be the owner, applicant, permittee, designer, superintendent, project manager, contractor, or any other project or development team member. The responsible land disturber must be designated on the plan or permit as a prerequisite for plan approval by the city. 
Runoff volume. The volume of water than runs off the land development project from a prescribed storm event. 
Stormwater. Precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan or SWPPP. A document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that reasonably may be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this ordinance. In addition, the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
Subdivision. The division of any parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for immediate or future transfer of ownership or building development. The term shall be construed to include all changes in lot lines, the creation of new lots involving any division of an existing lot or lots, or if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land, and when appropriate to context, the process of subdividing or the territory subdivided. 
Transporting. Any moving of earth materials from one place to another, other than such movement incidental to grading, when such movement results in destroying the vegetative ground cover, either by tracking or the buildup of earth materials to the extent that erosion and sedimentation will result from the soil or earth materials over which such transporting occurs. 
Water quality volume. The volume equal to the first one-half inch of runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project. 
(Code 1964, § 16.1-2; Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560.  
Sec. 13.1-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, property, and the public health, safety, and welfare and to conserve land, water, air, and other natural resources of the city by establishing requirements for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from land-disturbing activities and by establishing procedures whereby such requirements shall be administered and enforced. 
(Code 1964, § 16.1-1; Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-3. - Exemptions from chapter. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the following activities are exempt unless otherwise required by federal law: 
(1)  Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, and maintenance work; 
(2)  Individual service connections; 
(3)  Installation, maintenance, or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard surfaced road, street, or sidewalk, provided the land-disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street, or sidewalk that is hard surfaced; 
(4)  Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land-disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system; 
(5)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted pursuant to Code of Virginia, Title 45.1; 
(6)  Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the board in regulation, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1100, et seq.) or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1163(B); 
(7)  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities, and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company; 
(8)  Agricultural engineering operations, including but not limited to the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the provisions of the Dam Safety Act (Code of Virginia, § 10.1-604, et seq.), ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; 
(9)  Disturbed land areas of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size or less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of land area within a Chesapeake Bay preservation district as set forth in the city zoning ordinance; 
(10)  Installation of fence and sign posts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; 
(11)  Shoreline erosion control projects on tidal waters when all of the land-disturbing activities are within the regulatory authority of and approved by local wetlands boards, the marine resources commission, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers; however, any associated land that is disturbed outside of this exempted area shall remain subject to this article and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto; and 
(12)  Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property, and emergency repairs; however, if the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of the VESCP authority. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1098, 8-11-93; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 1493, 10-10-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0003, 1-14-15 ) 
State Law reference— Above activities excluded from definition of "land-disturbing activity," Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560.  
Sec. 13.1-4. - Relationship of chapter to other ordinances and regulations. 
This chapter is intended to be adjunct to the stormwater ordinance, subdivision ordinance, the zoning ordinance, the building code, and other city regulations governing the development of land and the removal of soil. Whenever this chapter imposes more restrictive standards than those of other city ordinances or regulations, the requirements of this chapter shall have precedence. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT AND INSPECTION PROCESS 
 
Sec. 13.1-5. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any land-disturbing activity, not exempt pursuant to section 13.1-3 without first obtaining a land-disturbing permit from the department in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No permit to begin any work that requires a permit covered by this chapter shall be issued and upon completion of the construction, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued if the property is the subject of a notice of violation or the owner of said property owns any other property in the City of Hampton that is the subject of a notice of violation under this chapter, chapter 33.2, chapter 41.1, or the zoning ordinance, which remains pending at the time of application. Nor shall any such permit required by this chapter be issued until all delinquent real estate taxes and all erosion and sediment control and stormwater management fines owed to the city, which have been properly assessed against the subject property, have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Code 1964, § 16.1-2; Ord. No. 1357, 9-10-03; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 1493, 10-10-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-6. - Permit application and fee. 
(a)  Application for a permit required by section 13.1-5 shall be submitted to the agent . Such application shall be made in the name of the owner of the property on which the activity is to take place and shall be signed by such owner or his representative. Three (3) copies of a land-disturbing plan provided pursuant to sections 13.1-11 or 13.1-12 and a stormwater management plan provided pursuant to sections 13.1-11, 13.1-12, or 33.2-11 shall be submitted with the application. 
(b)  Applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee according to the following schedule. Fees are based on the acreage associated with the disturbed area and shall be levied to cover the costs of processing and investigating the application for and the inspection of the land-disturbing activity as defined herein. 
Area of disturbance 	City land disturbance fee 	State construction general permit fee (under stormwater management ordinance) 	Total permit fee 
Less than 10,000 square feet outside of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation District: 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
Less than 2,500 square feet within the Chesapeake Bay Preservation District: 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
2,500 square feet—But less than 1.0 acre within the Chesapeake Bay Preservation District: 	$300.00 	$0.00 	$300.00 
Single family residential structure separately built—10,000 square feet but less than 5 acres: 	$209.00 	$0.00 	$209.00 
10,000 square feet—But less than 0.50 acre: 	$225.00 	$0.00 	$225.00 
0.50 acre—But less than 0.75 acre: 	$275.00 	$0.00 	$275.00 
0.75 acre—But less than 1.0 acre: 	$219.00 	$81.00 	$300.00 
1.0 acre—But less than 5.0 acres: 	$1,944.00 	$756.00 	$2,700.00 
5.0 acres—But less than 10.0 acres: 	$2,448.00 	$952.00 	$3,400.00 
10.0 acres—But less than 50.0 acres: 	$3,240.00 	$1,260.00 	$4,500.00 
50.0 acres—But less than 100.0 acres: 	$4,392.00 	$1,708.00 	$6,100.00 
100.0 acres or greater: 	$6,912.00 	$2,688.00 	$9,600.00 
 
(Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Code 1964, § 16.1-27; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0008, 6-11-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0012, 7-9-12 ; Ord. No. 15-0003, 1-14-15 ; Ord. No. 15-0007, 2-25-15 )  
Sec. 13.1-7. - Application of state guidelines, standards, etc. 
(a)  Land-disturbing activities within the city shall be subject to the guidelines and standards for soil erosion and sedimentation control contained in the current edition of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended, which is hereby made a part of this chapter by reference. 
(b)  Land-disturbing activities controlled by this chapter shall be designed and conducted in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations, 9VAC25-840 and the program administered by the State Water Control Board pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 62.1-44.15:50 through 62.1-44.15:66, including regulations designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
(c)  Erosion and sediment control practices shall be in compliance with the standards contained in chapter 3 of the current edition of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended. Alternative practices may be approved when it is shown that such practices provide equal or improved erosion and sedimentation control. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ) 
State Law reference— Approved plan required for permit issuance, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-565.  
Sec. 13.1-8. - General requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any land-disturbing activity, unless exempted by this chapter, until such person or representative has first submitted to the agent three (3) copies of a land disturbing plan and such plan has been approved as in compliance with the intent of, and requirements contained in this chapter and a permit certifying such approval has been issued as provided in this chapter. 
This section shall not apply to state agency projects except as provided for in Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:56. 
Where land-disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one (1) local control program, the applicant may submit to the State Water Control Board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned. 
(b)  No agency or department authorized under any other ordinance or law to issue building, right-of-way, or other required permits for projects involving land development activities covered by this chapter may issue such required permit unless a land-disturbing plan has been approved and a permit certifying such approval has been issued as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Construction, installation, or maintenance of electric and telephone utility lines and natural gas pipelines, and the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities, and other related structures and facilities of railroad companies must be conducted pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:55. 
(d)  As a prerequisite to engaging in the land-disturbing activities shown on the approved plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall provide the name of a responsible land disturber to the department as provided by Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:55(B), who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity in accordance with the approved plan. Failure to provide the name of the responsible land disturber may result in revocation of the approval of the plan, and the person responsible for carrying out the plan and/or the responsible land disturber shall be subject to penalties or other legal action as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-9. - Responsibility of property owner when work to be done by contractor. 
When a land-disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the person owning the property or his representative shall be responsible for submitting all plan requirements and obtaining a permit under this chapter. The contractor shall be responsible for obtaining a permit under this chapter for public projects. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-10. - Responsibility and bond for control measures. 
All control measures required by the provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken at the expense of the owner or his representative; and, pending actual provision thereof, the owner or his representative shall execute and file with the department, prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter, a permit/performance agreement and surety in favor of the City of Hampton pursuant to section 13.1-16. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 1-26-92; Ord. No. 1098, 8-11-93; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-11. - Preparation of plan; preliminary plan. 
(a)  Any person proposing to undertake any land-disturbing activity, other than those exempted by section 13.1-3 herein, shall prepare and submit to the agent a land-disturbing plan, prepared in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  The plan required by this chapter shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer or land surveyor duly licensed by the commonwealth and shall be developed in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law, Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:51, et seq. , and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations, 9VAC25-840, et seq. 
(2)  The plan shall consist of a recent physical survey of the parcel(s)/lot(s) where the land-disturbing activity is proposed drawn to a graphic scale and shall include: 
a.  Property owner's name and address; 
b.  Deed book and page number of recorded deed; 
c.  Land Record Serial Number ("LRSN"); 
d.  Property lines with dimensions of property; 
e.  Names of adjacent property owners; 
f.  Existing trees, watercourses, and utilities; 
g.  Existing drainage culverts, septic tanks, and septic fields; 
h.  Existing drainage patterns and elevations; 
i.  Date and signature of person preparing survey; 
j.  Location of 100-year floodplain, if applicable; 
k.  North arrow; and 
l.  Area of disturbance in square feet. 
(3)  The land disturbing plan also shall include: 
a.  Text and graphic information for purposes of clearly indicating the type, magnitude, and location of the proposed activity to include but not be limited to the horizontal and vertical limits of any proposed excavation, clearing and grading, and the location, amount, and composition of all proposed fill material; 
b.  The Chesapeake Bay Preservation District boundary in accordance with the city zoning ordinance, chapter 9, article II, section 9-13; 
c.  The proposed drainage scheme; 
d.  The location, method, and materials required and proposed to protect and preserve existing vegetation to be retained; 
e.  All required and proposed erosion and sediment control practices in accordance with section 13.1-7 herein and any erosion and sediment control practices required pursuant to chapter 9, article II of the city zoning ordinance and chapter 33.2 of the city stormwater management ordinance; 
f.  A written description of the anticipated conservation problems; and 
g.  The name, valid certificate of competence number, and contact information of the responsible land disturber, if known. If the responsible land disturber is not known at the time the application is presented to the agent, the information shall be supplied by the owner or his representative prior to issuance of any permit. 
(4)  If the development requires either site plan or subdivision approval, applicant shall submit a copy of all conditions relating to erosion and sediment control. 
(5)  A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land-Disturbing Activity shall be subject to an erosion and sediment control plan consistent with the requirements of this chapter, chapter 9, article II of the city zoning ordinance, and chapter 33.2 of the city stormwater management ordinance. Additionally, on properties zoned O-CBP, areas shown on the site plan as undisturbed, or as a buffer proffered as part of a conditional rezoning or required for a use permit, or as part of a resource protection area, shall be protected from disturbance by the following methods: 
a.  Prior to disturbing the site, undisturbed areas shall be delineated by a form of fencing or markings which clearly identify the area boundaries and intent. Fencing, markers, or similar barriers shall be placed around the undisturbed area, and shall display brightly colored flags or signs in a manner that is plainly visible to equipment operators and ground workers. Fencing or markers shall be located such that a distance of not less than six (6) inches for every one (1) foot in diameter of tree trunk shall be maintained from any tree within the undisturbed area. 
b.  Equipment, materials, or people shall not be allowed within the undisturbed area. 
c.  Boards, signs, wires, and the like shall not be nailed to trees to be retained, nor shall equipment hit against such trees. 
d.  Removal of trees not retained shall be in a manner which avoids injury to remaining trees. 
e.  When lowering the grade adjacent to an undisturbed area, damaged roots along the edge of the area shall be cut cleanly and immediately covered with moist organic soil and three (3) inches of mulch. 
f.  Utility services shall be placed on common trenches when possible and routed around undisturbed areas when possible. Tree roots within the tree protection area shall not be severed; however, boring through or under roots is permitted. 
g.  Removal of markers around undisturbed areas shall be permitted after a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(b)  Any person proposing any exempt land-disturbing activity or land-disturbing activity for which a permit is required by this chapter may submit to the agent, for informal review and comment, a preliminary plan showing the general extent and implications of such activities prior to executing any exempt land-disturbing activity or before submitting a formal permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 13.1-12. - Single-family detached residences. 
(a)  Single-family detached residential construction which will result in the disturbance of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of land may substitute an agreement in lieu of a land disturbing plan. 
(b)  Any requests for significant deviation from and/or amendments to the Hampton City Standard Erosion Control Plans for single-family detached construction as may be developed by the applicant shall require compliance with the terms of section 13.1-11. 
(c)  Building permits for any single-family detached residential construction required to obtain a land-disturbing activity permit under the provisions of this chapter shall not be issued until the department conducts an initial erosion and sediment control inspection, finds such project to be in compliance with the objectives of the approved land-disturbing plan, determines that all necessary erosion and sediment control measures have been properly installed, and issues an initial erosion and sediment control inspection approval notice. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0003, 1-14-15 )  
Sec. 13.1-13. - Approval or disapproval of plan. 
Following receipt of a plan submitted under this chapter, the department shall initiate a review of the proposed land-disturbing activity and shall approve or disapprove the plan according to the following criteria: 
(1)  The department shall determine the completeness of the plan in accordance with section 13.1-11 of this ordinance and section 33.2-16 of the city stormwater management ordinance. The department shall notify the owner, in writing, of such determination, within 15 calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the notification shall contain the reasons the plan is deemed incomplete. 
(2)  The department shall have an additional 60 calendar days from the date of the communication of completeness to review the plan, except that if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subparagraph (1), then the plan shall be deemed complete; and the department shall have 60 calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan. 
(3)  The department shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved within 45 calendar days of the date of resubmission. 
(4)  During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision communicated in writing to the owner. If the plan is not approved, reasons for not approving it shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this ordinance, the stormwater management ordinance, and the zoning ordinance. 
(5)  Prior to issuance of a permit, the director shall cause the application to be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator for compliance with the city zoning ordinance. Within 45 days following the receipt of a completed application under section 13.1-6 and approval by the zoning administrator, the director shall issue a permit or notify the applicant in writing of the refusal thereof. 
(6)  If a plan meeting all requirements of this ordinance, the city stormwater management ordinance, and the city zoning ordinance is submitted and no action is taken within the time provided above in subsection (2) herein for review, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ) 
State Law reference— Approved plan required for permit issuance, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-565.  
Sec. 13.1-14. - Appeals from decisions under chapter. 
Appeals from decisions of this chapter shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures of chapter 33.2 of the city stormwater management ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-568.  
Sec. 13.1-15. - Amendment of approved plan. 
A plan approved under this chapter may be amended as follows: 
(1)  The department may require that an approved plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the department, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection; or 
(2)  Amendments to an approved plan where the person responsible for carrying out the approved plan finds that, because of changed circumstances or for other reasons, the approved plan cannot be carried out effectively, shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the department. The department shall have 60 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-16. - Bond. 
(a)  Before a permit is issued under this chapter, the applicant shall assure compliance with the permit and this chapter by submitting one (1) of the following forms of security: 
(1)  A performance bond covering 100 percent of the cost of the control measures and permanent stormwater management facilities, such bond to be written by a bonding company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia; 
(2)  An escrow agreement, placing in escrow in a banking institution licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia, cash equal to 100 percent of the cost of the control measures and permanent stormwater management facilities; 
(3)  An irrevocable letter of credit covering 100 percent of the cost of the control measures and permanent stormwater management facilities; such letter of credit to be issued by a banking institution licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia; or 
(4)  A cash deposit covering 100 percent of the costs of the control measures and permanent stormwater management facilities. 
The department may waive the requirement for a form of security if the amount of the security is determined to be less than $1,000.00 and the land-disturbing activity is associated with the construction or alteration of a single-family residence. 
(b)  Each form of security required by this section shall be conditioned that the principal: 
(1)  Comply with all relevant provisions of this chapter and all applicable laws and ordinances; 
(2)  Comply with all the terms and conditions of the permit granted under this chapter and any use permit required by law; and 
(3)  Complete all of the work within the time specified in the permit or extension thereof. 
(c)  The bond, escrow agreement, letter of credit, or cash deposit shall be approved by the city attorney and shall guarantee that the required control measures and permitted stormwater management facilities will be properly and satisfactorily undertaken and maintained. 
(d)  The term of each form of security required by this section shall begin on the date the controlled activity commences and shall remain in effect until such form of security is specifically released, in writing, by the director. The surety executing such form of security, or the deposit referred to in subsection (a) above, shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the city in causing any and all such obligations to be completed, and the surety or the depositor assents to any lawful extension of time within which to complete the work. 
(e)  No bond, escrow agreement, irrevocable letter of credit, or cash deposit shall be released prior to completion of permitted improvements, achievement of adequate stabilization of the land-disturbing activity, and termination of the construction general permit if applicable. 
(f)  Within 60 days of the achievement of adequate stabilization of the land-disturbing activity, such bond, escrow, letter of credit, or cash deposit, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the owner or his representative or terminated, as the case may be, upon the issuance, by the department, or a certificate of completion pursuant to section 13.1-25 herein. Achievement of adequate stabilization shall be determined by the department. 
(g)  Conservation measures may be taken by the department at the permittee's expense should he fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation action which may be required of him by the approved plan as a result of his land-disturbing activity. If the department takes such conservation action upon such failure by the permittee, the department may collect from the permittee for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held. 
(Code 1964, §§ 16.1-7—16.1-11; Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Ord. No. 1037, 1-26-92; Ord. No. 1098, 8-11-93; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ) 
State Law reference— Bond, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-565.  
Sec. 13.1-17. - Issuance or refusal of permit. 
(a)  No permit for land-disturbing activities shall be issued by the department until the following items have been submitted to and approved by the department as prescribed herein: 
(1)  The information concerning the responsible land disturber as required by section 13.1-11; 
(2)  A permit application that includes a general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities registration statement; 
(3)  An approved erosion and sediment control plan and an executed permit/performance agreement agreeing to comply with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; and 
(4)  An approved stormwater management plan. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued until approval of the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities is obtained. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued until the fees required to be paid pursuant to section 13.1-6 are received and a performance bond required pursuant to section 13.1-16 has been approved. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued unless and until the permit application and attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land clearing, construction, disturbance, land development, and drainage will be done according to the approved permit. 
(e)  No building or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless a land-disturbing permit has been issued by the department. 
(Code 1964, § 16.1-12; Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ) 
State Law reference— Approved plan required for permit issuance, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-565.  
Sec. 13.1-18. - Term of permit. 
(a)  The duration of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be 12 months or less, as determined by the department. Reasonable extensions may be granted prior to expiration of the permit. 
(b)  Thirty-day extensions shall be allowed to correct violations following inspection by the department. 
(c)  If work is not started within 60 days after the date of issuance of a permit under this chapter, the permit shall be revoked automatically, and the permittee shall be notified in writing by the department. 
(Code 1964, § 16.1-14; Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-19. - Permit restrictions and conditions. 
(a)  All activity under the permit shall be conducted by the owner of the property or his representative. 
(b)  In granting any permit required by this chapter, the department shall impose such conditions thereon as are reasonably necessary to prevent the proposed operations from being conducted in such a manner as to constitute or create a nuisance or a hazard to life or property or cause environmental damage. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Designation of a reasonable time for the completion of the work. 
(2)  Limitations upon the hours of the day, days of the week, and months of the year for conducting the activity. 
(3)  Indication of the type of material to be used when the project is a fill project. 
(4)  Requirement that additional measures to further reduce erosion and sediment loss and/or prevent stormwater pollution. 
(5)  Requirement that additional measures to adequately protect and preserve trees and shrubs designated as plants to remain. 
(6)  Assurance that the plan will not result in adverse impacts to adjacent properties. 
(Code 1964, §§ 16.1-3, 16.1-13; Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-20. - Periodic inspections of land-disturbing activities. 
(a)  The department shall inspect the land-disturbing activity during construction for: 
(1)  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(2)  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and/or 
(4)  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a total maximum daily load requirement. 
(b)  An initial inspection of the land-disturbing activity is required and must be approved prior to issuance of other required permits. The city will conduct up to two (2) initial and two (2) final inspections at no additional cost. Should subsequent initial and final inspections not result in approval, permittee shall pay a reinspection fee of $35.00 for any third and subsequent initial and/or final inspections. Should permittee fail to pay the reinspection fee, a notice of violation will be issued until the violation is cured. No subsequent inspections will be conducted until the reinspection fee is paid. 
(c)  At reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, the department may enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and chapter 33.2 of the city stormwater management ordinance. 
(d)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, or letter of credit, the department also may enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
(e)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:40, the department may require every land-disturbing permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to land-disturbing permit requirements under this chapter, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposed of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-21. - Use of certain fill material prohibited. 
None of the following materials shall be used as fill in any activity covered by a permit issued under this chapter: 
(1)  Wood or chemical substances of wood; 
(2)  Hazardous waste; 
(3)  Paper or plastics; 
(4)  Metal or metal products; or 
(5)  Garbage, which is defined as the refuse of animal and vegetable food stuffs. 
(Code 1964, § 16.1-15; Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-22. - Covering of fill projects. 
No fill material, other than dirt, shall be left uncovered for longer than 30 days. Progressive covering shall be required as the fill progresses. The initial cover shall be a minimum of 6 inches, and the final cover shall consist of 12 inches of dirt or topsoil free of debris or other material. Such cover shall be protected against erosion. 
(Code 1964, § 16.1-16; Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-23. - Right of entry of department. 
The department shall have access at reasonable times to the premises upon which any controlled activity is being conducted. No person shall hinder or prevent the department from entering onto and inspecting any property on which such activity is taking place. 
(Code 1964, § 16.1-17; Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-24. - Correction of dangerous conditions and revocation. 
Whenever the department determines, by inspection, that a project conducted pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter has become dangerous to life, limb, or property or affects the safety, usability, or stability of a public way, or harmful to the environment, the department shall notify the owner of the property or his representative of such defects and the action necessary to correct the condition. Within 30 days from the date of such written notice, the owner or his representative shall repair, reconstruct, eliminate, or correct such condition so that it will conform to the requirements of this chapter or otherwise remedy the condition to the department's satisfaction so that it no longer will constitute a menace or danger or cause environmental damage. A shorter period of time to repair, reconstruct, or correct such condition may be specified by the department if any imminent hazard is found to exist. 
Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked for the violation of any condition of the permit, the violation of any provision of this chapter, or any other applicable law or ordinance or the existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others. 
(Code 1964, §§ 16.1-18, 16.1-35; Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-25. - Final inspection of, and certification of completion for, land-disturbing activity. 
Upon completion of a land-disturbing activity in accordance with the approved plan and adequate stabilization of all areas disturbed by the land-disturbing activity, the permittee shall request a final inspection of the project by the department. Upon finding satisfactory evidence of compliance with the approved plan and adequate stabilization of all areas disturbed by the land-disturbing activity and receipt of the notice of termination for the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities, the agent shall issue a certificate of completion, and the department shall release the surety. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ) 
State Law reference— Monitoring, reports and inspections, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-566.  
Sec. 13.1-26. - Completion of work by surety or city forces. 
In the event of the default in the performance of any term or condition of a permit issued under this chapter, the surety on the bond required by this chapter, or any person employed by or in behalf of such surety, or forces of the city shall have the right to go upon the premises to complete the required work. 
(Ord. No. 672, 10-8-80; Code 1964, § 16.1-19; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 13.1-27. - Agent designated for administration and enforcement of chapter. 
The agent shall be responsible for the approval and disapproval of land-disturbing plans pertaining to site plans and single-family dwellings, as required under this chapter. The department shall be responsible for the approval and disapproval of land-disturbing plans for all other controlled land-disturbing activities. Both departments shall jointly administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, that is, they are authorized to and shall make such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, including any conditions of approval for specific projects, and are authorized to take such steps as provided in this chapter, and as may be necessary, to ensure compliance with its terms. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ) 
State Law reference— Certification of local program personnel, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561.1.  
Sec. 13.1-28. - Notice of violations. 
(a)  The department, upon determination of a failure to comply with a plan or a violation of this chapter, shall immediately serve upon the permittee, by registered or certified mail to the address specified in permittee's application, or by delivery at the site of the land-disturbing activity to the employee supervising such activity, a notice of violation. Such notice shall set forth the measures needed to comply and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the permittee fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and may be subject to revocation of the permit. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of this chapter, the department, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice of violation as specified in this chapter, may issue an order requiring that all or part of the land-disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, such an order may be issued regardless of whether the alleged violator has been issued a notice of violation as specified in this chapter. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the alleged violator has failed to comply with a notice of violation. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice of violation, and shall remain in effect for seven (7) days from the date of service, pending application by the department or alleged violator for appropriate relief to the circuit court. Upon completion of corrective action, the order shall be lifted immediately. Nothing in this section shall prevent the department or agent from taking any other action specified in this chapter. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to violations of section 13.1-29. 
(d)  Revoked land-disturbing activity permits shall not be reinstated. The agent must issue all new permits after receipt of all fees and sureties required in this chapter, prior to resuming any site work. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-29. - Damaging, removing, etc., erosion-prevention bags. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy, cut, remove, injure, interfere, or tamper with any sand bag or erosion bag, public or private, without the consent of the owner or his representative, which such device is in place for the prevention of erosion. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 13.1-30. - Violations, or exceeding scope of approval. 
(a)  Any person who engages in or causes any regulated land-disturbing activity, without first receiving approval and a permit for such activity as prescribed by this chapter, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who violates or causes to be violated any condition of approval of a plan under this chapter or who exceeds the scope of approval of any such plan shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1037, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07)  
Sec. 13.1-31. - Penalties, injunctions, and other legal actions. 
(a)  Violators of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The city may apply to the circuit court of the city for injunctive relief to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of the terms of this chapter, without the necessity of showing that there does not exist an adequate remedy at law. 
(c)  In addition to any criminal penalties provided under this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be liable to the city in a civil action for damages. 
(d)  In lieu of criminal sanctions, any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any condition of that person's permit, or any provision of the person's program, upon the finding of the general district court for the city, shall be assessed the following civil penalties: 
(1)  A civil penalty for any one (1) violation of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(2)  A civil penalty in the amount of $1,000.00 shall be assessed for commencement of land-disturbing activities without a city approved plan and a land disturbing permit. 
(3)  Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $10,000.00. 
(4)  The director may issue a summons for collection of a civil penalty, and the action may be prosecuted by the city attorney. 
(e)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus, or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation. 
(f)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected, or refused to obey any regulation or order of the department or any condition of a permit or any provision of this chapter, the city may require the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified in subsection (e). Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsection (d). 
(g)  Upon the department's request, the city attorney shall take legal action to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall be prima facie evidence in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met, and the complaining party must show negligence in order to recover any damages. 
(i)  Civil penalties collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the stormwater management revenues of the city's treasury. 
(Ord. No. 1483, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 14-0004, 4-9-14 ) 
State Law reference— Penalties, Code of Virginia, §§ 10.1-562(J), 10.1-569.  
Chapter 14 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Division of fire of department of public safety, §§ 9.01, 9.02. 
Cross reference— Examinations to determine qualifications of firemen, § 2-107; criminal history investigation of applicants for position of fireman, § 2-108; building and development regulations, Ch. 9; removal of power wires during fire, § 9-68; authority of city to attach its fire alarm circuits and signal wires on power and telephone poles, § 9-69; requirement of site plan ordinance that buildings and structures be assessible [accessible] to fire and other emergency vehicles, § 9-166(3); fire-fighting equipment in mobile home parks, § 20-52; calling fire-fighting apparatus without cause or malicious activation of fire alarm in public building, § 24-8; smoking, Ch. 30.5; fire hydrants in subdivisions, § 35-81. 
State Law reference— Fire protection, Code of Virginia, § 27-1 et seq.; Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code Act, Code of Virginia, § 27-94 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Promulgation of bylaws, rules, etc., for certain volunteer fire companies and rescue squads. 
The city manager, after having received the written recommendation of the fire chief and the advisory committee of the volunteer fire companies, shall be authorized to promulgate constitutions, bylaws, rules and regulations for the Buckroe, Fox Hill, Hampton, Northampton, Phoebus and Wythe volunteer fire companies and the Buckroe, Northampton, Phoebus and Wythe rescue squads. 
(Code 1964, § 18-30; Ord. No. 452; Ord. No. 757, § 18-30, 7-27-83) 
State Law reference— Fire departments and fire companies, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1 et seq.  
Sec. 14-1.1. - Participation by minors in activities of volunteer fire companies. 
(a)  Any minor sixteen (16) years of age or older, with parental or guardian approval, is authorized to work with or participate fully in all activities of a volunteer fire company, provided such person has attained certification under National Fire Protection Association 1001, level one, fire fighter standards, as administered by the department of fire programs. Any trainer or instructor of any such minor or any member of a paid or volunteer fire company who supervises any such minor at the scene of any emergency shall be exempt from the provisions of § 40.1-103 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, no person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be authorized or permitted to operate any emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 739, 1-12-83) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, Code of Virginia, § 40.1-79.1.  
Sec. 14-2. - General authority of fire marshal and assistants to arrest, procure and serve warrants and issue summons. 
(a)  The fire marshal, and such of his assistants as are designated by the city manager, shall have the authority to arrest, to procure and serve warrants of arrest and to issue summons, in the manner authorized by general law, for violation of local fire prevention and fire safety and related ordinances. 
(b)  The authority granted in this section shall not be exercised by the fire marshal or any assistant until such person has satisfactorily completed a training course designed specifically for local fire marshals and their assistants, which course shall be approved by the Virginia State Fire Services Commission. 
(c)  The authority granted in this section may only be exercised when the officer is in uniform and is serving a designated tour of duty. 
(d)  The authority granted in this section shall not be construed to authorize the fire marshal or his assistants to wear or carry firearms. 
(Code 1964, § 18-23.1; Ord. No. 453; Ord. No. 514; Ord. No. 634, 10-24-79) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 27-34.2.  
Sec. 14-3. - Police powers of fire marshal and assistants as to investigations and prosecutions involving certain offenses. 
(a)  The fire marshal, and such of his assistants as are designated by the city manager, shall have the same police powers as a sheriff or police officer in the investigation and prosecution of all offenses involving fires, fire bombings, bombings, attempts or threats to commit such offenses, false alarms relating to such offenses and possession and manufacture of explosive devices, substances and fire bombs. 
(b)  The police powers granted in this section shall not be exercised by the fire marshal or any assistant until such person has satisfactorily completed a course for fire marshals with police powers, designed by the state office of fire services training in cooperation with the criminal justice services commission, which course shall be approved by the Virginia State Fire Services Commission. In addition, the fire marshal and any assistant shall continue to exercise the powers granted by this section only upon satisfactory participation in in-service and advanced courses and programs designed by the office of fire services training in cooperation with the criminal justice services commission, which courses shall be approved by the Virginia State Fire Services Commission. 
(Code 1964, § 18-23.2; Ord. No. 635, 10-24-79) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 27-34.2:1.  
Sec. 14-4. - Interference with firemen or fire equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to wilfully interfere in any way with any member of the city's fire division or an organized fire department or fire company or with the operation of any piece of fire equipment while such fireman or piece of equipment is operating in response to a fire alarm. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-20; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Disobedience of or order of fire chief, Code of Virginia, § 27-19.  
Sec. 14-5. - Impersonating fire division personnel in sale, etc., of fire protective or extinguishing equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently claim to be, or represent himself as being, an agent or official of the fire division of the city, in the sale, installation, maintenance or recharging, or solicitation of the sale, installation, maintenance or recharging, of any fire protective or extinguishing equipment. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-22; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Impersonating firefighters, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174.1.  
Sec. 14-6. - Volunteer fire companies and volunteer rescue squads designated as part of city's official safety program. 
The active members of the Hampton volunteer fire company, Phoebus volunteer fire company, Wythe volunteer fire company, Buckroe volunteer fire company, Fox Hill volunteer fire company, Northampton volunteer fire company, Phoebus volunteer rescue squad, Wythe volunteer rescue squad, Buckroe volunteer rescue squad, and Northampton volunteer rescue squad are hereby recognized as an integral part of the official safety program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-0011 , 9-12-18) 
State Law reference— Line of Duty Act, Code of Virginia, § 9.1-400 et. seq.  
Secs. 14-7—14-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1432, adopted October 25, 2006, repealed §§ 14-6—14-8, which pertained to burning of brush; duty of person leaving open-air fire unattended; and damaging property by fire. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 14-9. - Fire protection service fee. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed on all property located within the City of Hampton a fire protection service fee which shall be based upon the size of each water meter serving the property in accordance with the following schedule: 
Meter Size 
(inches) 	Monthly Fee 
5/8	$0.80  
¾ 	0.80 
1 	1.20 
1½ 	1.60 
2 	2.40 
3 	3.20 
4 	3.20 
6 	4.00 
8 	4.00 
10 	4.00 
 
(b)  The fee imposed hereby shall be included in the Newport News Waterworks service charge set forth in section 42-31 of the Newport News City Code and authorized by section 42-32(2) of that code. 
(c)  The City of Newport News, through its Department of Public Utilities, is hereby authorized to enforce and collect the service fee imposed by this section. 
(d)  This section shall take effect for all City of Newport News, Department of Public Utilities, billing cycles occurring on and after July 1, 1992. 
(Ord. No. 1047, 5-13-92)  
Sec. 14-10. - Service fees for emergency ambulance transport. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings given herein: 
(1)  Basic life support (BLS) means medical treatment or procedures provided to a patient as defined by the National Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Education and Practice Blueprint for the Emergency Medical Technician (EMT)-Basic. 
(2)  Advanced life support level 1 (ALS-1) means medical treatment or procedures provided to a patient beyond the scope of an EMT-Basic as defined by the National EMS Education and Practice Blueprint. 
(3)  Advanced life support level 2 (ALS-2) means advanced life support services provided to a patient which includes any of the following medical procedures: manual defibrillation/cardioversion, endotracheal intubation, central venous line, cardiac pacing, chest decompression, surgical airway, or intraosseous line, along with administration of three (3) or more medications. 
(4)  Ground transport mileage (GTM) means chargeable mileage assessed in statute mile from the location of the where medical services are provided or where the patient is picked up for transportation or transfer to a hospital or other facility, whichever is the further facility. 
(5)  Patient assessment fee (PAF) means a fee assessed to customers during an emergency response where a medical assessment and/or treatment were performed by EMS with no transport to a medical care facility. Medical assessment may be described as performing a methodical medical evaluation to assess for a medical illness or injury and may include clinical observation, blood pressure and glucose checks, "head-to-toe" manual assessment, etc. Treatment is described as applying medical knowledge, skills, and abilities to mitigate an illness or injury and may include, but is not necessarily limited to, oxygen and medication administration, bandaging, application of a hot or cold compress, intravenous fluid administration, and similar actions. 
(6)  The schedule of fees and rates for emergency medical services shall be set by the city council and remain in effect thereafter until revised or amended as provided for herein. 
(7)  The schedule of rates referenced above in paragraph (3) shall be reviewed on an annual basis and may be revised when the city's annual budget is adopted by setting forth the revised rates and fees in such budget. 
(b)  There is hereby levied upon each recipient of emergency ambulance transport service rendered by the city or by any volunteer rescue squad organized in the city a charge as follows: 
Service 	Charge 
Basic Life Support 	$500.00 
Advanced Life Support Level 1 	$600.00 
Advanced Life Support Level 2 	$750.00 
Ground Transport Mileage 	$11.00 per mile, from pick up to hospital for transport 
Patient Assessment Fee (PAF) 	$125.00 
 
No fee, pursuant to this section, shall be imposed upon the recipient of emergency ambulance transport service provided by a volunteer rescue squad organized in the city unless and until a written memorandum of understanding between the volunteer rescue squad and the city agreeing to such assessment is approved by the city attorney and filed with the clerk of council. 
(c)  The fire chief is hereby authorized and directed to establish rules and regulations for the administration of the charges imposed by this section, including, but not limited to, waiver of applicable insurance co-payments and/or deductibles for city residents and payment standards for those persons who demonstrate economic hardship, to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1327, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1398, 5-4-05; Ord. No. 09-0006, 5-13-09; Ord. No. 12-0021, 3-14-12) 
State Law reference— Authority to make reasonable charges for use of emergency medical services vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.14.  
Sec. 14-11. - Open burning prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall ignite or maintain, or cause or permit to be ignited or maintained, any open fire on public or private property outside any building. Salvage, demolition operations or disposal of waste materials by burning is prohibited. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Open fires may be set in the performance of official duties by the fire code official or his designee when necessary for any of the following purposes: 
a.  For the abatement of a fire hazard which can not be abated by other means; 
b.  For training in firefighting or for research in control of fires under supervision of the fire code official or his designee; 
c.  In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances when open burning is determined by the fire code official to be in the public interest. 
(2)  Fires may be used for cooking food, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(3)  Recreational fires may be set provided that no smoke violation or nuisance is created. 
(4)  Open burning shall be prohibited for land clearing operations, except controlled force-air pit burning of brush, leaves and trees from land clearing operations conducted under authority of a permit issued by the fire code official or his designee is permitted; provided that such burning shall be in conformance with procedures approved by the fire code official and the department of environmental quality (air division), and shall be immediately terminated upon revocation of such permit. Compliance with the provisions of this subsection shall not exempt any person from any damages or liability which may result from such open burning, nor exempt any person from adherence to all applicable laws, ordinance and regulations and orders of the fire code official and the state forester. 
(c)  Open burning, where permitted by this chapter, shall be constantly monitored until the fire is extinguished. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be available for immediate use. 
(d)  The fire code official may prohibit open burning, otherwise lawful, when smoke may cause reduced visibility on any highway, or when emissions or odors may constitute a hazard or nuisance. The fire code official may order the extinguishing by the permit holder or other responsible person, or by the fire department, of any fire which creates such a hazard or nuisance, or if adjacent property is considered to be endangered. 
(Ord. No. 1432, 10-25-06)  
Sec. 14-12. - Fires on beaches prohibited; exception(s). 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section it shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to or to procure another to set fire to any wood, brush, logs, leaves, grass, debris or other flammable material at any time on any beach of the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any person, group or organization which has been granted a permit by the fire code official to set a fire on a beach within the city, provided that such fire is set and maintained in compliance with the terms and conditions of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 1432, 10-25-06) 
State Law reference— Open burning, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1142.  
Sec. 14-13. - Damaging property by fire. 
If any person carelessly, negligently or intentionally sets any woods or marshes on fire, or sets fire to any stubble, brush, straw or any other substance capable of spreading fire on lands, whereby the property of another is damaged or jeopardized, he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor and shall be liable for the full amount of all expenses incurred in fighting the fire. 
(Ord. No. 1432, 10-25-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-88.  
Sec. 14-14. - Fireworks and pyrotechnic displays prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section it shall be unlawful for any person to transport, manufacture, assemble, store, sell, offer or display for sale, or to buy, use, possess, ignite or explode any firecracker, torpedo, sky rocket, or other substance or device that contains any explosive or flammable compound or substance, and is intended or commonly known as fireworks, and which explodes, rises into the air or travels laterally, fires projectiles or discharges sparks into the air. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any organization or group of individuals which has been granted a permit by the fire code official for the public or private display of fireworks or pyrotechnics, provided that such fireworks are stored, handled, transported and used in compliance with the terms and conditions of such permit. The provisions of this section shall not apply to sparklers when used or ignited by an adult or a minor under the supervision of an adult. 
(c)  The fire code official or any law enforcement officer shall be authorized to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all fireworks offered or exposed for display or sale, stored or held in violation of this section. 
(d)  Before the fire code official issues any permit required by this section the applicant for the permit shall submit evidence of liability insurance for the protection of persons and property from death, bodily injury and damage in an amount not less than on million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(e)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1432, 10-25-06) 
State Law reference— Permits for display of fireworks; use and exhibitions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-974; seizure and destruction of certain fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 27-100.1.  
Secs. 14-15—14-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 14-26. - Adopted. 
For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and welfare, there is hereby adopted the Statewide Fire Prevention Code, as it may from time to time be amended, except such provisions thereof maybe be inconsistent with other, more restrictive fire prevention ordinances of the city as permitted by state law. One (1) copy of such code shall be on file in the office of the clerk of council. Such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall apply to and be controlling within the limits of the city. 
The enforcement procedures of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code shall be instituted by the fire official when an unsafe condition is discovered by the fire official, or a report of an unsafe condition is made to the fire official, and will be administered in accordance with the provisions set forth in the "Statewide Fire Prevention Code" and the ordinances of the city. The fire official shall establish such procedures or requirements as may be necessary for administration and enforcement of this article including adoption of Appendix B, C and D of the 2003 International Fire Code, as amended. 
(Code 1964, § 18-16; Ord. No. 95, § 1; Ord. No. 172; Ord. No. 322; Ord. No. 486; Ord. No. 541, 9-28-77; Ord. No. 606, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 726, 9-8-82; Ord. No. 888, 4-27-88; Ord. No. 1017, 7-10-91; Ord. No. 1197, 9-24-97; Ord. No. 1406, 7-13-05; Ord. No. 1406, 7-13-05; Ord. No. 1427, 8-9-06) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt fire prevention code by reference, Code of Virginia, § 27-97.  
Sec. 14-27. - Availability of copies. 
Copies of the fire prevention code adopted by this article, are obtainable, during regular business hours, at the office of the clerk of council. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1; Ord. No. 486; Code 1964, § 18-17)  
Sec. 14-28. - Definitions. 
Whenever the following words and phrases are used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
(1)  Words used in the present tense include the future; the words "shall" or "should" are mandatory and not directory; the word "may" is discretionary. 
(2)  The terms "fire official," "chief of the fire department" or "bureau of fire prevention" shall mean the fire chief of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 18-18; Ord. No. 95, § 2; Ord. No. 486; Ord. No. 888, 4-27-88)  
Sec. 14-29. - Fees for commercial fire code inspections and fire code operational permits. 
(a)  There is hereby established an annual fire code inspection fee which shall be paid to the city pursuant to the Statewide Fire Prevention Code. The fee shall be charged to the owner for each premises that is subject to maintenance inspection under the Statewide Fire Prevention Code based upon the following schedule: 
Building Space 
(sq. ft.) 	Amount 
0—999 	$25.00 
1,000—5,000 	$75.00 
5,001—10,000 	$100.00 
10,001—20,000 	$125.00 
20,001—50,000 	$225.00 
50,001—100,000 	$275.00 
100,001—200,000 	$325.00 
> 200,000 	$375.00 
 
(1)  The fee hereby established shall not be charged to the United States of America, the Commonwealth of Virginia, its political subdivisions, or the City of Hampton. 
(2)  The fee established by this provision shall be due and payable from the date that a statement of account reflecting the charge is mailed by the city. The charges established by this provision shall be maintained in an open account in the name of the person or persons responsible for payment of this fee. Any account which is more than thirty (30) days delinquent may be forwarded to the city attorney or designee for collection. In the event that the account is forwarded for collection, the person in whose name the account is maintained shall be liable to the city for, in addition to the fire code inspection fee, a collection fee in the amount of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), or twenty-five (25) percent of the outstanding balance on the account, whichever is greater, said collection fee representing administrative costs and attorney's fees to the city for collecting said debt. Tender of payment and acceptance of the amount originally due the city under subsection (a) above shall not constitute satisfaction of the account unless and until the collection fee is paid. 
(b)  Re-inspection fee. A fifty dollar ($ 50.00) re-inspection fee shall be charged for follow-up inspections when previously identified violation(s) are found not to be in compliance. 
(c)  False alarm fee. A fee of one-hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid for each false alarm that occurs after three (3) false alarms in a ninety (90) day period. 
(d)  The fees set forth below shall be charged for permits issued by the city as provided for in the Statewide Fire Prevention Code. Beginning work or activities without first obtaining the necessary permit shall result in an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(1)  Explosives. An operational permit is required for the storage, handling, sale or use of any quantity of fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects within the scope of Chapter 33 of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code. 
a.  Permit fee per display for outside aerial display ..... $250.00 
b.  Permit fee for proximate audience ..... 250.00 
(2)  Flammable and combustible liquid storage tanks. An operational permit is required to alter, remove, abandon, place temporarily out of service (for more than ninety (90) days) or otherwise dispose of an underground, protected above- ground or above-ground flammable or combustible liquid tank ..... 50.00 
(3)  Open burning. An operational permit is required for the kindling or maintaining of an open fire, or a fire on any public street, alley, road, or other public or private ground. Instructions and stipulations of the permit shall be adhered to. Exception: Recreational fires. 
a.  Open burning/bonfires ..... 50.00 
b.  Open burning/land clearing, per month per pit burner ..... 50.00 
(4)  Private fire hydrants. An operational permit is required for the removal from service, use or operation of private fire hydrants ..... 50.00 
Exception: An operational permit is not required for private industry with trained maintenance personnel, private fire brigade or fire departments to maintain, test and use private hydrants. 
(5)  Spraying or dipping. An operational permit is required to conduct a spraying or dipping operation utilizing flammable or combustible liquids or the application of combustible powders regulated by Chapter 15 of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code ..... 100.00 
(6)  Storage of scrap tires and tire byproducts. An operational permit is required to establish, conduct or maintain storage of scrap tires and tire byproducts that exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) cubic feet (71 m3) of total volume of scrap tires ..... 100.00 
(7)  Waste handling. An operational permit is required for the operation of wrecking yards, junk yards and waste material-handling facilities ..... 100.00 
The fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be used to defray the delivery cost of fire and rescue services. The city manager or designee may waive any of these fees for permits required in the performance of a contract with the City of Hampton, provided that a written waiver is filed with the fire division along with a copy of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 12-0024, 5-9-12) 
Editor's note— Prior to reenactment by Ord. No. 12-0024, Ord. No. 1198, adopted Sept. 24, 1997, repealed former § 14-29, which pertained to amendments to the 1990 edition of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code, and derived from Ord. Nos. 95, 172, 332, 356, and 486; Ord. No. 655, adopted May 14, 1980; Code 1964, § 18-19; and Ord. No. 888, adopted April 27, 1988.  
Sec. 14-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 887, adopted April 27, 1988, repealed § 14-30 pertaining to variances, which derived from Ord. No. 95, § 5; Ord. No. 486 and Code 1964, § 18-21.  
Sec. 14-31. - Appeals. 
The board of appeals established by the BOCA Basic Building Code, which is a part of the building code adopted by section 9-26 of this Code, shall hear all appeals that may arise under the fire prevention code adopted by this article. The procedure established by such basic code shall govern such appeals. 
(Ord. No. 543, 9-28-77; Code 1964, § 18-22)  
Sec. 14-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 887, adopted April 27, 1988, repealed § 14-32 pertaining to violations, which derived from Ord. No. 486 and Code 1964, § 18-23.  
Secs. 14-33—14-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 
 
Sec. 14-46. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 14-47. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or deliver or have delivered or make otherwise available for use in the city any portable fire extinguisher except those bearing an approved label of the Factory Mutual Laboratories or the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 12; Code 1964, § 18-25)  
Sec. 14-48. - Standards for construction, installation, maintenance and use. 
(a)  The standards for construction, installation, maintenance and use of portable fire extinguishers shall be those of and published by the National Fire Protection Association entitled "Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers," as listed in Appendix A of the 1987 BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code adopted in Article II of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain for use a portable fire extinguisher except in accordance with the above adopted standards. 
(b)  Copies of the standards referred to in subsection (a) above are obtainable, during regular business hours, at the office of the clerk of council. 
(Ord. No. 634, 10-24-79; Code 1964, §§ 18-26, 18-27; Ord. No. 888, 4-27-88)  
Sec. 14-49. - Removal of seals or other markings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any seal, tag, label or other essential marking placed on a portable fire extinguisher by the manufacturer or testing laboratories to designate the make, type, use, capacity or contents thereof. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, mar or mutilate any tag, seal, stencil or marking placed upon fire protection or extinguishing equipment by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 15; Code 1964, § 18-29)  
Secs. 14-50—14-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKE DETECTORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— smoke detectors, Code of Virginia, § 36-99.3 et seq.; local authority relative to smoke detectors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-922. 
 
Sec. 14-66. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 14-67. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Existing building: A building constructed to building code requirements in effect prior to February 7, 1976. 
Listed: Equipment included in a list published by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed equipment and whose listing states either that the equipment meets nationally recognized standards or has been tested and found suitable for use in a specified manner. 
Owner: The holder of title in fee simple and any person, group of persons, company, association or corporation in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted. Such word shall also mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any building or building unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof. 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any building or building unit as owner, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgagee, or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, lessee or other person in control of a building, or his duly authorized agents. 
Any such person, group of persons, company, association, or corporation shall have joint and several responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
Power supply: A source of electrical power; either A.C. primary power, a battery or a combination of both, complying with the requirements of NFPA-74, as amended. 
(Code 1964, § 18-31; Ord. No. 705, 11-18-81; Ord. No. 928, 4-12-89)  
Sec. 14-68. - Required in certain existing buildings. 
It is hereby required that smoke detectors shall be installed by the owners in the following structures or buildings: 
(1)  Any building containing one (1) or more dwelling units; 
(2)  Any hotel, motel or dormitory regularly used, offered for, or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations for one (1) or more persons; and 
(3)  Rooming houses regularly used, offered for, or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations. 
The smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with this article, with NFPA-74, as amended, and with Section 36-99.5, 1987, Virginia State Fire Prevention Code, "Smoke Detectors for the Deaf and Hearing Impaired." 
(Code 1964, § 18-32; Ord. No. 705, 11-18-81; Ord. No. 928, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 985, 11-28-90)  
Sec. 14-69. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1469, adopted March 28, 2007, repealed § 14-69, which pertained to permit to install. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 14-70. - Installation standards. 
Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA-74, as amended. For use groups R-1, R-2 and R-3, either battery operated or A.C. powered units are acceptable in conformation with the applicable NFPA standards of the National Fire Protection Association. 
(Ord. No. 705, 11-18-81; Code 1964, § 18-32; Ord. No. 928, 4-12-89)  
Sec. 14-71. - Certificates to be given certain tenants; responsibility for maintenance, repair, etc. 
(a)  Owners of any unit which is rented or leased and which is required to have smoke detectors by section 14-68 of the City Code, shall at the beginning of each tenancy and at least annually thereafter, furnish each tenant with a certification that all required smoke detectors are present, have been inspected and are in good working order. Except for smoke detectors located in use group R-1 hallways, stairwells and other public or common areas, interim testing, repair and maintenance of smoke detectors in rented or leased units shall be the responsibility of the tenant; provided, however, that the owner shall be obligated to service, repair or replace any malfunctioning smoke detector, within five (5) days of receipt of written notice that such smoke detector is in need of service, repair or replacement. Owners of any hotel, motel, dormitory or rooming house listed in section 14-68 shall, at least annually, inspect, repair or replace smoke detectors and shall keep records of such maintenance. 
(b)  A copy of all certificates and maintenance records referred to in this section shall be available for inspection by the authority having jurisdiction and shall be maintained for at least two (2) years. 
(Code 1964, § 18-32; Ord. No. 705, 11-18-81; Ord. No. 928, 4-12-89)  
Secs. 14-72—14-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 14-86. - Establishment of revolving account. 
(a)  There shall be established within the financial records of the city a "Fire Department Hazardous Material (HAZMAT) Revolving Account," within the general fund in which shall be recorded any appropriations made by the city council for hazardous materials incidents. 
(b)  Any monies recovered by the city pursuant to § 15.2-900 of the Code of Virginia as reimbursement for costs expended by the city pursuant to Hazmat activities shall be credited to this account. 
(Ord. No. 1081, 5-5-93; Ord. No. 10-0004, 3-10-10)  
Sec. 14-87. - Disposition of funds collected under this article. 
All funds collected under the provisions of this article shall be used for hazardous materials emergencies and to recoup costs associated with a response to a hazardous materials emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1081, 5-5-93)  
Chapter 15 - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Smoking, Ch. 30.5; food and drink facilities at public swimming pools, § 36-58. 
State Law reference— Food and drink generally, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-5100 et seq.; authority of city to regulate the sale, preparation and handling of certain food, Code of Virginia, § 35.1-9; general authority relative to food, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1109. 
 
Article I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary: 
Cook-for-hire. A person hired to prepare and/or serve food at a private function or home. All food prepared by the cook is handled at the location of the function or in the home. No food is stored, prepared, or handled off-site. A health permit is not required for a cook-for-hire. 
Food. The word "food" shall mean any raw, cooked, or processed, edible substance, ice beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption. 
Food establishment. The term "food establishment" shall mean any place where food is prepared or provided and intended for individual portion service, and includes the site at which individual portions are provided. The term includes any such place, regardless of whether consumption is on or off the premises and regardless of whether or not there is a charge for the food. The term does not include private homes where food is prepared or served without compensation for individual family consumption, the location of food vending machines or supply vehicles. 
Food service manager. The term "food service manager" shall mean an individual having supervisory or management duties and any other person working in a food establishment who may be in charge of its food handling operation and who holds a valid food service manager's certificate issued under section 15-98. 
Health authority. The term "health authority" shall mean the director of the department of public health or his authorized representative. 
Mobile food service facility. The term "mobile food service facility" shall mean a food establishment mounted on wheels (excluding boats in the water) readily moveable from place to place at all times during operation and shall include, but not be limited to, pushcarts, trailers, trucks, or vans. The facility, all operations, and all equipment must be integral to and be within or attached to the facility. 
Prepackaged. The term "prepackaged" shall mean contained in a bottle, can, carton, secure wrapping or other types of containers and includes both hermetically and non-hermetically sealed packaging. 
Risk assessment. The term "risk assessment" shall mean an evaluation of the potential for a foodborne illness to occur in a food establishment based on a hazard analysis of the food. 
Temporary food establishment. The term "temporary food establishment" shall mean a food establishment that operates at a fixed location for a period of not more than 14 days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
(Ord. No. 483; Code 1964, § 33-1; Ord. No. 906, 9-14-88; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Sec. 15-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class three misdemeanor. Each day that such a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 906, 9-14-88; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class three misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 15-3. - Enforcement of chapter generally. 
Unless otherwise noted, the health authority shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. Inspections for the enforcement of this chapter shall be made as frequently as deemed necessary by the health authority. 
(Code 1964, § 33-2; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Secs. 15-4—15-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-0014 , adopted August 10, 2016, repealed § 15-4, which pertained to exceptions from chapter and derived from Ord. No. 92; Code of 1964, § 33-7; and Ord. No. 1439, adopted November 15, 2006.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS GENERALLY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Indecent exposure by waitresses or waiters, § 23-13; tax on meals sold by restaurants, § 37-226 et seq. 
State Law reference— Sanitary requirements for food establishments generally, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-5106 et seq.; regulations of state board of health governing restaurants, § 35.1-14. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-0014 , adopted August 10, 2016, repealed former § 15-21 and enacted a new § 15-21 as set out herein; and repealed §§ 15-22—15-25, 15-27—15-37, 15-39, 15-41—15-46, 15-48, 15-49, and 15-51—15-56 and renumbered former §§ 15-26, 15-38, 15-40, 15-47, and 15-50 as §§ 15-22—15-26 as set out herein. For a complete historical derivation, please see the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 15-21. - Compliance with law. 
All food establishments must comply with the relevant requirements of the Virginia Code and the Virginia Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Sec. 15-22. - Examination and condemnation of food and drink. 
Samples of food and drink may be taken from food establishments and examined by the health authority as often as deemed necessary to determine if such food or drink is adulterated, impure or dangerous. The health authority may condemn, remove and destroy any food or drink deemed adulterated, impure or dangerous. Portions of food once served to customers and left unconsumed shall be deemed adulterated, impure or dangerous and shall be destroyed. Food or drink, after having been once condemned by the health authority shall not thereafter be removed or disposed of by the operator or employee, except at the direction of, and in accordance with the directions of, the health authority. 
(Code 1964, § 33-5; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16) 
State Law reference— Authority to condemn adulterated, impure or dangerous milk, milk product, beverage, food or food product, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1109.  
Sec. 15-23. - Dishwashing equipment. 
All non-restaurant food establishments shall be provided with adequate sinks, one of which shall be a sink of not less than three compartments, with hot and cold running water available to each compartment. 
(Code 1964, § 33-31; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16) 
State Law reference— Daily cleaning of instruments and machinery in food establishments, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-5110.  
Sec. 15-24. - Use of poisonous material in cleaning or polishing utensils. 
No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other poisonous material shall be used in any food establishment for the cleaning or polishing of eating or cooking utensils. 
(Code 1964, § 33-33; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16) 
State Law reference— Daily cleaning of instruments and machinery in food establishments, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-5110.  
Sec. 15-25. - Use of rooms for domestic purposes. 
A person who prepares, furnishes, or prepares and furnishes food intended for individual portion service at the premises of the consumer, whether such premises are temporary or permanent, and as part of a specific menu for a specified number of people, shall not conduct their operation in any room used for domestic purposes. Similarly, no operations of a domestic nature shall be conducted in any room in which the operations of such person previously described in this section are conducted. This section is not applicable to cooks-for-hire. 
(Code 1964, § 33-44; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Sec. 15-26. - Samplings and demonstrations. 
Any sampling or so-called "demonstration" conducted in a food establishment shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter for the operation of a temporary food establishment. Approval in writing of the facilities for such sampling or demonstration by the health authority shall be had before such an operation may lawfully be conducted. 
(Code 1964, § 33-46; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Secs. 15-27—15-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OPERATOR'S PERMIT 
 
Sec. 15-66. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who does not possess a current unrevoked operator's permit issued pursuant to 12 VAC 5-421-3660 to operate any food establishment in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 33-8; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Sec. 15-67. - Prerequisite to issuance of license. 
No license to operate a food establishment shall be issued by any officer or agent of the city until an operator's permit issued pursuant to 12 VAC 5-421-3660 is presented by the applicant, a plan review has been completed, and an application and plan review fee as determined by the health authority is paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1964, § 33-13; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16; Ord. No. 18-0006 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 15-68. - Closing and padlocking establishment operated without permit. 
Upon written notice from the health authority that a food establishment is being operated without the permit required by 12 VAC 5-421-3660, or after such permit has been revoked, the chief of police or his designee, shall close and padlock such food establishment and it shall not be reopened to the public until such permit has been issued or reinstated. 
(Code 1964, § 33-15; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-0014 , adopted August 10, 2016, repealed §§ 15-68—15-73, and renumbered § 15-74 as § 15-68 as set out herein. Former §§ 15-68—15-73 pertained to operator's permits and derived from Code 1964; and Ord. No. 1439, adopted November 15, 2006. The historical notation has been retained for reference.  
Secs. 15-69—15-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FOOD HANDLER'S CARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-0006 , adopted June 13, 2018, changed the title of div. 3 from "Food Handler's Permit" to "Food Handler's Card". 
 
Sec. 15-86. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee who does not possess an unexpired or unrevoked food handler's card issued under this division to work in any food establishment in the city, unless such employee is required to have a food service manager certificate pursuant to section 15-98 or unless otherwise exempted by the health authority. 
(b)  The operator of a mobile food service facility shall be required to obtain a food handler's card under this division, before operating any mobile food service facility within the city, unless the operator is required to have a food service manager certificate pursuant to section 15-98. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a food establishment to employ any person to work therein, unless such person has a valid food handler's card issued under this division or a food service manager certificate pursuant to section 15-98, unless otherwise exempted by the health authority. 
(d)  Anyone need a food handler's card shall make application to the health authority and pay the application fee of $10.00. 
(Ord. No. 484; Code 1964, §§ 33-16, 33-20, 33-80; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16; Ord. No. 18-0006 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 15-87. - To whom issued. 
Food handlers' cards required by this division shall be issued by the health authority only to employees who shall furnish such information and laboratory specimens, submit to such physical examination and tests as the health authority may require, and who have received such instructions in personal hygiene and food establishment sanitation as may be offered or required by the health authority. 
(Code 1964, § 33-17; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16; Ord. No. 18-0006 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 15-88. - Term. 
Each food handler's card issued under this division shall remain in force for not more than two years or until revoked by the health authority for cause. 
(Code 1964, § 33-18; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16; Ord. No. 18-0006 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 15-89. - Posting. 
A food handler's card issued under the provisions of this division shall be kept posted in the place of employment of the holder thereof, together with a complete list of all employees of the food establishment in question. 
(Code 1964, § 33-19; Ord. No. 18-0006 , 6-13-18)  
Secs. 15-90—15-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FOOD SERVICE MANAGER CERTIFICATE 
 
Sec. 15-96. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to require a minimum of one full-time staff supervisor at each food establishment who has been certified in food sanitation. This person shall have successfully completed a health authority approved food manager course, and have the knowledge necessary to provide safe storage, preparation, display and service of foods in a manner to prevent foodborne illness and to protect the public health and shall also have the knowledge to provide training for the employees under their supervision in safe food handling procedures. 
(Ord. No. 905, 9-14-88; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Sec. 15-97. - Rules and regulations for administration and enforcement. 
The health authority or his designee is responsible for the enforcement of this division. The health authority is hereby authorized to make and adopt necessary rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the administration and enforcement of this division, which rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with or an enlargement of any of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 905, 9-14-88; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Sec. 15-98. - Food service manager; responsibilities; certification. 
(a)  No person shall operate a food establishment unless there is at least one full-time certified food service manager on staff. 
(b)  The food service manager shall be responsible for training employees and for establishing sanitary food handling procedures. Written documentation of a training program and training records of individual employees shall be available upon request by the health authority. 
(c)  Before a food service manager's certificate is issued, the applicant must pay a fee of 15 dollars and show proof of having successfully completed a food protection manager certification program that is evaluated and listed by a Conference for Food Protection-recognized accrediting agency as conforming to the Conference for Food Protection Standards for Accreditation of Food Protection Certification Programs. 
(d)  Such certificate shall be issued in the name of the individual only and shall be valid for a period documented on the individual's current certification program certificate. A food service manager's certificate is not transferable from one person to another. 
(e)  A food service manager's certificate shall be renewed for a period documented on the individual's current certification program certificate, upon payment of a fee of 15 dollars to the health authority. 
(f)  The health authority may require certified supervisory personnel to successfully complete additional training as specified by the health authority when: 
(1)  The employing food establishment has repeated or persistent violations of critical health code requirements and effective corrective action has not been taken over a reasonable period of time as determined by the health authority; or 
(2)  The employing food establishment is suspected with reasonable cause by the health authority as the source of foodborne illness. 
All costs associated with required training or testing shall be the responsibility of the food establishment or the individual food service manager. 
(Ord. No. 905, 9-14-88; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16; Ord. No. 18-0006 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 15-99. - Proof of certification. 
Each certified food service manager shall display his certificate in a prominent location in the food establishment or carry it upon his person when on duty as directed by the health authority. 
(Ord. No. 905, 9-14-88; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 15-100. - Exemptions. 
Food establishments that serve, sell or distribute only prepackaged foods and beverages are exempt from the provisions of this division. Temporary food establishments and mobile food service facilities may be exempted by the health authority. The health authority may also grant additional exemptions to this division on the basis of a risk assessment. 
(Ord. No. 905, 9-14-88; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 15-101—15-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-0014 , adopted August 8, 2016 changed the name of article III from "Itinerant Restaurants" to "Temporary Food Establishment" and repealed §§ 15-107—15-118, and enacted a new § 15-107 as set out herein. Former §§ 15-107—15-118 pertained to intinerrant restaurant regulations and derived from Code 1964; and Ord. No. 1439, adopted November 15, 2006. 
 
Sec. 15-106. - Compliance with article. 
(a)  All temporary food establishments must have an operator's permit issued pursuant to 12 VAC 5-421-3660. 
(b)  Upon failure, after warning by the health authority, of any person maintaining or operating any temporary food establishment to comply with any of the requirements set out in this article or in the Virginia Code or the Virginia Administrative Code, the health authority shall request and the chief of police or his designee shall close and padlock the temporary food establishment in question and it shall not be reopened to the public until such compliance is had. 
(Code 1964, §§ 33-53, 33-54; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06 ; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Sec. 15-107. - Application for a temporary food permit. 
Temporary food vendors must apply for a temporary food permit no less than ten calendar days prior to the event. No application for outdoor temporary food sales in conjunction with an event that requires a special event permit pursuant to city code section 2-311, et. seq., will be accepted unless a special event permit application has also been submitted to the special events coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Secs. 15-108—15-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE FOOD SERVICE FACILITIES GENERALLY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-0014 , adopted August 10, 2016, repealed §§ 15-138—15-140 and 15-143—15-151, and renumbered §§ 15-141 and 15-142 as §§ 15-138 and 15-139 as set out herein. Former §§ 15-138—15-140 and 15-143—15-151 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 484; Code 1964; and Ord. No. 1439, adopted November 15, 2006. The historical notation has been retained for reference. 
Cross reference— Regulations governing sales conducted on or adjacent to public right-of-way, § 34-7. 
 
Sec. 15-136. - Compliance with article generally. 
All mobile food service facilities must have an operator's permit issued pursuant to 12 VAC 5-421-3660. The health authority shall approve a mobile food service facility only if it complies with the requirements set out in this article, the Virginia Code and the Virginia Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 484; Code 1964, § 33-66; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Sec. 15-137. - Closing of facility for noncompliance with article. 
Upon failure, after warning from the health authority, of any person maintaining or operating any mobile food service facility to comply with any of the requirements set forth in this article, the health authority shall close the facility and post a notice of such closing upon the facility. The notice shall state that the mobile food service facility has been found in violation of health regulations and that such facility shall remain closed until found to be in full compliance. 
(Ord. No. 484; Code 1964, § 33-67; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Sec. 15-138. - Operation in public parks. 
Approved food service facilities may be operated in all public parks within the city, subject to the approval of the director of parks, recreation and leisure services. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the authority vested in the director of parks, recreation and leisure services by chapter 26 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 484; Code 1964, § 33-82; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Sec. 15-139. - Base of operations for mobile food service facilities. 
All mobile food service facilities shall have as their base of operations a restaurant or other food establishment approved by the health authority. Such base of operations shall have an adequate refrigeration facilities, storage, utensil washing facilities, an approved water supply of approved sanitary quality for the cleaning of utensils and equipment and replenishment of potable water for the mobile food service facility, sewage disposal facilities and space to service the facility. Adequate and satisfactory toilet and hand-washing facilities shall be readily accessible to operators of mobile food service facilities at such base of operations. 
(Ord. No. 484; Code 1964, § 33-68; Ord. No. 1439, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 16-0014 , 8-10-16)  
Chapter 16 - GAMBLING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinances paralleling state misdemeanor statutes, § 2.01c. 
Cross reference— Management of massage parlors not to permit gambling violations, § 19-4. 
State Law reference— Gambling, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Gambling device. A "gambling device" includes: 
(1)  Any device, machine, paraphernalia, equipment or other thing, including books, records and other papers, which are actually used in an illegal gambling operation or activity. 
(2)  Any machine, apparatus, implement, instrument, contrivance, board or other thing, including but not limited to, those depending upon the insertion of a coin or other object for their operation, which operates, either completely automatically or with the aid of some physical act by the player or operator, so that, depending upon elements of chance, it may eject something of value or determine the prize or other thing of value to which the player is entitled; provided, that the return to the user of nothing more than additional chances or the right to use such machine is not deemed something of value within the meaning of this subparagraph; and provided further, that machines that only sell or entitle the user to items of merchandise of equivalent value that may differ from each other in composition, size, shape or color, shall not be deemed gambling devices within the meaning of this subparagraph. 
Such devices are no less gambling devices if they indicate beforehand the definite result of one (1) or more operations but not all the operations, nor are they any less gambling devices if, apart from their use or adaptability as such, they also sell or deliver something of value on a basis other than chance. 
Illegal gambling. The making, placing or receipt of any bet or wager in the city of money or other thing of value, made in exchange for a chance to win a prize, stake or other consideration or thing of value, dependent upon the result of any game, contest or other event the outcome of which is uncertain or a matter of chance, whether such game, contest or event occurs or is to occur inside or outside the limits of this city, shall constitute illegal gambling. 
Interstate gambling means the conduct of an enterprise for profit which engages in the purchase or sale within the commonwealth of any interest in a lottery of another state or country whether or not such interest is an actual lottery ticket, receipt, contingent promise to pay, order to purchase, or other record of such interest. 
Operator. The term "operator" includes any person, firm or association of persons who or which conducts, finances, manages, supervises, directs or owns all or part of an illegal gambling enterprise, activity or operation. 
(Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325.  
Sec. 16-2. - Illegal gambling generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who illegally gambles, including engaging in interstate gambling, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. If an association or pool of persons illegally gamble, each person therein shall be guilty of illegal gambling. 
(Code 1956, § 16-18; Ord. No. 13; Ord. No. 474; Code 1964, § 19-1; Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-326.  
Sec. 16-3. - Winning by fraud. 
If any person, while gambling, cheats or by fraudulent means wins or acquires for himself or another money or any other valuable thing, such person shall be fined not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) times the value of such winnings. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-327.  
Sec. 16-4. - Permitting gambling to continue in one's premises. 
If the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in control of any place or conveyance knows, or reasonably should know, that it is being used for illegal gambling, and permits such gambling to continue without having notified a law-enforcement officer of the presence of such illegal gambling activity, such person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-329.  
Sec. 16-5. - Aiding or abetting operation of illegal gambling activity. 
Any person, other than those specified in other sections of this chapter, who knowingly aids, abets or assists in the operation of an illegal gambling enterprise, activity or operation, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-330.  
Sec. 16-6. - Illegal possession of gambling device. 
A person is guilty of illegal possession of a gambling device when such person manufactures, sells, transports, rents, gives away, places or possesses, or conducts or negotiates any transaction affecting or designed to affect ownership, custody or use of any gambling device, while believing or having reason to believe that such device is to be used in the advancement of any unlawful gambling activity. Illegal possession of a gambling device shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-331.  
Sec. 16-7. - Forfeiture of money, gambling devices, etc., seized from illegal gambling enterprise. 
All money, gambling devices, office equipment and other personal property used in connection with an illegal gambling enterprise or activity, and all money, stakes and things of value received or proposed to be received by a winner in any illegal gambling transaction, which are lawfully seized by any law-enforcement officer or which shall lawfully come into such officer's custody, shall be forfeited to the Commonwealth by order of the court in which a conviction under this chapter is obtained. Such court shall order all money so forfeited to be paid over to the city and, by order, shall make such disposition of other property so forfeited as the court deems proper, including the award of such property to any city or state agency or charitable organization for lawful purposes; or, in case of the sale thereof, the proceeds therefrom to be paid over to the city. Such forfeiture shall not extinguish the rights of any person, without knowledge of the illegal use of such property, who is the lawful owner or who has a lien on the same which has been perfected as provided by law. 
(Code 1956, § 16-21; Code 1964, § 19-6; Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-386.30.  
Sec. 16-8. - Certain acts not deemed "consideration" in prosecution under chapter. 
In any prosecution under this chapter, no consideration shall be deemed to have passed or been given because of any person's attendance upon the premises of another; his execution, mailing or delivery of an entry blank; his answering of questions, verbally or in writing; his witnessing of a demonstration or other proceeding; or any one or more thereof, where no charge is made to, paid by, or any purchase required of him in connection therewith. 
(Code 1964, § 19-5; Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-332.  
Sec. 16-9. - Exceptions from chapter—Contests of speed or skill. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any contest of speed or skill between persons, animals, fowl or vehicles, where participants may receive prizes or different percentages of a purse, stake or premium dependent upon whether they win or lose, or dependent upon their position or score at the end of such contest. 
(b)  Any participant who, for the purpose of competing for any such purse, stake or premium offered in any such contest, knowingly and fraudulently enters any contestant other than the contestant purported to be entered or knowingly and fraudulently enters a contestant in a class in which such contestant does not belong, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-333.  
Sec. 16-10. - Same—Games of chance in private residences. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make it illegal to participate in a game of chance conducted in a private residence, provided such private residence is not commonly used for such games of chance and that there is no operator, as defined in section 16-1. 
(Code 1956, § 16-18; Ord. No. 13; Ord. No. 474; Code 1964, § 19-1; Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-334.  
Sec. 16-11. - Same—Bingo games and raffles permitted by law. 
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any bingo game, instant bingo, raffle or duck race conducted solely by organizations as defined in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.16 which have received a permit as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.25, or which are exempt from the permit requirement under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.23. 
(Code 1964, § 19-16.1; Ord. No. 385; Ord. No. 625, 7-25-79; Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-334.2.  
Sec. 16-12. - Immunity of witness testifying in prosecution under chapter; compulsory testimony. 
No witness, called by the prosecution or by the court, giving evidence in any prosecution under this chapter, shall ever be prosecuted for the offense concerning which such witness testifies. Such witness shall be compelled to testify and for refusing to do so may be punished for contempt. 
(Ord. No. 1448, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-337.  
Chapter 16.1 - HOTELS AND SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-0017 , adopted August 14, 2013, repealed the former chapter 16.1, §§ 16.1-1—16.1-6, and enacted a new chapter 16.1 as set out herein. The former chapter 16.1 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 16.1-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hotel and motel means a facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public for compensation and having ten (10) or more sleeping rooms, that may also have additional accessory services, such as meeting rooms, restaurants and recreational activities. 
Law enforcement personnel means any law enforcement officer, fire marshal or any of his assistants and fire inspector. 
Lodging unit means transient living and sleeping quarters for a person or persons. 
Minor means an individual less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
Person means any individual, firm, owner, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, and unincorporated association governmental body, municipal corporation, executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, agent, occupant or other legal entity. 
Transient means a period of thirty (30) days or less. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0013, 7-9-14 ; Ord. No. 18-0008 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 16.1-2. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. In addition to any penalties imposed for each violation, a judge hearing the case shall order the person responsible for the violation to correct the violation, and each day's default in such correction shall constitute a violation of and a separate offense under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 )  
Sec. 16.1-3. - Enforcement. 
The city manager or his designee, any law enforcement officer, the fire marshal or any of his assistants and the fire inspector, shall have the authority to enforce all provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 16-0012 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 16.1-4—16.1-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-0012 , adopted July 13, 2016, repealed §§ 16.1-4 and 16.1-5, which pertained to access to premises and records and numbering of rooms or units and derived from Ord. No. 13-0017 , adopted August 14, 2013 and Ord. No. 14-0013 , adopted July 9, 2014.  
Sec. 16.1-6. - Guest register generally. 
(a)  Every person operating any hotel or motel in the city shall at all times keep and maintain therein a record, either electronic or in a book/register inscribed with ink or indelible pencil: 
(1)  The name and home address of each guest or visitor and the total number of guests or visitors; 
(2)  The day, month, year and time of arrival of each guest or visitor and the date of check out or departure; 
(3)  The room number assigned to each guest; 
(4)  The date each guest is scheduled to depart; 
(5)  The rate charged and amount collected for rental of the room assigned to each guest; 
(6)  The method of payment for each room; 
Such book or register shall be signed by the person renting a room, or someone of his authority. Until all of the aforesaid entries have been made electronically or in such book or register, no guest shall be permitted to occupy privately any room in such hotel or motel. 
(b)  The guest register shall be kept on the premises of the rooming house, hotel or motel in the guest reception area or guest check-in area or in an office adjacent to that area. The record shall be maintained at that location for two (2) years from and after the date of the last entry in the record. 
(c)  The persons designated in section 22-3 may request to inspect the guest register required by this section at any and all reasonable times. If inspection of the guest register is refused, the operator, manager, or person in charge, shall secure the guest register in the manner required by and in the presence of the person designated in section 22-3 to ensure that no one can tamper with the record until such time as an administrative or criminal search warrant can be obtained or denied. 
(d)  No person shall alter, deface, or erase any record so as to make the information recorded in it illegible or unintelligible, or hinder, obstruct, or interfere with any inspection of the record. 
(e)  Any record maintained in the form of a book shall be permanently bound, with each page sequentially numbered. No page shall be removed from the book. Any record maintained in the form of cards shall be on cards that are numbered sequentially and used in sequence. If the record is maintained electronically, the record shall be printable. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 18-0008 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 16.1-7. - False registration by guests. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, or cause to be written, or knowingly permit to be written, in any electronic record, book or register in any hotel or motel in the city, any other or different name or designation than the true name of the person registered therein. Photo identification or other acceptable form of identification shall be required to be produced at registration. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 18-0008 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 16.1-8. - Registration or occupancy of rooms by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for a minor to rent a hotel or motel room or for the proprietor of a hotel or motel to allow a minor to rent a hotel or motel room. It shall also be unlawful for a minor to occupy a room absent the presence of a parent, guardian, or other responsible adult age 21 or older. This section shall not apply to active duty military members who are in the area on valid work order. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 16-0012 , 7-13-16; Ord. No. 18-0008 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 16.1-9. - Giving false information to obtain lodging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain lodging for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years in any hotel or motel by giving to the proprietor, owner, manager, agent, person in charge or keeper thereof false information as to such person's age, or false information as to the relationship to such person of any alleged parent or guardian, or any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who shall obtain lodging in any such establishment by giving any such false information. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 )  
Sec. 16.1-10. - Renting or occupying room for illegal or unlawful purposes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or occupy any room in any hotel or motel in this city for illegal or unlawful purposes, or for the proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any such hotel or motel to rent, assign to or permit any person to occupy any such room, with knowledge that they intend to use it for illegal or unlawful purposes. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 )  
Sec. 16.1-11. - Maximum occupancy. 
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting or managing a hotel or motel in the city to permit any room or space to be occupied in excess of the maximum occupant load for such room or space, as established by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 18-0008 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 16.1-12. - Length of stay in hotel or motel. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put up or stay at any hotel or motel for longer than 30 days in a 180-day period. This section shall not apply to extended stay hotels as defined in the zoning ordinance that have either been designated as extended stay hotels by the zoning administrator or have received a use permit to operate as an extended stay hotel. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a stay in excess of 30 days in a 180-day period may occur in the following situations: 
(1)  Where there is a written contract or document between a hotel or motel and a business, corporation, firm, individual or governmental agency to house employees or individuals on valid work orders, provided the employee or individual on a valid work order has a primary residence outside the city limits of the cities of Hampton, Poquoson, Newport News or Norfolk. 
(2)  Where the human services director authorizes in writing, a stay for an additional period of up to 30 days to prevent residents from becoming homeless. In the event that the department of human services is unable to identify appropriate alternative housing within 30 days, this 30 day period may be extended in writing by the human services director upon good cause documented. In no event shall a stay authorized under this section be extended for more than 90 days. 
(3)  Where there is written documentation from an attending physician that the individual occupying the lodging unit or a member of their immediate family is receiving long term medical treatment at a facility in the city that makes it necessary to stay in the city for a period exceeding 30 days. Such written documentation shall indicate the expected length of stay necessary to receive the treatment. 
(4)  Where there is a written contract between the hotel or motel and a governmental, charitable or insurance agency to house families in crisis who are receiving temporary housing assistance from said governmental, charitable or insurance agency. 
(c)  The written contract, document, or authorization referred to in subsections b(1)—(4), shall be kept on file by the hotel or motel. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), an owner or operator of a hotel or motel may allow up to two rooms to be used for two bona-fide employees to reside on premises for a hotel or motel with up to 150 rooms, and may allow up to three rooms to be used for three bona-fide employees to reside on premises for any hotel or motel over 150 rooms. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0013, 7-9-14 ; Ord. No. 16-0012 , 7-13-16; Ord. No. 18-0008 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 16.1-13. - Visitors. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to visit a hotel or motel room without first checking in with the hotel or motel front desk. 
(Ord. No. 18-0008 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 16.1-14. - Hotel operating license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, conduct or operate any hotel or motel in the city, unless he has a valid hotel operating license to do so issued pursuant to this chapter. The permit shall be posted in a public place in a conspicuous location for public viewing. Proof of an applicable license shall be the burden of the hotel or motel operator. A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be separate from any license required by chapter 18.1—Licenses. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 16-0012 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 16.1-15. - Application. 
Any person desiring a hotel operating license required by this chapter shall make application therefore to the city manager or his designee on a form to be prescribed by him, no later than October 1st of each year, which application shall include a fee payment of $100.00; state the name, if any, of the hotel or motel; the location where the same will be maintained, conducted or operated; the names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership thereof, if privately owned; the names and addresses of all officers and trustees thereof, if owned by a non-incorporated association; the names and addresses of the officers thereof, if owned by a corporation; and the name and address of the person who will be in actual charge of the operation thereof. The application will also identify how many rooms are available for rent. The application shall also contain the name and address of any other hotel or motel operated, owned or managed by the licensee even if not in the City of Hampton. The application shall also contain any additional information the city manager or his designee requires. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 16-0012 , 7-13-16; Ord. No. 18-0008 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 16.1-16. - Inspection. 
Upon receipt of a complete application for a hotel operating license, the city manager or his designee shall investigate the facts stated therein and shall cause an inspection to be done of the premises by the departments community development, fire, police and health to ensure there are no outstanding violations of any applicable local, state or federal law on the property. All such inspections shall be done in accordance with Virginia law. The police division shall also provide information on calls for service and a record of arrests at the location for the year preceding the application or renewal. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 16-0012 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 16.1-17. - Hotel operating license issuance, expiration and renewal. 
If the city manager or his designee determines from the investigation that the hotel or motel is in compliance with the hotel operating license conditions, a license shall be granted. Otherwise, the license shall be denied. If issued, the license shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. The license may be renewed annually after an investigation and inspection as required for a new license pursuant to section 16.1-16. 
If a hotel or motel has passed the annual investigation and inspection and had no violations of federal, state or local laws or regulations, including those requirements found in section 16.1-18, for two consecutive years, upon renewal, a license which is valid for a three-year period will be issued. If a hotel or motel is found to have violated any federal, state or local laws or regulations, including those requirements found in section 16.1-18, during the three-year period of the license, the license may be revoked by the city manager or his designee, and the hotel or motel will again be required to apply for license renewal on an annual basis. 
Prior to refusing to issue a new or renewal license, the city manager or his designee shall first give the applicant at least 15 days' written notice and an opportunity to meet the city manager or his designee to discuss the reason for the refusal. 
Notice may be sent by certified mail to the applicant at the address given on the license application, which shall constitute sufficient service thereof. The city manager or his designee shall pursue criminal charges; seek an injunction, or both, against any person or persons operating a hotel or motel without a currently valid license. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 16-0012 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 16.1-18. - Hotel operating license conditions. 
Any hotel operating license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following general conditions, and any additional specific conditions noted by the city manager or his designee in the license: 
(a)  The motel or hotel shall be operated and maintained in conformance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the zoning code, building code, fire code, health code, business license code, criminal code, and the provisions of this ordinance; 
(b)  The person or persons in charge of operating or owning the motel or hotel shall promptly notify the City of Hampton Police Division of any actual or suspected criminal violations, including, but not limited to, contributing to the delinquency of a minor; trespassing; prostitution; and controlled substance possession, manufacturing or distribution; 
(c)  Each lodging unit in any hotel or motel shall be numbered in a plain, conspicuous manner. Such numbers shall be at least three inches high and shall be placed at eye level on the outside of the outer door of each lodging unit, and no two lodging units shall bear the same number; 
(d)  No lodging unit shall be rented in any hotel or motel in the city more than once between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the next day, except in the case of a pre-scheduled and documented business contract; 
(e)  It is prohibited for the owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of a hotel or motel to permit or allow a person to put up or stay at a hotel or motel in excess of thirty (30) days in a 180-day period, except as authorized by section 16.1-12; 
(f)  A receipt showing payment received shall be provided to all hotel or motel guests; and 
(g)  All registries or other information required to be maintained by section 16.1-6, section 16.1-8, or section 16.1-12, shall be provided to the city manager or his designee, on the first of every month, by mailing paper copies of such documentation, or by sending electronically in a manner approved by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee may periodically request additional records or supporting records. 
To the extent allowed by Virginia law, the city shall have the right to inspect the premises to ensure compliance with all license conditions. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 16-0012 , 7-13-16; Ord. No. 18-0008 , 6-13-18)  
Sec. 16.1-19. - Transfer. 
A hotel operating license issued under this chapter shall not be transferable to another owner or to another location. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 16-0012 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 16.1-20. - Suspension and revocation of hotel operating license. 
The city manager or his designee may at any time, after giving at least 15 days' written notice and an opportunity to be heard by the city manager or his designee, revoke or suspend for such length of time as he may deem proper any hotel operating license issued under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  Fraud or misrepresentation by the licensee in the procurement of such license; 
(b)  Any violation of any applicable local, state or federal law; 
(c)  Failure to comply with the general or specific terms of the license; and 
(d)  Any illegal or unlawful acts caused, allowed or permitted to be done by the licensee or his designated manager or operating agent. 
The notice referred to above may be sent by certified mail to such licensee at the address given by him on the application for the licensee, which shall constitute sufficient service thereof. The city manager or his designee shall pursue criminal charges; seek an injunction, or both, against any person or persons operating a hotel or motel without a currently valid license. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 16-0012 , 7-13-16)  
Sec. 16.1-21. - Does not authorize establishment not conforming to laws or ordinances. 
No hotel operating license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the operation of any hotel or motel that does not conform to the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city applicable thereto. 
( Ord. No. 13-0017, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 16-0012 , 7-13-16)  
Chapter 17 - LIBRARIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Libraries generally, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-1 et seq.; local libraries, § 42.1-33 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 17-1—17-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GEORGE WYTHE LAW LIBRARY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Law libraries, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-60 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-16. - Designated. 
The law library for the support of which the fund created by the imposition and assessment of costs under section 17-17 was created is hereby designated as "The George Wythe Law Library." 
(Ord. No. 106; Code 1964, § 2-44; Ord. No. 1440, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 17-17. - Assessment of additional court costs in civil actions for support of library. 
(a)  Pursuant to § 42.1-70 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed and assessed, as part of the costs incident to each civil action filed in any court located within the city, the sum of two dollars ($2.00) for the support of the library referred to in section 17-16. 
(b)  The assessment provided for in this section shall be in addition to all other costs prescribed by law, but shall not apply to civil actions in which the state, or any other political subdivision thereof, or the federal government is a party and in which the costs are assessed against the state, or a political subdivision thereof, or the federal government. 
(Ord. No. 106; Ord. No. 158; Ord. No. 544, 9-28-77; Code 1964, § 2-45; Ord. No. 975, 10-10-90; Ord. No. 1440, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Authority for subsection (a) above and provisions similar to subsection (b), Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Sec. 17-18. - Collection, remittance and disbursement of assessments imposed by section 17-17. 
The assessment imposed by section 17-17 shall be collected by the clerk of the court wherein the civil action is filed, except that, where a civil action is instituted by a civil warrant issued by a magistrate, then the magistrate shall collect the assessment and pay same to the clerk of the court in which the action is to be heard. All such assessments shall be remitted to the city treasurer and held by him, subject to disbursements by the city council, as a fund for the acquisition of law books and law periodicals and computer legal research services and equipment, and maintenance of the George Wythe Law Library, including compensation to be paid to librarians and other necessary staff for the maintenance of such library and acquisition of suitable quarters for such library. 
(Ord. No. 106; Ord. No. 158; Ord. No. 544, 9-28-77; Code 1964, § 2-45; Ord. No. 1440, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Sec. 17-19. - Acceptance of contributions from bar associations. 
The city council may accept contributions to the fund created by the imposition and assessment of costs under section 17-17 from any bar association. 
(Ord. No. 106; Code 1964, § 2-46; Ord. No. 1440, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Sec. 17-20. - Appointment and compensation of librarian. 
The city council shall appoint a librarian of the George Wythe Law Library at such salary as shall be established by the council, from year to year, all to be paid out of the fund created by the imposition and assessment of costs under section 17-17. 
(Ord. No. 106; Code 1964, § 2-47; Ord. No. 1440, 11-15-06) 
State Law reference— Compensation of librarian to be fixed by council and paid from fund referred to above, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Chapter 18 - RESERVED* 
*Editor's note— Ord. No. 1159, adopted Jan. 24, 1996, amended the Code of Ordinances by repealing Ch. 18, Licenses, in its entirety. This chapter was derived from the following legislation: 
Ord. No. 	Sec. 	Ord. No. 	Sec. 
80 	1—4 		4.5 
	6—9 		11—29 
	33—35 		40 
	42, 43 		46—49 
	51—55 		57, 58 
	60, 61 		63—66 
	68—71 		73—75 
	77—83 		85—87 
	89—94 		96—98 
	100—103 		105—108 
	118 		198 
 
Ord. No. 	Ord. No. 	Ord. No. 	Ord. No. 	Ord. No. 	Ord. No. 
100 	105 	122 	142 	143 	144 
146 	148 	165 	167 	180 	181 
197 	220 	234 	263 	266 	292 
293 	294 	309 	310 	315 	338 
365 	366 	368 	369 	370 	371 
408 	409 	463 	500 	510 	511 
 
Code 1964 	Code 1964 	Code 1964 	Code 1964 
22-1, 22-2 	22-3.1 	22-4—22-5.1 	22-7—22-13 
22-15—22-17 	22-19 	22-21—22-25 	22-27, 22-28 
22-30—22-39 	22-40—22-44.1 	22-45 	22-47—22-58.1 
22-59—22-62 	22-64—22-66 	22-68—22-70 	22-70.1, 22-72 
22-74—22-79 	22-81—22-89 	22-91—22-93 	22-95—22-101 
22-103—22-114.1 	22-115—22-135 	22-139—22-149.2 	22-150—22-159 
 
Ord. No. 	Sec. 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Sec. 	Date 
569 		 4-12-78 	595 		11-21-78 
647 		 2-27-80 	670 		 9-24-80 
718 		 4-28-82 	727 		 9- 8-82 
743 		 2- 9-83 	762 	22-42, 22-43 	11- 9-83 
787 		10-10-84 		22-49 	
790 		12-12-84 		22-52 	
795 		 3-27-85 		22-54 	
808 		11-13-85 		22-57 	
842 		11-12-86 		22-70 	
870 		10-28-87 		22-75, 22-76 	
907 		 9-14-88 		22-78 	
949 		10-11-89 		22-82, 22-83 	
962 		 2-28-90 		22-85 	
1032 		 1-22-92 		22-106, 	
			22-107 		
1072 		12- 9-92 		22-144 	
1077 		 1-27-93 		22-149 	
1125 		 7-13-94 		22-156 	
1126 		 7-13-94 			
 
See Ch. 18.1 following for the city's current provisions pertaining to licenses.  
Chapter 18.1 - LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18.1-1. - Overriding conflicting ordinances. 
Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the Charter of the City of Hampton, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by this governing body, whether or not compiled in the Code of the City of Hampton, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within this city. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-2. - Adoption of state law and guidelines. 
(a)  As to all questions in regard to the duty and conduct of officers of the city on collecting and enforcing the taxes imposed by this chapter and in regard to questions of construction, and for definitions of terms used in this chapter and the rules and regulations applicable to putting the same in operation, reference is hereby made to the laws of the state for the assessment, levy and the collection of taxes for the current year, or to so much thereof as is applicable to this chapter and is not inconsistent with it and the general ordinances of the city. For the conduct and guidance of the officers of the city and other parties affected by this chapter and for fixing their powers, rights, duties and obligations, the provisions of such laws, so far as applicable, are hereby adopted, without being specifically herein quoted. 
(b)  For purposes of determining the proper category within which to place a business, profession or occupation in determining tax liability, the commissioner of the revenue shall utilize the current edition of the "Guidelines for Business, Professional and Occupational License Tax," as published by the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Taxation, or successor document. Those businesses, professions and occupations for which no guidance is available shall be taxed in accordance with this chapter unless specifically exempted from taxation by federal or state law or by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701.  
Sec. 18.1-3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise required by the context: 
Affiliated group means: 
(1)  One (1) or more chains of corporations subject to inclusion connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is a corporation subject to inclusion if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least eighty (80) percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the corporations subject to inclusion, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other corporations subject to inclusion; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least eighty (80) percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one (1) of the other subject to inclusion corporations. As used in this subdivision, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "corporation subject to inclusion" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two (2) or more corporations if five (5) or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least eighty (80) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least eighty (80) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation, and 
b.  More than fifty (50) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than fifty (50) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one (2) or more of the corporations subject to inclusion, including the common parent corporation is a non stock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this subdivision shall refer to the non stock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
(3)  Two (2) or more entities if such entities satisfy the requirements in subdivision (1) or (2) of this definition as if they were corporations and the ownership interests therein were stock. 
Assessment: A determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
Assessor and assessing official: The City of Hampton Commissioner of the Revenue. 
Base year: Except for contractors subject to the provisions of Virginia Code section 58.1-3715, the preceding year's gross receipts for either the fiscal year or the calendar year used by the business; provided, that the year employed shall also coincide with the year used for federal and state income tax purposes. 
Broker: An agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis. 
Business: A course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one (1) business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (i) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or (ii) filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
Charitable nonprofit organization: An organization which is described in Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(3) and to which contributions are deductible by the contributor under Internal Revenue Code section 170, except that educational institutions shall be limited to schools, colleges and other similar institutions of learning. 
Commission merchant: Any person engaged in the business of selling merchandise on commission by sample, circular, or catalogue for a regularly established retailer, who has no stock or inventory under his control other than floor samples held for demonstration or sale and owned by the principal retailer. 
Commissioner: The City of Hampton Commissioner of the Revenue. 
Commodity: Staples such as wool, cotton, etc., which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
Contractor shall have the meaning prescribed in § 58.1-3714(D) of the Code of Virginia, as amended, whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract. 
Dealer, for purposes of this chapter shall mean any person, other than a motor vehicle dealer, engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
Definite place of business: An office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for thirty (30) consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not subject to licensure as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
Direct seller: Any person who: 
(1)  Engages in the trade or business of selling or soliciting the sale of consumer products primarily in private residences and maintains no public location for the conduct of such business; and 
(2)  Receives remuneration for such activities, with substantially all of such remuneration being directly related to sales or other sales-oriented services, rather than to the number of hours worked; and 
(3)  Performs such activities pursuant to a written contract between such person and the person for whom the activities are performed and such contract provides that such person will not be treated as an employee with respect to such activities for federal tax purposes. 
Financial services: The buying, selling, handling, managing, investing and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities or other investments and shall include the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
Gems: Any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry. 
Gross receipts: The whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of chapter 37 of title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950 (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq.), as amended, and this chapter. However, the term "gross receipts" shall not include any amount paid to the United States, the commonwealth or any county, city or town for the Virginia retail sales or use tax, for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes or for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
Hotels, motels, boardinghouses and similar establishments applies to those establishments when the number of bedrooms provided for transient guests shall be three (3) or more or, in the case of a boardinghouse, unless the number of boarders at any time shall be more than five (5). 
License year: The calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
Motor vehicle dealer shall have the same meaning as defined in § 46.2-1500 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Person: An individual, or a form of organization for the conduct of business including, but not limited to, companies, corporations, partnerships, etc. 
Personal services: Rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this ordinance, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this ordinance unless exempted from local license tax by title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Precious metals: Any item except coins, composed in whole or in part, in gold, silver, platinum or platinum alloys. 
Professional services: Services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the Virginia Department of Taxation may list in the business, professional, occupational license (BPOL) guidelines promulgated pursuant to Virginia Code § 58.1-3701. The department shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used in its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
Purchases: All goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all such goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale as merchandise. Such merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
Real estate services: Providing a service with respect to the purchase, sale, lease, rental, or appraisal of real property. 
Retailer or retail merchant: Any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial, industrial and governmental users. 
Security, for purposes of this chapter, shall have the same meaning as in the Securities Act (§ 13.1-501 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. 
Services: Things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares, or merchandise. 
Wholesaler or wholesale merchant: Any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial, industrial and governmental users which because of the quantity, price, or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700.1.  
Sec. 18.1-4. - License requirements; due dates; limitations and extensions. 
(a)  License requirements: 
(1)  This chapter is in compliance with Virginia Code § 58.1-3703.1, which requires the business license ordinance have substantially similar provisions. 
(2)  Every person shall apply for a license for each business or profession when engaging in a business in this city if (i) such person maintains a definite place of business in this city; (ii) such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere, but does maintain an abode in this city, which abode, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be deemed a definite place of business; (iii) there is no definite place of business in this city but the person operates amusement machines or is engaged in business as an itinerant merchant, peddler, carnival, circus as specified in Virginia Code §§ 58.1-3717, 58.1-3718, or 58.1-3728, respectively; or is engaged in business as a contractor subject to Virginia Code § 58.1-3715, or public service corporation subject to Virginia Code § 58.1-3731. 
(3)  A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business and for each business. A person engaged in two (2) or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one (1) license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (i) each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of this city; (ii) all of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; (iii) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts; (iv) if the business is a motor vehicle dealer who does not elect to use the alternate method as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(4)  Any person doing business at more than one (1) place of business shall be required to take out a separate license for each such place of business. Each such place of business shall constitute a separate and distinct place of business requiring the payment of a license tax as provided for under this chapter. 
(5)  If the holder of a business license ceases to conduct business at the location specified on the license, the license shall thereupon expire, and such holder shall inform the commissioner of the revenue in writing within 30 days after ceasing to conduct business at such location. If the holder of a business license desires to change his place of business to a different location within this city, he shall inform the commissioner of the revenue in writing before beginning to operate at the new location and the license may be reissued in accordance with this section and section 18.1-12. 
(b)  Due dates: 
(1)  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business if he was not subject to licensing in this city on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March 1 of the current license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding license year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(2)  All license taxes imposed by this chapter, except as otherwise herein provided, shall be deemed to be due on the date of the beginning of the business, employment or profession. Any person prosecuting any licensable business, employment or profession on or before the first day of January of any year shall file the license application with the commissioner of the revenue on or before March 1 of such year and the license tax shall be paid to the city treasurer, as collector of city taxes and levies, on or before the first day of March, except as otherwise herein provided. Any person beginning a business, employment or profession after the first day of January of any year, unless otherwise stated, shall first file with the commissioner of the revenue an application for a license covering such business, employment or profession and the license tax shall be paid to the city treasurer, as collector of city taxes and levies, on or before the expiration of one (1) month from the date of beginning business or the first day of March, whichever is later. The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts. 
(3)  The assessor may grant an extension of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension may be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension, together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, with a penalty of ten (10) percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(4)  No such license shall be issued until such applicant has produced satisfactory evidence that all delinquent business license, business personal property, meals, transient occupancy severance and admissions taxes owed to the city have been paid which have been properly assessed against the applicant by the city. 
(5)  A license issued under this chapter shall not be valid or effective until the tax required by this chapter has been paid to the city treasurer, as collector of city taxes and levies, and such payment shall be shown on the license. If the business in question is one for which a license can be granted only on the certificate of a court or other officer, such license shall not be valid or effective until such certificate has been obtained. 
(c)  Limitations and extensions: 
(1)  Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this chapter, both the assessor and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(2)  Notwithstanding Virginia Code § 58.1-3903, the assessor shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six (6) preceding license years. 
(3)  The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in Virginia Code § 58.1-3940, two (2) years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this subdivision of the chapter, two (2) years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to section 18.1-17(b) or (d) of this chapter, or two (2) years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to Virginia Code § 58.1-3984 or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07; Ord. No. 12-0002, 1-11-12)  
Sec. 18.1-5. - General duties of commissioner of the revenue under chapter. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to require all persons prosecuting any business, employment or profession for which a license is required by this chapter to procure such license and pay the license tax therefor. The license shall be valid only for the location specified and shall expire immediately if the business ceases to operate at that location. Should any license tax not be paid, the commissioner of the revenue shall prosecute for such violation. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue, in performing the duties of such office, shall have authority to require any person or entity doing business in the city to furnish information concerning subcontractors to whom any part of a contract is sublet. The information shall include, but is not limited to, a list of the names and addresses of each subcontractor, and the amount of each subcontract. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue is authorized to determine the construction or application of any doubtful or disputed provisions of this chapter. Such determination shall be subject to judicial review and the appeal process promulgated by the Virginia Department of Taxation, as provided by law. 
(d)  In every case in which a license tax is imposed by the state on any business, employment or profession not specifically mentioned in this chapter, a city license tax equal to the amount of the state tax is hereby imposed for the privilege of conducting such business, employment or profession in the city. 
(e)  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation from the assessor. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or (ii) the assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(f)  As one (1) of the means of ascertaining the amount of any license tax due under this chapter, the commissioner of the revenue, any duly sworn deputy, or attorney for the commissioner of the revenue, may propound interrogatories to an applicant for a license and use such other evidence as he may procure. Such interrogatories shall be answered under oath. It shall be unlawful for any applicant to refuse to answer such interrogatories under oath. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07; Ord. No. 12-0003, 1-11-12)  
Sec. 18.1-6. - Exemptions from chapter. 
All exhibitions, performances or events open to the public and occurring on the premises or within a city-owned permanent coliseum, arena or auditorium, shall be exempt from any license required pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3729.  
Sec. 18.1-7. - Chapter does not affect other taxes. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to repeal any tax imposed by any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city upon motor vehicles, persons, property, admissions, charges for utility services or any subject not herein mentioned unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
Cross reference— Taxation generally, Ch. 37.  
Sec. 18.1-8. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this chapter is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a privilege subject to licensure at a definite place of business within this city. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one (1) or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Virginia Code § 58.1-3715. 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two (2) or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality; 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the to definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed; and 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one (1) definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to this city solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
(c)  Agreements. The assessor may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of Virginia concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one (1) or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than one hundred (100) percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. If an agreement cannot be reached, either the assessor or taxpayer may seek an advisory opinion from the department of taxation pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701; notice of the request shall be given to the other party. Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3993, when a taxpayer has demonstrated to a court that two (2) or more political subdivisions of Virginia have assessed taxes on gross receipts that may create a double assessment within the meaning of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3986, the court shall enter such orders pending resolution of the litigation as may be necessary to ensure that the taxpayer is not required to pay multiple assessments even though it is not then known which assessment is correct and which is erroneous. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700.1(A)(3).  
Sec. 18.1-9. - Calculation of gross receipts for tax purposes. 
The calculation of gross receipts for license tax purposes under this chapter shall be on either a cash or accrual basis; provided, however, that the basis used shall coincide with the system of accounts used by the taxpayer for federal and state income tax purposes. The preceding year's gross receipts may be either the fiscal year or the calendar year used by the business; provided, that the year employed shall also coincide with the year used for federal and state income tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-10. - Exclusions and deductions from gross receipts. 
(a)  Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
(b)  All provisions for exclusions and deductions from gross receipts as set forth in Virginia State Code § 58.1-3732. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-11. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  Penalties: 
(1)  A penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the assessing official if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the assessing official, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the assessing official is not paid within thirty (30) days the treasurer may impose a ten (10) percent late payment penalty. If the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer, the penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed shall be abated by the official who assessed them. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 
(2)  "Acted responsibly" means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
(3)  "Events beyond the taxpayer's control" include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the assessing official who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
(4)  Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. The conviction of any person or entity for a violation of any provision of this chapter and the imposition of a penalty therefor shall not relieve such person from liability for any tax imposed upon him by this chapter. 
(b)  Interest: 
(1)  Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any business license tax from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under Virginia Code section 58.1-3916. 
(2)  No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than thirty (30) days from the date of the payment that created the refund or the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1.  
Sec. 18.1-12. - Prerequisites to validity. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall not license any business at a particular location until it is confirmed that the activity is permitted under applicable law, including but not limited to the city zoning ordinance. 
(b)  If the business in question is one for which a license can be granted only on the certificate of a court or other officer, such license shall not be valid or effective until such certificate has been obtained. This requirement shall include, but is not limited to, licenses issued to the following: 
Bondsman; 
Dealers in precious metals; 
Private security services businesses and their employees; 
Pawnbroker. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07; Ord. No. 12-0001, 1-11-12)  
Sec. 18.1-13. - Display of license, tag or sign; inspection of licensee's premises. 
(a)  Every person required to pay a license tax under the provisions of this chapter shall keep the license upon which such tax was paid in a convenient place and, whenever required to do so, shall exhibit the same to any police officer detailed or authorized to inspect licenses or to any authorized representative of the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  Every person required to obtain any license tag or sign under the provisions of this chapter shall keep the tag or sign in a convenient place and, whenever required to do so, shall exhibit such tag or sign to any police officer detailed or authorized to inspect such tag or sign or to any authorized representative of the commissioner of the revenue. 
(c)  Every person in charge of any premises where a business, occupation, profession or other activity required to be licensed under this article is conductive or practical shall permit any member of the police department, when detailed or authorized to make such inspections, and the license inspector to make a physical inspection of the entire premises, for the purpose of ascertaining license tax liability, at any time during regular business operation hours. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-14. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  Licenses issued under this chapter shall be transferable, except where otherwise provided. In no case shall any transfer of the license be legal or valid until notice in writing of such transfer has been given to the commissioner of the revenue and he has approved such transfer in writing on the license. Such notice shall state the time of the transfer, the place of the business and the name of the person to whom transferred. The transfer of such license shall not be valid or effective until a service charge of one dollar ($1.00) has been paid by the licensee and receipt of such payment shall be shown on the certificate of transfer. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, only the part of a license based on gross receipts that is in excess of gross receipts of the transfer or for that part of the year he has prosecuted business under such license shall be transferable. The person to whom such license is being transferred shall pay the additional estimated license tax to the end of the license year or an amount sufficient to make the minimum cost of the license as provided in this chapter, whichever is the greater. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer or attempt to transfer any license contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The commissioner of the revenue shall keep a record of transfers made pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-15. - Estimates for ascertaining tax for beginners or those in business for only part of preceding year. 
(a)  For the purpose of ascertaining the tax to be paid by any person beginning a new business, employment or profession and whose license tax under this chapter is based on gross receipts, gross purchases, or gross commissions, the applicant for the license shall reasonably estimate the basis for measuring the license tax between the date of issuance of the license and the thirty-first of December following. 
(b)  The license tax of any person who was licensed at a definite place of business for only a part of the next preceding license year shall be computed for the then-current license year on the basis of a reasonable estimate of the amount of gross receipts or gross purchases which the licensee will make throughout the then-current license year; provided, however, that any commission merchant shall be licensed on the basis of gross commissions of the next preceding license year or any part thereof. 
(c)  Every underestimate under this section shall be subject to correction by the commissioner of the revenue, whose duty it shall be to assess such licensee with such additional taxes as may be found to be due after the close of the license year on the basis of gross receipts, gross purchases, or gross commissions. In case of an overestimate under this section, the commissioner of the revenue shall order a refund or credit in the amount of the overpaid tax on the license tax for the following year. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-16. - Record-keeping and audits. 
(a)  Every person who is assessable with a local license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within this city. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit at the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside this city, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the assessor's office upon demand. 
(b)  Upon the filing of a report under this section, or in any case in which the commissioner of the revenue shall deem it advisable, the commissioner of the revenue shall investigate and ascertain whether the person filing a report or return has made a correct report or return and, to that end, the commissioner of the revenue may summon such person before him and require the production of any and all of his records, books and papers likely to throw any light upon the matter under investigation. The commissioner of the revenue may also make, or cause to be made, such other and further investigations, examinations and audits of the records, books and papers of such person as he shall deem proper, in order to determine accurately the proper report or return to be made by the person in question. 
(c)  All invoices, records and general books of account referred to in this section shall be open to inspection and examination, on the premises of the business, employment or profession in question, by the commissioner of the revenue, or any other officer of the city charged in any manner with the duty of assessing or collecting license taxes. 
(d)  If, upon an investigation pursuant to this section, it shall appear that the license basis or other matters pertinent to assessment were incorrectly reported or returned, the commissioner of the revenue shall assess the person in question with the proper license tax. 
(e)  Any person who shall fail to appear before the commissioner of the revenue and produce such records, books and papers, when duly summoned, or who shall refuse to permit the commissioner to make or cause to be made such other and further investigation and audit of such books and papers, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Each day's refusal to furnish such access or information shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  If appropriate, the penalty provisions of Virginia Code § 18.1-11 of this chapter shall apply. 
(g)  The enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance are subject to the limitations of section 18.1-4 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3111.  
Sec. 18.1-17. - Administrative appeals to commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this article: 
Amount in dispute, when used with respect to taxes due or assessed, means the amount specifically identified in the administrative appeal or application for judicial review as disputed by the party filing such appeal or application. 
Appealable event means an increase in the assessment of a local license tax payable by a taxpayer, the denial of a refund, or the assessment of a local license tax where none previously was assessed, arising out of the local assessing official's (i) examination of records, financial statements, books of account, or other information for the purpose of determining the correctness of an assessment; (ii) determination regarding the rate or classification applicable to the licensable business; (iii) assessment of a local license tax when no return has been filed by the taxpayer; or (iv) denial of an application for correction of erroneous assessment attendant to the filing of an amended application for license. 
Frivolous means a finding, based on specific facts, that the party asserting the appeal is unlikely to prevail upon the merits because the appeal is (i) not well grounded in fact; (ii) not warranted by existing law or a good faith argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law; (iii) interposed for an improper purpose, such as to harass, to cause unnecessary delay in the payment of tax or a refund, or to create needless cost from the litigation; or (iv) otherwise frivolous. 
Jeopardize by delay means a finding, based on specific facts, that a taxpayer desires to (i) depart quickly from the locality; (ii) remove his property therefrom; (iii) conceal himself or his property; or (iv) do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(b)  Filing and contents of administrative appeal. Any person assessed with a local license tax as a result of an appealable event as defined in this section may file an administrative appeal of the assessment within one (1) year from the last day of the tax year for which such assessment is made, or within one (1) year from the date of the appealable event, whichever is later, with the commissioner of the revenue or other local assessing official. The appeal must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, the tax periods covered by the challenged assessments, the amount in dispute, the remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The assessor may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, an audit or further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the appeal. The assessment placed at issue in the appeal shall be deemed prima facie correct. The assessor shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a written determination to the taxpayer setting forth the facts and arguments in support of his decision. 
(c)  Notice of right of appeal and procedures. Every assessment made by a commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official pursuant to an appealable event shall include or be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to file an administrative appeal and the specific procedures to be followed in the jurisdiction, the name and address to which the appeal should be directed, an explanation of the required content of the appeal, and the deadline for filing the appeal. 
(d)  Suspension of collection activity during appeal. Provided a timely and complete administrative appeal is filed, collection activity with respect to the amount in dispute shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official, unless the treasurer or other official responsible for the collection of such tax (i) determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay as defined in this section; (ii) is advised by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time; or (iii) is advised by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official that the appeal is frivolous as defined in this section. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 18.1-11, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. 
(e)  Procedure in event of nondecision. Any taxpayer whose administrative appeal to the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official pursuant to the provisions of subdivision 5 of this subsection has been pending for more than one (1) year without the issuance of a final determination may, upon not less than thirty (30) days' written notice to the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official, elect to treat the appeal as denied and appeal the assessment to the tax commissioner in accordance with the provisions of subdivision 6 of this subsection. The tax commissioner shall not consider an appeal filed pursuant to the provisions of this subsection if he finds that the absence of a final determination on the part of the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official was caused by the willful failure or refusal of the taxpayer to provide information requested and reasonably needed by the commissioner or other assessing official to make his determination. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1.  
Sec. 18.1-17.1. - Administrative appeal to the tax commissioner. 
(a)  [ Generally. ] Any person assessed with a local license tax as a result of a determination, upon an administrative appeal to the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official pursuant to section 18.1-17, that is adverse to the position asserted by the taxpayer in such appeal may appeal such assessment to the tax commissioner within ninety (90) days of the date of the determination by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official. The appeal shall be in such form as the tax commissioner may prescribe and the taxpayer shall serve a copy of the appeal upon the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official. The tax commissioner shall permit the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official to participate in the proceedings, and shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within ninety (90) days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required. The appeal shall proceed in the same manner as an application pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1821, and the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1822. 
(b)  Suspension of collection activity during appeal. On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under subsection a of this section, collection activity with respect to the amount in dispute shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the treasurer or other official responsible for the collection of such tax (i) determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay as defined in this section; (ii) is advised by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official, or the tax commissioner, that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time; or (iii) is advised by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official that the appeal is frivolous as defined in this section. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 18.1-11, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The requirement that collection activity be suspended shall cease unless an appeal pursuant to subsection a of this section is filed and served on the necessary parties within thirty (30) days of the service of notice of intent to file such appeal. 
(c)  Implementation of determination of tax commissioner. Promptly upon receipt of the final determination of the tax commissioner with respect to an appeal pursuant to subsection a of this section, the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall take those steps necessary to calculate the amount of tax owed by or refund due to the taxpayer consistent with the tax commissioner's determination and shall provide that information to the taxpayer and to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  If the determination of the tax commissioner sets forth a specific amount of tax due, the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall certify the amount to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a bill to the taxpayer for such amount due, together with interest accrued and penalty, if any is authorized by this article, within thirty (30) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner. 
(2)  If the determination of the tax commissioner sets forth a specific amount of refund due, the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall certify the amount to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a payment to the taxpayer for such amount due, together with interest accrued pursuant to this article, within thirty (30) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner. 
(3)  If the determination of the tax commissioner does not set forth a specific amount of tax due, or otherwise requires the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official to undertake a new or revised assessment that will result in an obligation to pay a tax that has not previously been paid in full, the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall promptly commence the steps necessary to undertake such new or revised assessment, and provide the same to the taxpayer within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, or within sixty (60) days after receipt from the taxpayer of any additional information requested or reasonably required under the determination of the tax commissioner, whichever is later. The commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall certify the new assessment to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a bill to the taxpayer for the amount due, together with interest accrued and penalty, if any is authorized by this article, within thirty (30) days of the date of the new assessment. 
(4)  If the determination of the tax commissioner does not set forth a specific amount of refund due, or otherwise requires the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official to undertake a new or revised assessment that will result in an obligation on the part of the locality to make a refund of taxes previously paid, the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall promptly commence the steps necessary to undertake such new or revised assessment, and provide the same to the taxpayer within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, or within sixty (60) days after receipt from the taxpayer of any additional information requested or reasonably required under the determination of the tax commissioner, whichever is later. The commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall certify the new assessment to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a refund to the taxpayer for the amount of tax due, together with interest accrued, within thirty (30) days of the date of the new assessment. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1.  
Sec. 18.1-18. - Proration of license taxes. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall not impose a license tax based on gross receipts on a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling, or upon a person, firm or corporation for any fraction of a year during which such person, firm or corporation has permanently ceased to engage in such business, trade, profession, occupation or calling within the city. 
(b)  In the event a person, firm or corporation ceases to engage in a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling within the city during a year for which a license tax based on gross receipts has already been paid, the taxpayer shall be entitled upon application to a refund for that portion of the license tax already paid, prorated on a monthly basis so as to ensure that the licensed privilege is taxed only for that fraction of the year during which it is exercised within the city. The commissioner of the revenue may elect to remit any refunds in the ensuing fiscal year and may offset against such refund any amount of past-due taxes owed by the same taxpayer. In no event shall the commissioner of the revenue be required to refund any part of a flat fee or minimum flat tax. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue shall issue, to any person entitled to receive a refund under this section, a certificate showing such person to be entitled to a refund of the amount stated in such certificate; and the city treasurer shall indicate thereon whether such amount has been paid to the city for the license year in question. The director of finance shall, upon presentation of such certificate to him, cause to be paid to the person entitled to such refund the amount set forth in the certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3710.  
Sec. 18.1-19. - Transitional provisions. 
The provisions of this article relating to penalties, interest, and administrative and judicial review of an assessment shall be applicable to assessments made on and after January 1, 1997, even if for an earlier license year. The provisions relating to agreements extending the period for assessing tax shall be effective for agreements entered into, on and after July 1, 1996. The provisions permitting an assessment of license tax for up to six (6) preceding years in certain circumstances shall not be construed to permit the assessment of tax for a license year beginning before January 1, 1997. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Secs. 18.1-20—18.1-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CLASSIFICATIONS OF BUSINESS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18.1-31. - Rates for license tax and license fee. 
Every person required to purchase a business license by chapter 18.1 of the Code of the City of Hampton and chapter 37 of title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq.) shall pay the following license fees and taxes, as applicable, unless specifically provided otherwise by ordinance or other law: 
(1)  Every such person or business with gross receipts of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or less shall pay an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the issuance of a business license. 
(2)  Every such person or business with gross receipts of greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) during the preceding calendar year shall be assessed and required to pay an annual license tax on all gross receipts includible as provided by this chapter, at the rate set forth in this chapter for each different license classification, except as may be otherwise provided in §§ 58.1-3712, 58.1-3712.1, 58.1-3713, 58.1-3716, 58.1-3717, 58.1-3719.1, 58.1-3727, 58.1-3731 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1224, 7-15-98; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07; Ord. No. 10-0010, 5-12-10) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 10-0010, adopted May 12, 2010, shall be effective and the charges applied to billings made by the city on and after January 1, 2011. 
State Law reference— Authority, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.  
Sec. 18.1-32. - Alcoholic beverages—Generally. 
(a)  Every person engaged in manufacturing, bottling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall pay a license tax as follows: 
(1)  For each distiller's license, if more than five thousand (5,000) gallons of alcohol or spirits, or both, are manufactured during the license year, including bottling, the license tax shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00). 
(2)  For each winery license, if to manufacture not in excess of five thousand (5,000) gallons of wine during the license year, including bottling, the license tax shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); and if to manufacture more than five thousand (5,000) gallons during such year, the license tax shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00). 
(3)  For each brewery license, including bottling, the license tax shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00). 
(4)  For each bottler's license, the license tax shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00). 
(5)  For each wholesale beer license, the license tax shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(6)  For each wholesale wine distributor's license, the license tax shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(7)  For each retail on-premise wine license, the license tax shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
(8)  For each retail on-premise beer license, the license tax shall be sixty dollars ($60.00). 
(9)  For each retail off-premise wine and beer license, or wine or beer license, the license tax shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(10)  For each retail on and off-premise wine and beer license, or beer license, the license tax shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
(b)  The license tax for the retail sale of beer and wine may be prorated by taking one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the amount of such tax and then multiplied by the number of months in business during the current year. 
(c)  The licenses for which the taxes are set out in subsection (a) above shall be as respectively defined by the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Code of Virginia, title 4.1). The terms "alcoholic beverage", "alcohol", "spirits", "beer", and "wine", wherever used in this section shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by such act. 
(d)  No license shall be issued pursuant to this section to any person, unless such person shall hold or shall secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license required by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. Such state license shall be exhibited to the commissioner of the revenue. 
(e)  Any license for which the license tax is set out in this section may be amended to show a change in the place of business within the city. Any such license may be transferred from one (1) person to another, provided the person to whom it is transferred holds, at the same time, a similar license from the state alcoholic beverage control board. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07; Ord. No. 10-0006, 5-12-10) 
State Law reference— Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100 et seq.; authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-233.  
Sec. 18.1-33. - Same—Mixed beverages. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon persons holding mixed beverage restaurant licenses issued by the state for establishments located within the city a city license tax in the following amounts: 
(1)  Persons operating restaurants, including restaurants located on premises of and operated by hotels or motels: 
a.  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for up to one hundred (100) persons; 
b.  Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than one hundred (100) but not more than one hundred fifty (150) persons; and 
c.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than one hundred fifty (150) persons. 
(2)  A private, nonprofit club operating a restaurant located on the premises of such club, three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per annum. 
(b)  No license the tax for which is prescribed in this section shall be issued unless the applicant shall display to the commissioner of the revenue a valid mixed beverage restaurant license issued to such applicant by the state alcoholic beverage control board. 
(c)  The tax on each license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to proration taking one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the amount of such tax and then multiplied by the number of months in business during the current year. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as exempting any licensee from any merchants' license tax, motel or hotel license tax, restaurant license tax or any other city tax whatsoever, and the tax levied and imposed by this section shall be in addition to all other taxes of every kind levied and imposed by any other section of this Code or by any other ordinance or law of this city. 
(e)  The commissioner of the revenue is hereby authorized and empowered to correct erroneous assessments made by him against any person, and to allow credit for license taxes paid by any licensee for any license which is subsequently merged or changed into another license during the same license year. 
(f)  No license shall be issued and no tax charged or collected for the privilege of selling and serving alcoholic beverages in (i) passenger trains, boats or airplanes and (ii) rooms designated by the board of establishments of air carriers of passengers at airports in the city for on-premises consumption only. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1251, 6-9-99; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-233.  
Sec. 18.1-34. - Same—Exemptions from sections 18.1-32 and 18.1-33. 
The commissioner of the revenue may exempt from the payment of the license tax imposed by sections 18.1-32 and 18.1-33 all dining rooms, restaurants, lunchrooms and clubrooms wherein the beverages referred to in such sections are sold for consumption both on and off the premises, if the dining rooms, restaurants, lunchrooms and clubrooms belong to and are operated by a benevolent, fraternal or charitable association and are used exclusively for lodge or fraternal purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1251, 6-9-99; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-34.1. - Wholesale beer and wine merchants. 
In ascertaining the liability of (i) a beer wholesaler to local merchants' license taxation under this article, and in computing the local wholesale merchants' license tax on such beer wholesaler, purchases of beer up to a stated amount shall be disregarded, which stated amount shall be the amount of beer purchases which would be necessary to produce a local wholesale merchants' license tax equal to the local wholesale beer license tax paid by such wholesaler and (ii) a wholesale wine licensee to local merchants' license taxation under this article, and in computing the local wholesale merchants' license tax on such wholesale wine licensee, purchases of wine up to a stated amount shall be disregarded, which stated amount shall be the amount of wine purchases which would be necessary to produce a local wholesale merchants' license tax equal to the local wholesale wine licensee license tax paid by such wholesale wine licensee. 
(Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-233.  
Sec. 18.1-35. - Certain public service corporations. 
In addition to any tax levied under Virginia Code § 58.1-2600 et seq., a license tax is required, on (i) telephone and telegraph companies, (ii) water companies and (iii) heat, light and power companies (except electric suppliers, gas utilities and gas suppliers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-400.2 and pipeline distribution companies as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2600) at a rate not to exceed one-half (½) of one (1) percent of the gross receipts of such company accruing from sales to the ultimate consumer in this city. However, in the case of telephone companies, charges for long distance telephone calls shall not be included in gross receipts for purposes of license taxation. After December 31, 2000, the license tax authorized by this section shall not be imposed on pipeline distribution companies as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2600 or on gas suppliers, gas utilities or electric suppliers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-400.2, except upon gross receipts for calendar year 2000 as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-2901(D) and 58.1-2905(D). 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731.  
Sec. 18.1-36. - Direct sellers. 
A tax on direct sellers, as defined herein, shall be levied if, and only if, the total sales of such seller exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) per year. The rate of tax levied on a direct seller whose total sales exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) per year shall be twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of retail sales and five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of wholesale sales, whichever is applicable. This tax shall only be levied if such direct seller maintains his place of abode in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3719.1.  
Sec. 18.1-37. - Financial, real estate and professional services. 
(a)  Each person engaged in a financial, real estate or professional service shall pay a license tax of fifty-eight cents ($0.58) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on all gross receipts. 
(b)  Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Buying installment receivables. 
Chattel mortgage financing. 
Consumer financing. 
Credit card services. 
Credit unions. 
Factors. 
Financing accounts receivables. 
Industrial loan companies. 
Installment financing. 
Inventory financing. 
Loan or mortgage brokers. 
Loan or mortgage companies. 
Safety deposit box companies. 
Security and commodity brokers and services. 
Stockbroker. 
Working capital financing. 
(c)  Those engaged in rendering real estate services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Appraisers of real estate. 
Escrow agents, real estate. 
Fiduciaries, real estate. 
Lessors of real property. 
Real estate agents, brokers and managers. 
Real estate selling agents. 
Rental agents for real estate. 
(d)  Those engaged in rendering a professional service include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Architects. 
Attorneys-at-law. 
Certified public accountants. 
Dentists. 
Engineers. 
Land surveyors. 
Practitioners of the healing arts (the art or science or group of arts or sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities). 
Surgeons. 
Veterinarians. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-38. - Fortunetellers, clairvoyants, etc. 
(a)  Every person who for compensation shall pretend in the city to tell fortunes or assume to act as a clairvoyant or to practice palmistry, phrenology or hand writing analysis shall be deemed a fortuneteller. A fortuneteller shall pay a license tax of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which tax shall not be prorated. 
(b)  No license, the tax for which is paid pursuant to this section, shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3726.  
Sec. 18.1-39. - Marinas. 
Every person engaged in the city in the business of keeping or operating a marina shall pay a license tax on all gross receipts. The gross receipts derived from retail sales, if separately stated to the customer, shall be taxed at the rate for a retail merchant outlined in this chapter. Examples of retail sales include, but are not limited to, the sale of gasoline, motor oils, engines, engine parts, boats, or other merchandise. The gross receipts derived from services shall be taxed in accordance with the rate set forth in section 18.1-43 of this chapter. Examples of services include, but are not limited to, repairs and the berthing or launching of boats. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-40. - Pawnbrokers. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker, junk and secondhand dealer, as defined in chapter 27 of this Code, must comply with those provisions set forth therein. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any pawnbroker taxed under this section, until there is presented to the commissioner of the revenue a certificate from the circuit court permitting the operation of such business. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
Cross reference— Pawnbrokers, Ch. 27. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4001.  
Sec. 18.1-41. - Photography and related activities. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term photographer shall mean any person, partnership or corporation having no regularly established place of business in the Commonwealth of Virginia who provides services consisting of taking of pictures or the making of pictorial reproductions in the Commonwealth. The term shall also include every employee, agent or canvasser for such photographer. Nothing in this section shall apply to (i) amateur photographers who expose, develop, and finish their own work and who do not receive compensation for such work or receive compensation for performing any of the processes of photography; (ii) coin-operated photography machines; (iii) photographers providing service in the course of their employment by newspapers, magazines, or television stations. 
(b)  Every photographer, as defined in subsection (a) of this section shall pay a license tax of thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(c)  Photographers with a definite place of business in the city shall be taxed at the rate set forth in section 18.1-43 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3727.  
Sec. 18.1-42. - Principal contractors receiving identifiable federal appropriations for research and development services. 
Every person or entity designated as the principal or prime contractor receiving identifiable federal appropriations for research and development services as defined in sections 31.205-18(a) of the Federal Acquisition Regulation in the areas of (i) computer and electronic systems, (ii) computer software, (iii) applied sciences, (iv) economic and social sciences, and (v) electronic and physical sciences shall pay to the city a license tax of three cents ($0.03) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of such federal funds received in payment of such contracts upon documentation provided by such person or entity to the commissioner of the revenue confirming the applicability of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3706(D)(1).  
Sec. 18.1-43. - Repair, personal, business and other services; other businesses. 
(a)  The local license tax imposed upon a person engaged in providing for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate, or professional service" in this chapter, or engaged in any other business or occupation not specifically named in this chapter, or not specifically exempted from local license tax is thirty-six cents ($0.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts. 
(b)  It shall be the intent of this city to apply the provisions of this chapter to all persons who are engaged in business. In the event a particular activity not specifically named in this chapter and not specifically named to be exempt, by this code or by the state code, shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Those rendering a repair, personal or business service or other service as referred to in subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Advertising agencies. 
Airports. 
Ambulance services. 
Amusements and recreation services. 
Animal hospitals, grooming services, kennels or stables. 
Auctioneers and common criers. 
Automobile driving schools. 
Barber shops, beauty parlors, and hairdressing establishments, schools and services. 
Bid or bidding reporting service. 
Billiard or pool establishments or parlors. 
Boat landings. 
Bondsman. 
Booking agents or concert managers. 
Bowling alleys. 
Brokers and commission merchants other than real estate or financial brokers. 
Business and governmental research and consulting services. 
Chartered clubs. 
Child care attendants or schools. 
Collection agents or agencies. 
Commercial photography, art and graphics. 
Court reporting and public stenographers. 
Dance studios and schools. 
Data processing, computer and systems development services. 
Developing or enlarging photographs. 
Private security services. 
Drafting services. 
Employment agencies. 
Engraving. 
Erecting, installing, removing or storing awnings. 
Extermination services (unless the services involve performing functions defined as contracting under subsection D of § 58.1-3714, Code of Virginia). 
Farrier or blacksmith. 
Freight traffic bureaus. 
Fumigating or disinfecting. 
Funeral services and crematories. 
Golf courses, driving ranges and miniature golf courses. 
Hauling of sand, gravel or dirt (excavated by others). 
Home for adults (licensed by department of social services). 
Hospitals, profit or nonprofit. 
Hotels, motels, tourist courts, boarding and rooming houses and transient trailer parks and campsites. 
House cleaning services. 
Information bureaus. 
Instructors, tutors, schools and studios of music, ceramics, art, sewing, ports and the like. 
Interior decorating. 
Janitorial services. 
Laundry cleaning and garment services including laundries, dry cleaners. 
Linen supply, diaper service, coin-operated laundries and carpet and upholstery cleaning. 
Mailing, messenger and correspondent services. 
Movie theaters and drive-in theaters. 
Nickel plating, chromizing and electroplating. 
Nurses and physician registries. 
Nursing and personal care facilities including nursing homes, convalescent homes, homes for the retarded, old age homes and rest homes. 
Packing, crating, shipping, hauling or moving goods or chattels for others. 
Parcel delivery services. 
Parking lots, public garages and valet parking. 
Pawnbrokers. 
Personnel services, labor agents and employment bureaus. 
Photographers and photographic services. 
Piano tuning. 
Picture framing and gilding. 
Porter services. 
Press clipping services. 
Professional sports (i.e., commercial rather than amateur). 
Promotional agents or agencies. 
Public relations services. 
Realty multiple listing services. 
Renting or leasing any items of tangible personal property. 
Reproduction services. 
Research and development laboratories. 
Secretarial services. 
Septic tank cleaning. 
Shoe repair, shoe shine and hat repair shops. 
Sign painting (unless the painting services involve performing functions defined as contracting under subsection D of § 58.1-3714, Code of Virginia). 
Storage—all types. 
Swimming pool maintenance and management. 
Tabulation services. 
Tax preparers (other than professionals described in section 18.1-37). 
Taxicab companies. 
Taxidermist. 
Telephone answering services. 
Temporary employee services. 
Testing laboratories. 
Theaters. 
Theatrical performers, bands and orchestras. 
Towing services. 
Transportation services including buses and taxis. 
Travel agencies. 
Tree surgeons, trimmers and removal services. 
Trucking companies, intrastate. 
Wake-up services. 
Washing, cleaning or polishing automobiles. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Limitation on tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3705(A)(4).  
Sec. 18.1-44. - Savings and loan associations and credit unions. 
Every savings institution or state-chartered credit unions having its main office in the city shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3730.  
Sec. 18.1-45. - Short-term rental business. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the short-term rental business as defined in section 37-337 of this Code shall be classified in the category of retail sales and shall pay a license tax equal to that imposed by this chapter on retail business. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a person is engaged in the short-term rental business if not less than eighty (80) percent of the gross rental receipts of such business in any year are from transactions involving rental periods of ninety-two (92) consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessor. For purposes of this section only, "affiliated" shall mean any common ownership interest in excess of five (5) percent of any officers or partners in common with the lessor and lessee. For the purposes of this test, (1) any rental to a person affiliated with the lessor shall be treated as rental receipts but shall not qualify for purposes of the eighty (80) percent requirement, and (2) any rental of personal property which also involves the provision of personal services for the operation of the personal property rented shall not be treated as gross receipts from rental. For purposes of this section, the delivery and installation of tangible personal property shall not mean operation. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
Cross reference— Taxation generally, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Virginia Code, § 58.1-3706(C).  
Secs. 18.1-46—18.1-74. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AMUSEMENTS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18.1-75. - Generally. 
Every person conducting, operating or engaging in any amusement or recreation business, trades or occupations shall pay a license tax as set forth section 18.1-43 of this chapter, which is thirty-six cents ($0.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts. These activities shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Arcade or building devoted to general amusement or entertainment. 
(2)  Auditorium. 
(3)  Coliseum. 
(4)  Gardens, display or amusement. 
(5)  Golf driving range. 
(6)  Miniature golf. 
(7)  Skating rink. 
(8)  Trampoline. 
(9)  Go-cart track. 
(10)  Other similar amusements and entertainments. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-76. - Amusement parks. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any permanent park for public amusement in the city, which is open to the public, shall pay for the privilege of operating in such park any bowling alley, skeetball machine, hobby horse, merry-go-round, ferris wheel, old mill, roller coaster, dodge cars and other amusements, penny or nickel machines for exhibiting pictures, automatic photo machines, boathouses, parking lots and refreshment and confectionery stands not selling beer, wine or tobacco, a license tax of thirty-six cents ($0.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts, exclusive of any federal and city admission tax thereon. 
(b)  Any person, other than the operator of such park, who shall operate any amusement within an amusement park, for which tickets are not sold, such as recording the voice, guessing one's weight, testing one's strength, baseball pitching and the like, shall pay a license tax of thirty-six cents ($0.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts, exclusive of any federal and city admission tax thereon. 
(c)  The license tax provided for in this section shall not be prorated and the license for the operation of any such park shall not be construed to authorize the operation within such park of any hotel, dance hall, motion picture theater, theater, restaurant or store or the sale of beer, wine or tobacco or any other business or occupation for which a specific license is required by this chapter. 
(d)  The commissioner of the revenue may require of any applicant for a license under this section a certificate, in writing and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths, that the operation of such amusement or activity does not include any element of gambling. 
(e)  No license issued under this section shall be construed to authorize the licensee to operate any amusement or other activity the operation of which is prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-77. - Carnivals, circuses, animal shows, etc. 
(a)  Every person exhibiting performances in a carnival, as defined in Virginia Code section 58.1-3728, shall pay a license tax of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each week or part thereof that such carnival exhibits in the city. 
(b)  Every person exhibiting performances in a circus and menagerie or wild west show shall pay a license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day that such circus, menagerie or wild west show exhibits in the city. 
(c)  Every person exhibiting performances of trained animal shows shall pay a license tax of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each day that such show exhibits in the city. 
(d)  Each person exhibiting performances described in the preceding subsections of this section shall, before beginning operation in the city, post a cash bond, in an amount to be determined by the commissioner of the revenue not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), which bond shall assure faithful compliance by the licensee with all of the ordinances of the city pertaining to revenue and regulation. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to exhibitions by kennel clubs, horse clubs, horse shows, fairs or bazaars, when conducted by any local club or association or educational schools and the entire proceeds are retained by such club or association or educational schools and used for charitable or civic purposes, or where no charges or admission fees are collected. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3728.  
Sec. 18.1-78. - Dance halls. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "public dance hall" shall be as defined in section 4-16 of chapter 4 of this Code. 
(b)  Every person engaged in the operation of a public dance hall shall pay a license tax of thirty-six cents ($0.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts, up to a maximum of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per year. 
(c)  No license for which the license tax is imposed by this section shall be issued, unless there is presented to the commissioner of the revenue a permit issued pursuant to article II of chapter 4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07; Ord. No. 11-0008, 6-8-11) 
Cross reference— Public dance halls generally, § 4-16 et seq.  
Sec. 18.1-79. - Theatrical performances. 
No license tax shall be charged under this section when the entire proceeds from theatrical performances are applied for religious, charitable or locally established educational or nonprofit association purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Secs. 18.1-80—18.1-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES 
 
Sec. 18.1-100. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Amusement machine. The term "amusement machine" shall mean any coin-operated machine, except the following: 
(1)  Weighing machines; 
(2)  Automatic baggage or parcel checking machines or receptacles; 
(3)  Vending machines which are so constructed as to do nothing but vend goods, wares and merchandise or postage stamps or provide service only; 
(4)  Viewing machines or photomat machines; 
(5)  Machines affording rides to children; and 
(6)  Machines used for the delivery of newspapers. 
Amusement machine operator. The term "amusement machine operator" means any person leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated amusement machine or a machine or device which accepts recyclable material and dispenses money therefor; provided, however, the term "amusement machine operator" shall not include a person owning less than three (3) such machines and operating such machines on property owned or leased by such person. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3720.  
Sec. 18.1-101. - Tax on amusement machine operators. 
(a)  Every amusement machine operator shall pay a license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the operation of ten (10) or more amusement machines or one hundred ninety-five dollars ($195.00) for the operation of less than ten (10) such machines. 
(b)  In addition to the tax prescribed in subsection (a) above, every amusement machine operator shall pay a tax of thirty-six cents ($0.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on all gross receipts. For those amusement machine operators without a definite place of business in the city, such tax shall apply only to the share of receipts actually received by such operator from amusement machines operated within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3720.  
Sec. 18.1-102. - Tax on receipts from vending machines. 
Every person engaged in the business of selling goods, wares, and merchandise through the use of coin-operated vending machines shall be deemed to be a retail merchant and shall pay a license tax as provided in section 18.1-150. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-103. - Registration and bond of persons licensed under division. 
(a)  Every person, before engaging in the business of an amusement operator in this city, shall register with the commissioner of the revenue and deposit with him a bond, payable to the city, to insure the keeping of accurate records, the filing of reports, in such form and at such times as may be prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue, and the proper payment to the treasurer of the city of the taxes imposed by section 18.1-75 of this chapter. The form of such bond shall be determined by the commissioner of the revenue and the surety thereon shall be approved by him. The amount of such bond shall be determined by the commissioner of the revenue, not to exceed fifteen hundred dollars ($1500.00). 
(b)  Every person subject to the tax prescribed in section 18.1-75 of this chapter, before commencing doing business in this city, shall register with the commissioner of the revenue and deposit with him a bond, payable to the city, to insure the keeping of adequate records, the filing of reports, in such form and at such times as may be prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue, and the proper payment to the treasurer of the city of the taxes imposed by section 18.1-75 of this chapter. The form and amount of such bond shall be determined by the commissioner of the revenue and the surety thereon shall be approved by him. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-104. - Filing of list of machine locations. 
Upon making the initial application for a license, the tax for which is prescribed by this division, the applicant shall file with the commissioner of the revenue, in duplicate, a list of the locations of all amusement machines and vending machines, leased, rented or otherwise furnished to or placed with others. Each year thereafter, this list shall be provided, in duplicate, no later than January 31. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-105. - Display of information on machines. 
Every amusement machine and every vending machine operated under the provisions of this division shall have conspicuously located thereon a decal, sticker or other adhesive label, no less than one (1) inch by two (2) inches in size, denoting the name, trade name and address of the operator. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3722.  
Sec. 18.1-106. - Division does not permit illegal machines. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as permitting any person to keep, maintain, exhibit or operate any coin-operated machine or other device the operation of which is prohibited by law. The commissioner of the revenue shall not issue any license for the operation of any coin-operated machine or device which is unlawful under the provisions of this Code or the state law. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Secs. 18.1-107—18.1-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONTRACTORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation of contractors, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714. 
 
Sec. 18.1-115. - Contractors generally. 
(a)  A person shall be classified as a contractor if he regularly performs, or engages others to perform, any of the work described in paragraph D of Virginia Code § 58.1-3714 on buildings, structures or real estate (i) owned by him when the buildings, structures or real estate will be offered for sale upon completion of such work; or (ii) owned by others. 
(b)  Contracting generally includes, but is not limited to, persons engaged in the following occupations, businesses or trades: 
Air-conditioning. 
Brick contracting and other masonry. 
Building. 
Cementing. 
Dredging. 
Electrical contracting. 
Elevator installation. 
Erecting signs which are assessed as realty. 
Floor scraping or finishing. 
Foundations. 
House moving. 
Paint and paper decorating. 
Plastering. 
Plumbing, heating, steamfitting. 
Refrigeration. 
Road, street, bridge, tunnel, sidewalk, or curb and gutter construction. 
Roofing and tinning. 
Sewer drilling and well digging. 
Sign painting. 
Structural metal work. 
Tile, glass, flooring and floor covering installation. 
Wrecking, moving or excavating. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-116. - License tax. 
The license tax shall be sixteen cents ($0.16) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on all gross receipts. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Secs. 18.1-117—18.1-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation of peddlers and itinerant merchants, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717. 
 
Sec. 18.1-130. - Definition; application generally. 
(a)  Peddler. For purposes of this section, any person who shall carry from place to place any goods, wares or merchandise and offer to sell or barter the same, or actually sell or barter the same in this city shall be deemed to be a peddler. All persons who do not keep a regular place of business, whether it be a house or a vacant lot or elsewhere, with regular business hours, and at the same place who shall offer for sale goods, wares and merchandise in this city shall be deemed peddlers under this division. All persons who keep a regular place of business open at all times with regular business hours at the same place in the city, who shall, elsewhere than at such regular place of business, personally or through their agents, in an isolated transaction, offer for sale or sell and, at the time of such offering for sale, deliver goods, wares or merchandise shall request permission, in writing, from the commissioner of the revenue to include those receipts with the gross receipts reported on their regular business license, without procuring a peddler's license. 
(b)  Itinerant merchant. For purposes of this section, any person who engages in, does, or transacts any temporary or transient business and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, occupies any location for a period of less than one (1) year shall be deemed to be an itinerant merchant. 
(c)  Show and sale. For purposes of this section, the term "show and sale" means a show, consisting of a group of persons or merchants, to stimulate the sale of specific classes of goods, wares, and merchandise. Any person or entity who promotes, sponsors or conducts a show and sale within the city shall obtain an itinerant merchant's license, provided no single show and sale at the same location shall continue for a period exceeding seven (7) days. A license issued to a sponsor under this subsection shall be in lieu of individual itinerant merchant's licenses otherwise required for each merchant participating in the show and sale. Each person who obtains such license shall be required to report to the commissioner of the revenue and provide a list of participants prior to each event. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant merchants, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3717, 58.1-3718, and 58.1-3719.  
Sec. 18.1-131. - Tax; limitations. 
(a)  Every peddler or itinerant merchant, as defined in section 18.1-130, shall pay a license tax in conformity with the following schedule: 
(1)  Itinerant merchants, including those who promote, sponsor or conduct a "show and sale" and peddlers of goods, wares or merchandise, except those set forth in subsections (2) through (8) below, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(2)  Peddlers of meat, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature not grown or produced by the peddler, seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(3)  Peddlers of family supplies of a perishable nature, which are not grown or produced by the peddler, and groceries generally, including such articles as customarily sold in grocery stores, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(4)  Peddlers of Christmas trees, ice, wood, coal, oil, kerosene, coke or charcoal not grown or produced by the peddler, twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(5)  Peddlers of candies and confections, seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(6)  Peddlers of bottled soft drinks, hot dogs and wrapped sandwiches, one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(7)  Peddlers, and their employees or agents, selling subscriptions for books, magazines and the like, and who do not carry from place to place their goods, wares or merchandise, fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(8)  Dealers in precious metals shall be taxed at the license tax rate set forth in this chapter for a retail or wholesale merchant, whichever is applicable. 
(b)  This division shall not apply to those who sell or offer for sale, in person or by their employees, ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale. A dairyman who uses, upon the streets of the city, one (1) or more vehicles may sell and deliver from his vehicles milk, butter, cream and eggs, without procuring a peddler's license. 
(c)  No license tax set out in this section shall be prorated. 
(d)  All peddlers must comply with the provisions set forth in this section for a peddler's tag. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-132. - Peddlers at wholesale. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, who or which sells or offers to sell goods, wares or merchandise to licensed dealers, other than at a definite place of business operated by the seller, and at the time of such sale or exposure for sale delivers, or offers to deliver, the goods, wares or merchandise to the buyer shall be deemed a peddler at wholesale. For purposes of this section, any delivery made on the day of sale shall be construed as a delivery at the time of sale. 
(b)  The license tax imposed on a peddler at wholesale shall be at the same rate imposed by this chapter on a wholesale merchant selling similar goods, wares or merchandise at one (1) definite place of business. 
(c)  When such articles are peddled along with the articles specified in other sections of this division, and the license tax imposed by this division is paid, such person shall not be required to pay in addition thereto the license taxes imposed by other sections. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing a license tax in any case where the city is prohibited by the state law from imposing a license tax on peddlers. 
(e)  No license tax set out in this section shall be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-133. - Exemption for certain peddlers, itinerant merchants and peddlers at wholesale. 
(a)  Any license tax imposed on peddlers or itinerant merchants or on peddlers at wholesale in this division shall not apply to: 
(1)  A licensed wholesale dealer who sells and, at the time of such sale, delivers merchandise to retail merchants; 
(2)  A distributor or vendor of motor fuels and petroleum products; 
(3)  A distributor or vendor of seafood who catches seafood and sells only the seafood caught by him; 
(4)  A farmer or producer of agricultural products who sells only the farm or agricultural products produced or grown by him; 
(5)  A farmers' cooperative association; 
(6)  A manufacturer who is subject to Virginia tax on intangible personal property who peddles at wholesale, only the goods, wares, or merchandise manufactured by him at a plant, whose intangible personal property is taxed by this commonwealth. 
(7)  A charitable nonprofit organization conducting a show and sale, except to the extent the receipts from these peddling activities are from an unrelated trade or business and the income is taxable under Internal Revenue Code section 511 et seq. The commissioner of the revenue shall determine the exemption and is authorized to request and obtain all necessary information to ascertain a proper application. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue shall require each bona fide producer or grower of market produce, fruit or fresh meat, who wishes to peddle the same in the city, to file with him a certificate in which shall be given the name and address of the applicant, the location of the land from which his fruit, vegetables or other perishables are to be produced, whether the applicant is the owner thereof, or renter, and in the latter case, the name of the landlord or owner and the time from which his lease is to run. Such certificate shall state that the applicant intends to use the sign issued to him pursuant to this section himself personally, or by agent, for the sale of his own produce only, and will not permit the same to be used by any third party, or for the sale of any produce, except his own. Upon receipt of such certificate, the commissioner of the revenue shall furnish to such bona fide grower or producer a sign, of a size and design to be selected by the commissioner, suitable to be displayed on his wagon or truck and on which shall be printed "City Grower No. _______, _______" with the license year inserted. 
(c)  Each bona fide catcher, producer or grower of seafood, who wishes to peddle the same in the city, shall apply to the commissioner of the revenue for a license exemption under this section. The commissioner shall issue to such applicant a tag, of a size and design selected by the commissioner, suitable to be displayed on the peddler's wagon, cart or truck, on which shall be printed "Seafood Peddler No. _______, _______," with the license year inserted. 
(d)  Any tag or sign issued under this section shall be affixed and displayed, by the owner, on the left-hand side of his cart, wagon, truck or other vehicle, on the outside thereof, and in a conspicuous place, so that the same may be readily seen at all times by anyone authorized to inspect the same. A charge of one dollar ($1.00) shall be made for each sign issued under this subsection. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement in the certificate referred to in subsections (b) and (c) above or to permit the grower's sign issued to be used in the sale of any produce, except produce grown by him on the land described in the certificate. Any such violation shall punishable as a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-134. - License tags. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall issue to each applicant for a peddler's license a license tag, of a size and design to be selected by the commissioner, suitable to be displayed on the vehicle to be used by the peddler in the prosecution of such business. On each tag so issued, there shall be printed the classification of the peddler, the tag number and the license year for which the license is issued. 
(b)  No license tag issued under this section shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-135. - Other requirements. 
(a)  Every itinerant merchant operating in the city shall file with the license application an affidavit from the owner of the building, structure or other property to be used by such applicant, showing for what period of time the property to be used by such applicant has been hired or leased by such applicant. No itinerant merchant license shall be issued, unless such affidavit is attached to the application; provided, however, that the commissioner of the revenue may, in lieu of the foregoing affidavit, issue a regular merchant's or a regular license issued to an auctioneer under section 18.1-43 to any applicant upon the giving of a bond or security in such amount as will equal the specific tax required by this section for a period of one (1) year from the date of the application for such license. Such bond or security shall provide that such amount shall be paid to the city in the event and at any time during any such year that the commissioner of the revenue shall receive sufficient evidence showing that it was the applicant's intention to engage in or transact a temporary or transient business in the city. 
(b)  No person shall be exempt from the payment of the license tax imposed by section 18.1-131 by reason of associating temporarily with any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer or by reason of conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with, or as a part of, the business in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale, at auction, of any automobile, mechanics' tools, used farm implements, livestock, poultry (dressed or undressed), seafood, vegetables, fruits, melons, berries, flowers or leaf tobacco; or to the sale of used household furniture and used household effects, when being sold at the residence of the housekeeper desiring to dispose of the same; or to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents or regularly established merchants or manufacturers selling to the trade by sample for future delivery from their established place of business; or to the sale of products raised upon lands leased or owned by the seller; or to the sale of vegetables, fruits or other farm products; or to hawkers on the streets; or to the sale of any goods by an assignee, trustee, executor, fiduciary, officer in bankruptcy or other officer appointed by any court of this state or of the United States; or to peddlers licensed under this chapter. 
(d)  Licenses for which the tax is designated in this section shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Secs. 18.1-136—18.1-149. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RETAIL, WHOLESALE AND COMMISSION MERCHANTS 
 
Sec. 18.1-150. - License tax—Retail merchant. 
Every retail merchant shall pay a license tax of twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on all gross receipts. Additionally, restaurants must comply with the bond requirement of Hampton Code section 37-231.1. Any person engaging in the business of selling at retail, and installing air conditioning units which are placed in windows or other openings, with frames and requiring no ducts, shall be deemed a retail merchant and pay the license tax under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-151. - Same—Wholesale merchant. 
Every wholesale merchant shall pay a license tax of fifteen cents ($0.15) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on all gross purchases. However, this shall not be construed as applying to manufacturers who offer for sale, at the place of manufacture, goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by them. Any person engaging in the business of selling, at wholesale, and installing air conditioning units which are placed in windows or other openings, with frames and requiring no ducts, shall be deemed a wholesale merchant and pay the license tax under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3716.  
Sec. 18.1-152. - Same—Commission merchant. 
Any person engaged in the business of selling merchandise on commission by sample, circular, or catalogue for a regularly established retailer, who has no stock or inventory under his control other than floor samples held for demonstration or sale and owned by the principal retailer, shall be classified as a commission merchant and taxed only on commission income at a rate of thirty-six cents ($0.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts. Such person engaged in such business shall not be subject to tax on total gross receipts from such sales. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3733.  
Sec. 18.1-153. - Application of tax to caterers. 
Every person engaged in the business of catering shall be deemed a retail merchant and subject to the tax prescribed in this section. For the purpose of measuring such tax, all such gross receipts shall be regarded as retail sales. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-154. - Application of tax to promotional sales by financial institutions. 
Every bank, savings institution, lending institution and the like which is not ordinarily licensed as a retailer, but which engages in promotional activities involving the sale of tangible personal property, shall pay a retail local license tax pursuant to this section on the gross receipts from such sales. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1202.  
Sec. 18.1-155. - Tax when merchant goes out of business after close of license year. 
If a retail or wholesale merchant, after the close of the year for which his license is issued, elects not to renew it, but desires the privilege to sell whatever goods, wares and merchandise he may have on hand at the time, it shall be lawful for him to do so, upon the payment of a license tax measured by either the retail or wholesale sales value of such goods, wares and merchandise, which value shall be estimated by the commissioner of the revenue; provided, however, that no purchases may be made by the merchant after the close of the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
Cross reference— Going-out-of-business sales, § 33-16 et seq.  
Sec. 18.1-156. - Motor vehicle dealers; alternate method of payment of business license tax. 
(a)  In lieu of the payment provisions otherwise required by this article, motor vehicle dealers may elect annually to report and pay their required annual business license tax in accordance with the provisions of this section. The method of reporting and paying the required annual business license tax by motor vehicle dealers provided for in this section shall be known as the "alternate method of payment" and shall apply only to the retail sale of motor vehicles by such dealers. 
(b)  Motor vehicle dealers which elect the alternate method of payment for a tax year shall not change the method of reporting and paying the business license tax during such tax year. 
(c)  Motor vehicle dealers which elect the alternate method of payment shall separately state the amount of the business license tax attributable to the sale of a motor vehicle, shall add the tax to the retail sales price of the motor vehicle and shall collect same at or before the time of the delivery of the vehicle to the purchaser. 
(d)  All business license taxes which are separately stated shall be reported and paid by the dealer to the city treasurer no later than the twentieth day of the first month of the calendar quarter following the calendar quarter in which such taxes were required to be collected. 
(e)  Motor vehicle dealers which fail to elect to utilize the alternate method of payment shall not separately state the amount of the tax as authorized by this section and shall pay their business license tax as prescribed in this section. Any dealer which collects business license taxes in violation of this subsection shall exercise due diligence to refund such tax, in excess of one dollar ($1.00) to the purchaser within one hundred twenty (120) days of discovering such overpayment, and produce evidence of such refund to the commissioner of the revenue upon request of the commissioner of the revenue. If the purchaser cannot be located by the dealer after due diligence, the amount of such tax shall be paid to the city. 
(f)  During a three-year period after receipt of such amounts, the commissioner of the revenue or other local assessing officer and the treasurer, as that term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3123, shall refund such amounts as appropriate to purchasers who produce documentation verifying such overpayment. At the expiration of this period, the commissioner of the revenue or other local assessing officer shall consider these funds as additional business license tax. The locality may recover from the motor vehicle dealer its costs of mailing, printing, and other reasonably necessary administrative costs related to refunding such amounts to purchasers. Dealers which elect the alternate method of payment shall be liable for the collection, reporting and payment of the tax to the city in accordance with this section whether separately stated or not, and whether the tax was actually collected from the purchaser or not. 
(g)  The failure of a motor vehicle dealer to report and pay such taxes as prescribed in subsection (e) shall be subject to the same interest and penalties as provided herein for the annual reports and payments of business license taxes. 
(h)  The amount of tax that is paid to the city pursuant to this section shall not be considered as gross receipts for determination of business license tax liability in the next succeeding year. 
(i)  The tax collected pursuant to this provision shall be deemed to be held in trust for the City of Hampton. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3734.  
Sec. 18.1-157. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1281, adopted June 21, 2000, repealed § 18.1-157, which pertained to the application of the tax to distributing houses and which derived from Ord. No. 1172, adopted Oct. 9, 1996.  
Sec. 18.1-158. - Tax not applicable to storage of goods in public warehouses. 
A person who maintains no place of business in the city, and who stores goods, wares and merchandise in a public warehouse in the city for ultimate distribution to wholesalers only or to the federal or state government or to any agency of either such government, shall not be deemed to be a wholesale merchant and shall not be subject to payment of a license tax as such. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07)  
Sec. 18.1-159. - Dealers in precious metals. 
(a)  Any person acting as a dealer in precious metals or gems, as defined in this chapter, shall be deemed a wholesale merchant, except where a dealer's purchase or acquisition occurs for the purpose of: 
(1)  Resale of the purchase or acquired items to the general public by the dealer; 
(2)  Use of the items or their materials by the dealer in manufacturing or production activity carried on by the dealer; or 
(3)  Trade-in as part of a retail sales transaction. 
(b)  A dealer engaging in any of the activities described in subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to taxation in accordance with the applicable terms and standards of this article. 
(c)  No business license shall be issued to such dealer until there is presented to the commissioner of the revenue a permit issued by the Hampton Police Division. 
(Ord. No. 1172, 10-9-96; Ord. No. 1461, 1-14-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108.  
Chapter 19 - MASSAGE PARLORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Virginia Health Spa Act, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-294 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Director: The director of public health of the city. 
Massage: A method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping with the hand or any instrument. 
Massage parlor: Any place conducting a business where any person engages in, conducts or carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, any business of giving Turkish, Swedish, vapor, sweat, electric, salt, magnetic or any other kind or character of massage, bath, alcohol rub, fomentation, manipulation of the body or other similar procedure. 
Massage technician: Any person, male or female, including, but not limited to, a massage parlor operator, who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, alcohol rub, bath, manipulation of the body or any similar procedure. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-1; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 19-3. - Exemptions from chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist duly licensed by the commonwealth, a massage therapist who is certified as a massage therapist by the state board of nursing under Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3029, or to a licensed nurse acting under the direct prescription or direction of any such physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor shall this chapter apply to barbershops or beauty parlors in which massage is given to the scalp, the face, neck or the shoulders only. 
The director of public health may issue a permit for any person exempting them from the provisions of this chapter where the director determines that such person is a graduate of an approved school or received instruction which is equal to or greater than the standards set by Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3029. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-3; Ord. No. 920, 1-11-89; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-4. - Responsibility of management for compliance with chapter and other laws. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage parlor, or holding a permit issued under this chapter for a massage parlor, to knowingly cause, allow or permit, in or about such massage parlor, any agent, massage technician, employee or other person under his control or supervision to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  The owner, operator and manager of a massage parlor, and the person holding the permit for the parlor, shall be responsible for maintaining the premises in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and for the conduct of all agents and employees in complying with the requirements of this chapter. No such person shall permit, in his premises, any activity or behavior prohibited by the laws of the United States, this state or this city relating to gambling, prostitution, sodomy, adultery, fornication, lewd and lascivious cohabitation or other laws relating to obscenity or moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. 342; Ord. No. 430; Code 1964, §§ 22.1-10.2, 22.1-11, 22.1-12; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Gambling, Ch. 16; obscenity, Ch. 23; adultery and fornication, §§ 24-20, 24-21; lewd and lascivious cohabitation, § 24-22; prostitution, § 24-23 et seq.  
Sec. 19-5. - Operating name and location. 
No person granted a massage parlor permit pursuant to this chapter shall operate under any name or at any location not specified in his permit. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-12; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-6. - Operation prohibited between certain hours. 
No massage parlor shall remain open for business, nor shall any massage be administered to any patron of any such business, between the hours of 10:00 p.m., and 6:00 a.m., the following day. 
(Ord. No. 430; Code 1964, § 22.1-10.1; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-7. - Required facilities and equipment generally. 
Each massage parlor shall be provided with the following: 
(1)  Equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in performing acts of massage. 
(2)  Hot and cold water and soap at all times. 
(3)  Closed cabinets for the storage of clean linen. 
(4)  Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities for patrons. A minimum of one (1) tub or shower, one (1) dressing room containing a separate locker for each patron to be served, which locker shall be capable of being locked, as well as a minimum of one (1) toilet and one (1) wash basin, shall be provided. If male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously, a separate massage room, or rooms, and separate dressing, bathing and toilet facilities shall be provided for male and for female patrons. 
(5)  A service sink for custodial services, to be located either in the massage parlor quarters or the floor of the building on which the quarters are located. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-8; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-8. - Surfaces of tables, tubs, etc., to be nonporous. 
All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls and steam or bath areas in a massage parlor shall have nonporous surfaces which may be readily disinfected. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-8; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-9. - Separate massage area required. 
Each massage parlor shall have one (1) area designated for massage, or in the event massages are administered to both sexes during the same times, such massage parlor shall have two (2) separate massage areas, one (1) being for male patrons and one (1) being for female patrons. All massages shall be administered in such massage area or areas, as the case may be, and no massages shall be administered in private rooms or behind closed doors. The massage area or areas shall be open to inspection by the director or his designee and law-enforcement officers of the city during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 430; Code 1964, § 22.1-10.3; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-10. - Maintenance of premises. 
All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and other physical facilities or equipment of a massage parlor shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Heat, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets shall be cleaned each day the parlor is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-8; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-11. - Towels and linens for patrons. 
Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of a massage parlor or each patron receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-8; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-12. - Names of technicians to be displayed. 
There shall be displayed, in a conspicuous place in every massage parlor, a list showing the names of all massage technicians employed in the massage parlor. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-7; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-13. - Health requirements for operators and technicians. 
No massage parlor operator or massage technician shall be permitted to give massage or come in contact with a patron of any massage parlor, unless such operator or massage technician is free of any contagious or communicable disease. The director may, for cause, require that an operator or massage technician not be allowed to give massage, unless such person provides the director with a certificate from a licensed medical doctor that such person has been examined, within the previous ten (10) days, and found to be free of all contagious or communicable disease. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-9; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-14. - Unlawful conduct by technicians or other employees generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any massage technician or any other person employed in a massage parlor to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or massage, the sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, of any other person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any massage technician or any other person employed in a massage parlor to expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any massage technician or any other person employed in a massage parlor to fail to conceal, with a fully opaque covering, the sexual or genital parts of his or her body while in the presence of any patron of such massage parlor. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any female massage technician or any other female person employed in a massage parlor to fail to conceal, with a fully opaque covering, the nude breast or breasts of such female massage technician or other female person while in the presence of any patron of such massage parlor. 
(Ord. No. 430; Code 1964, § 22.1-10.2; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-15. - Administering massage or other treatment to person of opposite sex. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to administer, for hire or reward, to any person of the opposite sex, any massage, alcohol rub or similar treatment or any fomentation, bath or electric or magnet treatment. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-11; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-16. - Serving patrons with skin infections. 
No massage technician shall knowingly serve any patron infected with any fungus or other skin infection, nor shall service be performed on any patron exhibiting skin inflammation or eruptions, unless a duly licensed physician certifies that such patron may be safely served and prescribes the conditions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-9; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-17. - Record of treatments. 
Every person operating a massage parlor pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter shall keep a record of the date and hour of each treatment, the name and address of each patron and the name of the technician administering such treatment. Such record shall be open to inspection by the director or his designee and law enforcement officers of the city. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-10; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-18. - Patron giving false or fictitious name. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person, while seeking massage, to give a false or fictitious name to a massage parlor operator or employee. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-10; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 19-19—19-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 19-31. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the city, the business of a massage parlor, or to render or permit to be rendered massage services at a location removed from a massage establishment within the city, without a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-2; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-32. - Application generally. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit to operate a massage parlor or establishment shall make application therefor to the director. Such application shall contain: 
(1)  The full name, age and present address of the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant's two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address. 
(3)  The applicant's height, weight, sex and color of eyes and hair. 
(4)  A portrait photograph of the applicant, giving a clear view of the applicant's face. 
(5)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(6)  The previous experience of the applicant as a massage parlor operator or as a massage technician. 
(7)  All criminal convictions, other than traffic offenses, and the place of each such conviction of the applicant and all massage technicians to be employed in the establishment. 
(8)  A list of all contagious or communicable diseases had by the applicant within the past three (3) years and name of person, with address, giving treatment. 
(9)  The location of the massage parlor and, if such premises are not fully constructed, plans for any construction to take place. 
(10)  A list, including the name, age, height, weight, sex and experience, of any presently employed or to be employed massage technicians, with a medical history of any contagious or communicable diseases presently had and being treated, or cured within the previous three (3) years. 
(b)  Each application submitted under this section shall be accompanied by a receipt showing payment to the city treasurer of the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), such sum to help cover the costs of investigations by the police division and the health and other departments. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-4; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-33. - Referral of application for investigations. 
The director shall refer each application to the building official, the fire chief and the chief of police for investigation. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, §§ 22.1-4, 22.1-5; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-34. - Issuance. 
Within fourteen (14) days after the filing of an application for a permit under this article, the director shall issue the permit, if he shall find that: 
(1)  The premises to be used or constructed meet the requirements and standards of the building and fire prevention codes* of the city, as reported by the building official and fire chief; 
Cross reference— Building code, § 9-26 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 14-26 et seq. 
(2)  Further medical examination or treatment of the applicant and employed massage technicians is not needed; 
(3)  The facilities comply with the requirements of this chapter; 
(4)  The experience and knowledge of the permittee and employed massage technicians are such that the operation of the proposed massage parlor will not be detrimental to the health and safety of the patrons; and 
(5)  The information in the application is truthful. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-6; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-35. - Display. 
Every person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall display such permit in a conspicuous place, so that the same may be readily seen by anyone entering the premises where the massage is given. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-7; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-36. - Revocation or suspension generally. 
(a)  The director may revoke or suspend for a term any permit issued pursuant to this article upon the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. No permit, however, shall be revoked or suspended until after a hearing has been held by the director to determine just cause for such action. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given the opportunity to present evidence and argument against revocation or suspension. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing provided for in this section shall be given the permittee by mailing, at least five (5) days prior to such hearing, a written statement setting forth the ground of complaint, addressed to the permittee at the address shown on his permit. 
(c)  After the hearing required by this section, the director may suspend the permit for a term not to exceed sixty (60) days, may revoke the permit or may dismiss the complaint. The decision of the director shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-13; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 19-37. - Automatic voidance or revocation. 
The sale or transfer of the interest of the permittee in a massage parlor shall render null and void any permit issued pursuant to this article. The enlargement or alteration of the structure at which a massage parlor is operated shall be deemed to revoke such permit, ipso facto, unless prior approval was obtained from the director. The hiring and use of massage technicians not listed with the director shall also be deemed to revoke such permit, ipso facto, unless the information required by subsection (a)(10) of section 19-32 has been first filed with the director. 
(Ord. No. 342; Code 1964, § 22.1-14; Ord. No. 1441, 11-15-06)  
Chapter 20 - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building and development regulations, Ch. 9; land disturbing activity and erosion and sediment control generally, § 13.1-1 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 30; water supply, Ch. 39; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference— Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq.; Virginia Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-85.2 et seq. 
 
ARTCLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Violations of chapter generally. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 20-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Certificate of occupancy. The term "certificate of occupancy" shall mean a certificate issued by the building official after compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter have been verified. 
Dependent mobile home. The term "dependent mobile home" shall mean a mobile home which does not have within it a flush toilet and a bathtub or shower. 
Independent mobile home. The term "independent mobile home" shall mean a mobile home which has within it a flush toilet and a bathtub or shower. 
Mobile home. The term "mobile home" shall mean a camp automobile, a trailer, a trailer coach or any other mode of habitation which is, can or may be used for living or sleeping purposes and which is, can or may be intended for transportation from one place to another upon a highway; whether by motive power or not; provided, however, that a vehicle used or intended to be used exclusively for vacations or camping purposes or for general utility purposes or for the hauling of pleasure boats shall not be deemed a mobile home. 
Mobile home park; park. The term "mobile home park" or "park" shall mean a tract of land, a site, a lot or a field upon which are located, or which is held out for the location thereon, of one (1) or more mobile homes, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation, location or occupancy. 
Mobile home space. The term "mobile home space" shall mean a plot of ground or lot or site within a mobile home park, established for the accommodation, location or occupancy of one (1) mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 2; Code 1964, § 24-1; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-3. - Parking mobile homes outside mobile home park. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a mobile home on any public way or on any public or private property in the city, except in a duly licensed mobile home park and except that one (1) mobile home may be parked and stored in an improved, enclosed garage or accessory building, but such mobile home shall not be occupied or living quarters maintained therein or any business use made thereof while so parked and stored. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent or prohibit a mobile home being temporarily parked on a public way, if permitted by some other provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city, or the display of mobile homes by dealers therein on their sales or display lots where permitted, or the use of a mobile home as a temporary office on the site, by a contractor, while construction is in progress. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 1; Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-4; Code 1964, §§ 8.1-4, 24-4; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 20-4—20-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 20-16. - Inspections. 
(a)  Mobile home parks and the facilities thereof shall be open to inspection by public officials at all reasonable times. 
(b)  The building official and the director of public health or their agents shall make an inspection of every mobile home park in the city each six (6) months, or more often if deemed necessary. A prompt written report shall be made to the city manager after each inspection, which shall disclose the results of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 8; Code 1964, § 24-5; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-17. - Notice to correct violations of article. 
In the event it is ascertained by the director of public health that a mobile home park for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this article is being kept, maintained or operated in a manner in violation of this article, the director of public health shall give the permittee in question five (5) days' written notice to correct the violation in question. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 3; Code 1964, § 24-6; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 20-18—20-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 20-26. - Required. 
No person shall keep, maintain or operate a mobile home park within the city, unless he has a valid permit so to do issued pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 58, §§ 1, 3; Code 1964, §§ 24-3, 24-7; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-27. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit required by this division shall make application therefor, upon forms provided for that purpose, to the director of public health. Such application shall contain the name and address of the applicant, a description of the proposed park site and such other information as may be required by the director of public health. 
(b)  In the case of a mobile home park established after December 1, 1960, application for the permit required by this division shall be made after approval, by the building official, of the improvement site plans submitted as provided in section 20-82. 
(Ord. No. 58, §§ 3, 6; Code 1964, §§ 24-8, 24-37; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-28. - Inspection of site; issuance or refusal. 
Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this division, the director of public health or his agent shall inspect the site of the proposed mobile home park. The director of public health may approve or reject such application, depending upon the results of such inspection. If such application is approved, the requisite permit shall be issued pursuant thereto. If such application is rejected, the permit applied for shall be refused. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 3; Code 1964, § 24-9; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-29. - Fee. 
Upon the issuance of a permit pursuant to this division, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid to the city treasurer by the person to whom the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 3; Code 1964, § 24-10; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-30. - Transfer. 
A permit issued under this division shall be transferable upon written application of the holder thereof and endorsement thereon by the director of public health. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 1; Code 1964, § 24-3; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-31. - Revocation. 
In the event a permittee under this division shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the notice referred to in section 20-17, the director of public health may revoke the permit in questions. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 3; Code 1964, § 24-11; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 20-32—20-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL PARKS 
 
Sec. 20-41. - Application of division. 
Unless otherwise clearly indicated, the requirements of this division shall apply to every mobile home park located in the city, regardless of when such park was or is established. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, § 24-12; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-42. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All service buildings and the grounds of mobile home parks shall be maintained in a clean, orderly manner and kept free of any condition that would menace the public health or constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  At all times, the person to whom a use permit or a certificate of occupancy has been issued for a mobile home park, or the duly authorized agent of such person, shall be in charge of the mobile home park to maintain the same and its facilities in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and in a state of good repair. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, §§ 24-19, 24-28; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-43. - Display of permits, license and certificate of occupancy. 
The use permit required by the zoning ordinance,* the license required by chapter 18.1 of this Code and the permit and certificate of occupancy required by this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed, under a transparent covering, in the office on the premises of a mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, § 24-27; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 20-44. - Water and sewers generally. 
In each mobile home park, the potable water supply, sewers and connections thereto and sewage disposal shall conform to all applicable provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, § 24-26; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 30; water supply, Ch. 39.  
Sec. 20-45. - Construction requirements for service buildings. 
Service buildings having toilet and bath facilities or laundry or other facilities shall be permanent structures, well lighted, well ventilated and with all openings tightly screened. They shall be constructed of such moisture proof materials as will permit repeated cleaning. The floors shall be of water impervious material. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, § 24-17; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-46. - Required sanitation facilities. 
Each mobile home park accommodating dependent mobile homes shall provide toilets, baths or showers, slop sinks and other sanitation facilities, as follows: 
(1)  Toilet facilities for males, distinctly marked "FOR MEN," shall consist of not less than one (1) flush toilet and one (1) urinal for each five (5) dependent mobile homes or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Toilet facilities for females, distinctly marked "FOR WOMEN," shall consist of not less than one (1) flush toilet for each five (5) dependent mobile homes or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Each sex shall be provided with not less than one (1) lavatory and one (1) bathtub or shower, or combination tub and shower, supplied with an adequate quantity of hot and cold running water, with individual dressing accommodations, for each five (5) dependent mobile homes or fraction thereof. 
(4)  Each toilet and each bathtub or shower, or combination tub and shower, with individual dressing accommodations as herein required, shall be in a private compartment or stall. 
(5)  Toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall be in separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a solid, soundproof wall from floor to ceiling or roof, with separate entrances. 
(6)  There shall be provided in both the male and female facilities, in a separate compartment or stall, not less than one (1) flush toilet bowl for emptying bedpans or other containers of human excreta, with a slop sink and an adequate supply of hot running water for cleaning the same. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, § 24-20; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-47. - Location of service buildings with toilet and bath facilities. 
Service buildings housing toilet and bath facilities shall be located no more than one hundred (100) feet from any space occupied by a dependent mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, § 24-18; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-48. - Unlawful disposal of sewage; sewer connections. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or for any person to dispose of or attempt to dispose of waste water or material from sinks, toilets, baths, showers or any other fixture or thing upon the surface of the ground in any mobile home park. All such fixtures in mobile homes or facilities of the mobile home park shall be connected to the park sewer system. Such park sewer system shall discharge into public sewers or a sewage disposal system as required by applicable provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, § 24-21; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 30.  
Sec. 20-49. - Electric service. 
Each mobile home space shall be supplied with electric service. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, § 24-25; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-50. - Lighting of driveways and walkways. 
Driveways and walkways in a mobile home park shall be adequately lighted from sunset to sunrise. 
(Ord. No. 58, §§ 6, 7; Code 1964, §§ 24-33, 24-44; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-51. - Garbage containers. 
Leakproof garbage containers, with tight-fitting lids, shall be provided for, and located at, each mobile home space. Such containers shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, § 24-22; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-52. - Fire-fighting equipment. 
Each mobile home park shall, at all times, be equipped with such fire-fighting equipment as is required by the applicable provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, § 24-23; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 14.  
Sec. 20-53. - Fuel storage facilities. 
Storage facilities for gas, fuel oil or gasoline in a mobile home park shall conform with the applicable requirements of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 5; Code 1964, § 24-24; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 20-54—20-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO PARKS EXISTING ON DECEMBER 1, 1960 
 
Sec. 20-66. - Application of and compliance with division. 
This division prescribes requirements for mobile home parks lawfully existing on December 1, 1960. Such parks shall conform to the requirements of this division, in addition to the general requirements of division 3 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 7; Code 1964, § 24-40; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-67. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or operate within the city a mobile home park governed by this division without first securing a certificate of occupancy from the building official. The building official shall issue such certificate, if the park conforms to the requirements of this division and Division 3 of this article. 
(b)  A certificate of occupancy issued under this section shall be transferable upon the written application of the holder thereof and endorsement thereon by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 58, §§ 1, 7; Code 1964, §§ 24-3, 24-46; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-68. - Required ground area generally. 
Mobile home parks subject to this division shall be of such ground area as may be required for necessary driveways, buildings and the ground areas required for each mobile home space and the clear spaces required between the latter. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 7; Code 1964, § 24-41; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-69. - Minimum area of mobile home spaces. 
The owner or operator of a mobile home park subject to this division shall provide not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of ground, exclusive of the ground underneath a mobile home, for each space rented or offered for rent. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 7; Code 1964, § 24-42; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-70. - Maximum coverage of mobile home space. 
(a)  Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each mobile home space in a park subject to this division that there shall be unoccupied space of not less than ten (10) feet on both sides and ends thereof. Such unoccupied space shall not be construed to mean the space underneath the mobile home. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, a mobile home park containing two (2) or more mobile homes that has a permit issued by the city under the provisions of any ordinance in effect prior to December 1, 1960, may retain such placement of mobile homes therein as was required or accepted by the city under the provisions of such previous ordinance, provided a plat of the park and its mobile home spaces, to a scale of twenty (20) feet to an inch, is filed with the building official prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy under section 20-67. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 7; Code 1964, § 24-45; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-71. - Parking on driveways. 
The parking of vehicles on driveways in mobile home parks subject to this division shall be regulated in such manner as to permit the egress and ingress of emergency vehicles at all times. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 7; Code 1964, § 24-43; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-72. - Enlargements and additions. 
Enlargements of or additions to mobile home parks governed by this division shall conform to the requirements of Division 5 of this article, except those prescribed in sections 20-82 through 20-85. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 7; Code 1964, § 24-50; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Secs. 20-73—20-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO PARKS ESTABLISHED AFTER DECEMBER 1, 1960 
 
Sec. 20-81. - Application of division. 
This division prescribes requirements for mobile home parks established in the city between December 1, 1960 and October 24, 1990, which requirements are in addition to the general requirements of division 3 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 6; Code 1964, § 24-29; Ord. No. 977, 10-24-90; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-82. - Improvement site plans. 
After a use permit has been granted by the city council for a mobile home park, as required by the zoning ordinance*, the person in whose name it is granted shall, in duplicate, submit improvement site plans to the building official, which plans shall show the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the person to whom the use permit was granted. 
(2)  The location and street number of the park site. 
(3)  The layout of driveways, walkways, mobile home spaces; water, sewer and electric service locations and connection locations; driveway light locations; location of sanitation facilities and laundry facilities, if furnished; the surface drainage plan; sewage disposal plan; and such other information as may be requested by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 6; Code 1964, § 24-36; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 20-83. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or operate within the city a mobile home park governed by this division, without first securing a certificate of occupancy from the building official. Such certificate shall be issued upon completion of all improvements in accordance with the site plans submitted pursuant to section 20-82. 
(b)  A certificate of occupancy issued under this section shall be transferable upon the written application of the holder thereof and endorsement thereon by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 58, §§ 1, 6; Code 1964, §§ 24-3, 24-38; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-84. - License. 
The person to whom the use permit, the permit required by Division 2 of this article and certificate of occupancy required by section 20-83 are issued shall then secure the license required by chapter 18.1 of this Code, after which mobile home spaces may be occupied in the park. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 6; Code 1964, § 24-39; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-85. - Gross ground area; minimum number of spaces. 
Mobile home parks subject to this division shall have a gross ground area equal to the area required for the number of mobile home spaces to be provided, the necessary area for setbacks required by the zoning ordinance,* park roadways, park service buildings and other park purposes. The minimum number of mobile home spaces to be provided for in such parks shall be ten (10). 
(Ord. No. 58, § 6; Code 1964, § 24-30; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 20-86. - Width and depth of spaces; marking of space corners. 
Mobile home spaces in parks subject to this division shall be of such width and depth that there shall be at least twenty (20) feet of unoccupied space between the sides of each mobile home and ten (10) feet on each end of the mobile home thereon harbored. The roof of an open patio adjacent or attached to the mobile home may extend into the unoccupied space on one (1) side thereof; provided, however, that if the space under such roof is enclosed, the enclosed space shall be counted as a part of the mobile home width and the required unoccupied space on that side shall be measured from the outside wall of such enclosed space. The corners of each space shall be permanently marked. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 6; Code 1964, § 24-31; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-87. - Clearances and setbacks for mobile homes. 
Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each mobile home space that there shall be at least a twenty (20) foot clearance between homes. In any multiple residential district (R-M), as defined in the zoning ordinance, mobile homes shall be harbored at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line and not less than ten (10) feet from a side property line or any building within the park and not less than twenty (20) feet from the rear property line. If the park is located in a commercial district C-1, C-2 or C-3, as defined in the zoning ordinance, mobile homes shall be harbored not less than twenty (20) feet from the front property line and not less than ten (10) feet from a side or rear property line or any building within the mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 6; Code 1964, § 24-34; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 20-88. - Driveways generally. 
Mobile home spaces in a park subject to this division shall abut upon a paved driveway, not less than thirty (30) feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 6; Code 1964, § 24-32; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06)  
Sec. 20-89. - Fence or planting. 
Each mobile home park subject to this division shall have around its boundary a suitable fence or planting, not less than three (3) feet in height, having only openings that are necessary for egress and ingress to public streets. Barbed wire or electric fences are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 6; Code 1964, § 24-35; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06) 
Cross reference— Barbed wire generally, § 9-206 et seq.; general prohibition against electric fences, § 24-40.  
Sec. 20-90. - Referral to zoning ordinance. 
All manufactured/mobile home parks and subdivisions established in the city after October 24, 1990 and all additions and changes to existing manufactured/mobile home parks after October 24, 1990 shall meet the criteria prescribed in the zoning ordinance, as well as any additional conditions of the approved use permit. 
(Ord. No. 977, 10-24-90; Ord. No. 1442, 11-15-06; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Chapter 21 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 982, adopted Nov. 14, 1990, repealed Ch. 21 in its entirety which pertained to motor vehicles and traffic, and derived from Code 1964, §§ 25.1-1, 25.1-2A—25.1-2E, 25.1-3—25.1-6, 25.1-9, 25.1-10—25.1-15, 25.1-17—25.1-18.4, 25.1-19—25.1-27.1, 25.1-28—25.1-140, 25.1-143—25.1-170, 25.1-172—25.1-201, 25.1-204—25.1-210, 25.1-212—25.1-227, 25.1-229—25.1-260, 25.1-284 and the following legislation: 
Ord. No. 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Date 
676 	12-10-80 	832 	5-28-86 
684 	3-11-81 	841 	10-22-86 
708 	1-3-82 	844 	11-12-86 
709 	2-10-82 	847 	12-10-86 
711 	2-24-82 	849 	1-14-87 
712 	3-10-82 	853 	3-25-87 
723 	6-23-82 	868 	9-9-87 
724 	8-18-82 	873 	11-18-87 
729 	9-8-82 	885 	4-13-88 
776 	6-27-84 	902 	8-10-88 
780 	9-12-84 	933 	2-8-89 
807 	10-9-85 	959 	1-10-90 
813 	1-8-86 	980 	10-24-90 
818 	5-7-86 		
 
Ord. No. 983, adopted Nov. 14, 1990, enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 21 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion to both Ord. No. 983 and Ord. No. 982. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. 1465, adopted March 1, 2007, amended Articles I, IV, V, VII and VIII, and repealed § 21-11. See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of said ordinance. 
Cross reference— Stopping or impeding vehicles for advertising purposes, § 3-1; deposit of advertising matter on parked vehicles, § 3-2; vehicles used for sale of ice cream, § 15-166 et seq.; noise from vehicles, §§ 22-6, 22-7; sound trucks, § 22-21 et seq.; using vehicle to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, § 24-26; injuring, tampering with, etc., vehicles, § 24-32; open storage of inoperative vehicles, § 24-39; parades, Ch. 25; unlawful driving of vehicles in parks, § 26-33; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 34; vehicles for hire, Ch. 38; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference— General authority of city to regulate traffic, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2028, 46.2-1300 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of § 46.2-1313 and 1-220 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and as amended in the future, except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can not have application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the city. Reference to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, which is adopted by this section; provided, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  All definitions of words and phrases contained in the state law hereby adopted shall apply to such words and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless clearly indicated to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1006, 4-10-91; Ord. No. 1016, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1054, 6-24-92; Ord. No. 1067, 9-23-92; Ord. No. 1090, 6-9-93; Ord. No. 1110, 1-12-94; Ord. No. 1124, 6-8-94; Ord. No. 1135, 1-11-95; Ord. No. 1140, 6-14-95; Ord. No. 1166, 6-12-96; Ord. No. 1189, 7-9-97; Ord. No. 1219, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 10-0005, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 21-2. - Compliance with chapter and rules and regulations; general penalty for violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). If it is found by a court of proper jurisdiction that the violation of any provision of this chapter (i) was a serious traffic violation as defined in Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, § 46.2-341.20 and (ii) that such violation was committed while operating a vehicle or combination of vehicles used to transport property with (A) a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty-six thousand one (26,001) or more pounds, or (B) a gross combination weight rating of twenty-six thousand one (26,001) or more pounds inclusive of a towed vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds, the judge may assess, in addition to any other penalty assessed, a further monetary penalty not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  When any rule or regulation is made pursuant to authority granted in this chapter, and when appropriate signs, signals or markers have been erected as required by this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate such rule or regulation. Except where specifically provided otherwise, such violation shall be deemed a traffic infraction punishable as provided in subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1059, 6-24-92; Ord. No. 1219, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions applicable to violations of state traffic laws, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113; city prohibited from imposing penalty for traffic violation which is greater than penalty imposed by state for similar offense, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300.  
Sec. 21-3. - Authorizing or permitting violations of chapter. 
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven by any person who has no legal right to do so or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-4. - Arrest procedure for violations of chapter—Generally. 
(a)  Whenever any person is detained by, or in the custody of, an arresting officer, including an arrest on a warrant, for a violation of any provision of this chapter, except § 18.2-266 of the Code of Virginia, the arresting officer shall, except as otherwise provided in this section or by law, take the name and address of such person and the license number of his motor vehicle and issue a summons or otherwise notify him, in writing, to appear, at a time and place to be specified in such summons or notice, such time to be at least five (5) days after such arrest, unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing, and such person shall, if he so desires, have a right to an immediate hearing or a hearing within twenty-four (24) hours at a convenient hour, and before a court having jurisdiction. Upon the giving by such person of his written promise to appear at such time and place, the officer shall forthwith release him from custody. 
(b)  Any person refusing to give a written promise to appear under the provisions of this section shall be taken immediately by the arresting officer before a magistrate or other issuing officer having jurisdiction, who shall proceed according to the provisions of section 21-6. 
(c)  Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear, given in accordance with this section, shall be treated in accordance with the provisions of section 21-5. 
(d)  Any officer violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office and subject to removal therefrom upon complaint filed by any person in a court of competent jurisdiction. This section shall not be construed to limit the removal of a police officer for other misconduct in office. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07) 
Cross reference— Use of above section in making arrests for boating violations and for littering, §§ 7-22. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936.  
Sec. 21-5. - Same—Failure to comply with summons or notice. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any person to comply with the terms of a summons or notice as provided in section 21-4, such person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and the court may direct the arresting officer or the clerk of the court to obtain a warrant for his arrest or for the violation of his written promise to appear given in accordance with section 21-4 and serve, or cause to be served, or attempt, or cause to be attempted, to serve such warrant on such person. The warrant shall be returnable to the court having jurisdiction of the offense and shall be accompanied by a report by the arresting officer, which shall clearly identify the person arrested, specifying the section of this chapter violated, the location of the offense, a description of the motor vehicle and its registration or license number. 
(b)  If the warrant is returned to the court with the notation "not found" or the person named in the warrant does not appear on the return date thereof, the court shall forward a certificate of the fact of nonservice or nonappearance, with a copy of the report specified in subsection (a) above, to the commissioner, who shall forthwith suspend the driver's license of such person. The order of suspension shall specify the reason for the suspension. Such suspension shall continue until such time as the court has notified the commissioner that the defendant has appeared before the court under the terms of the summons or notice and the warrant. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-938.  
Sec. 21-6. - Same—When arrested person to be taken before magistrate or other issuing authority. 
If any person arrested for a violation of this chapter is believed by the arresting officer to have committed a felony or is believed by the arresting officer to be likely to disregard a summons issued under section 21-4, or if such person refuses to give a written promise to appear under the provisions of section 21-4, the arresting officer shall take such person forthwith before a magistrate or other issuing authority having jurisdiction, who shall determine whether or not probable cause exists that such person is likely to disregard a summons, and may issue either a summons or a warrant, as he shall determine proper. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-940.  
Sec. 21-7. - Same—Traffic infractions treated as misdemeanors for arrest purposes. 
For purposes of arrest, traffic infractions shall be treated as misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the authority and duties of arresting officers shall be the same for traffic infractions as for misdemeanors. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-937.  
Sec. 21-8. - Procedure in traffic infraction cases. 
(a)  In a traffic infraction case, a defendant may elect to enter a written appearance and waive a court hearing, except in instances in which property damage or personal injury resulted. Arraignment is not necessary when waived by the accused or his counsel, when the accused fails to appear or when such written appearance has been elected. 
(b)  The accused in a traffic infraction case may plead not guilty, guilty or nolo contendere. The court shall not refuse to accept a plea of nolo contendere. A plea of guilty may be entered in writing, without court appearance. 
(c)  When the accused in a traffic infraction case tenders payment by mail, without executing a written waiver of court hearing and entry of guilty plea, such tender of payment shall itself be deemed a waiver of court hearing and entry of guilty plea. 
(d)  The chief judge of the general district court may designate the traffic violations bureau for the receipt of a written appearance, waiver of court hearing and guilty plea in traffic infraction cases. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-8.1. - Authority of police officers to issue subpoenas. 
(a)  Any police officer, in the course of his duties in the investigation of an accident involving a motor vehicle or vehicles, may, at the scene of any such accident, issue a subpoena to any witness to appear in court and testify with respect to any criminal charge brought against any person as a result of such accident. 
(b)  Any person failing to appear in response to a subpoena issued as provided in subsection (a) hereof shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-9. - Driving improvement school for violators. 
(a)  There is hereby established the city driving improvement school to be directed and conducted by the general district court and the juvenile and domestic relations court, being the courts charged with the duty of hearing traffic cases. 
(b)  A judge of any court in the city may, upon a finding of guilty in any traffic case, require attendance of an offender at such school, as provided in § 46.2-1314 of the Code of Virginia. Attendance at such school may be in lieu of or in addition to any penalty prescribed by law. Failure to comply with an order of the court to attend such school shall be punishable as contempt of such court. 
(c)  The full-time judges of the general district court and the juvenile and domestic relations court of the city shall exercise supervision and control of such school, the days and hours when it shall be conducted and the personnel who are to be instructors. Such judges may establish a tuition for such classes of students as they may deem advisable. Such sum shall be received by the respective clerks of court and shall be disbursed pursuant to direction of a judge of the court, to the end that such school shall be self-supporting. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1314.  
Sec. 21-10. - General powers of city manager relative to traffic. 
(a)  In addition to the powers granted him by other sections of this chapter, the city manager shall have the following powers and authority regarding the regulation of motor vehicles and traffic. 
(1)  To regulate the operation of vehicles within the corporate limits of the city by the erection and placing of proper signs or markers indicating loading and unloading zones, school zones, hospital zones and quiet zones. 
(2)  To mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating the direction and flow of traffic. 
(3)  To secure all necessary signs, signals or markers to be erected or placed on any street or part of a street to provide a uniform system of marking and signing such street. 
(b)  The powers granted to the city manager in this section and other sections of the chapter shall be exercised subject to the provisions of this chapter and subject to the directions of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1465, adopted March 1, 2007, repealed § 21-11, which pertained to the transportation safety commission. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 21-12. - Duty of police officers to enforce chapter and other traffic laws. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police division of this city, or such officers thereof as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
Cross reference— Police, Ch. 29.  
Sec. 21-13. - Direction of traffic by fire and emergency management officers. 
Officers of the fire division, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. Officers of the emergency management unit, when on duty and in uniform, may direct or assist the police or firefighters in directing traffic. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 14.  
Sec. 21-14. - Compliance with directions of police officers, etc. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer, fire division official or officer of the emergency management unit given pursuant to authority granted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Failure to obey order of conservator of the peace, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-464; disregarding signal by law enforcement officer to stop, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-817.  
Sec. 21-15. - Vehicles not to cause deposit or accumulation of mud, dirt, etc., on street. 
No vehicle or mobile equipment shall be operated on a public street in the city in such manner or under such conditions as to cause a deposit, buildup or accumulation of mud, dirt, gravel or foregoing matter on such street. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Securing loads on vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1155; vehicles scattering load, Code of Virginia § 46.2-1156.  
Sec. 21-16. - Presumption as to lawful erection. 
The existence of any signs, signals, paintings, buttons or markers provided for in this chapter at any place within the corporate limits of the city shall be prima facie evidence that such were erected or placed by and at the direction of the city manager in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-17. - Signals by lights—Authority of city manager to erect. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to regulate the operation of vehicles within the corporate limits of the city by the erection of traffic-control signals exhibiting colored lights or the words "Go", "Caution" or "Stop." 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-18. - Use of video-monitoring systems to enforce law against passing stopped school buses authorized. 
(a)  The School Board of the City of Hampton is hereby authorized to install and operate a video-monitoring system in or on school buses operated by the school division, or to contract with a private vendor to do so on behalf of the school division, for the purpose of recording violations of § 46.2-844 of the Code of Virginia prohibiting drivers of motor vehicles from passing stopped buses under the conditions set forth in this statute. Section 46.2-844 of the Code of Virginia has been duly incorporated by reference into the Code of the City of Hampton, § 21-1, pursuant to authority granted in § 46.2-1313 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The term "video-monitoring system" shall have the meaning given it in § 46.2-844(B) of the Code of Virginia. Any such system, and the operation thereof, shall comply with all requirements of "video-monitoring systems" contained in § 46.2-844(B) of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  Any civil penalty levied for a violation of Virginia Code § 46.2-844 as incorporated by reference into the Code of the City of Hampton by § 21-1, shall be payable to the school board for the City of Hampton. 
( Ord. No. 13-0023, 11-13-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0002, 1-14-15 )  
Secs. 21-19—21-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL VEHICLE LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1492, adopted September 26, 2007, amended Art. II, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference— Authority of city relative to vehicle licenses, Sec. 2.02a. 
State Law reference— Authority of city as to vehicle license taxes, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-973; 46.2-752. 
 
Sec. 21-36. - Definition(s). 
"Domicile" means having a place of abode in the city, irrespective of any intention on the part of any person to return to or to establish a domicile outside of the city at some future time. The term "domicile" shall also be construed to embrace any corporation or firm having an office or place of business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 21-37. - License fee; situs, requirement thereof; violations. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed, on every motor vehicle, trailer and semitrailer which is normally garaged, stored or parked within the city limits, a license fee at the rates set forth in section 21-41. If it cannot be determined where such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is normally garaged, stored or parked, the situs for the purpose of imposing this license fee shall be the domicile of its owner. The commissioner of the revenue shall determine applicability of this section and the treasurer shall bill and collect the license fees assessed. Every owner of a motor vehicle, trailer and/or semitrailer normally garaged, stored or parked within the city limits shall pay the license fee on or before December 5 of the preceding license year, or within ten (10) days of purchasing a state license for such vehicle, or within thirty (30) days of moving the situs of the vehicle to the city, whichever is sooner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, garage, store or park a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer within the city without having paid the license fee therefore. 
(c)  Police officers, special police officers and such other employees or agents of the city as the chief of police or treasurer may designate shall attach to any vehicle which is not so licensed, a notice to the owner thereof that he is in violation of this article and instructing the owner that he may report and present to the treasurer's office proper evidence of payment of the license fee for such vehicle and pay, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(d)  Any person who shall desire to contest a citation issued under subsection (c) shall present the citation to the treasurer's office within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the citation to register his/her intent to contest the violation. Failure to initiate this action within thirty (30) days shall constitute waiver and the matter shall proceed for collection. Upon timely registration of intent to contest, the citation shall be certified by the treasurer on an appropriate form to the general district court. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 21-38. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No license shall be required under this article of a nonresident of the city who shall use a motor vehicle exclusively for his personal transportation to and from a place of business in the city. 
(b)  No person shall be required to pay the license fee prescribed by this article on any vehicle for which an annual registration certificate and license are not required by Code of Virginia, Title 46.2, on any vehicle specifically exempt under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-755, or on any vehicle owned by any person in active military service who is in the city solely by reason of military orders and who has legal residence in a state other than Virginia. Provided, however, that every person claiming an exemption under this section who owns and operates a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is normally garaged, stored, or parked within the boundaries of the city must still provide to the commissioner of the revenue proof that the owner of a vehicle is exempted under this section. If the status of the owner of the vehicle changes so as to no longer qualify the vehicle for the exemption provided herein, the owner shall forthwith notify the commissioner of the revenue within thirty (30) days of the date of such change in status, give the reason for the status change, and shall comply with all other provisions of this article. 
(c)  In the event the owner of the motor vehicle is a full time student attending an institution of higher education, the situs shall be the domicile of such student, provided the student has presented sufficient evidence that he has paid personal property tax on the motor vehicle in his domicile. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 21-39. - Separate license for trailers and semitrailers. 
Trailers and semitrailers shall be licensed separately under this article from the vehicles to which they are attached. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 21-40. - Invoice for license fee and payment. 
(a)  After a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer has been assessed for personal property tax purposes by the commissioner of revenue, a license fee as set forth by section 21-41 shall be charged to such motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer. The city treasurer shall mail the taxpayer a bill for the license fee for the current and each subsequent year. The license fee shall be listed as a separate item on each year's annual personal property tax bill, which payment shall be due on or before December 5th of the year preceding the year for which the license is purchased, or as indicated on the bill. 
(b)  Upon payment to the treasurer of the license fee prescribed by this article and in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this article, the city treasurer shall mark the treasurer's records that a license fee has been paid on the applicant's vehicle for which the fee was charged. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 21-41. - Amount of fee—Generally. 
(a)  Amount of fee. The license fee imposed by this article on all motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers that have situs in the city as described in this article for any portion of the year between January 1 and June 30 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for a passenger car, if such passenger car is not used for the transportation of passengers for compensation and is not kept or used for rent or for hire, or is not operated under a lease without a chauffeur. 
(2)  Thirty cents ($0.30) per one hundred (100) pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for a private motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, with a normal seating capacity of more than ten (10) adult persons, including the driver, if such private motor vehicle is not used for the transportation of passengers for compensation and is not kept or used for rent or for hire or is not operated under a lease without a chauffeur; provided, that in no case shall the fee be less than twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(3)  Thirty cents ($0.30) per one hundred (100) pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for a private school bus; provided that, in no case shall the fee be less than twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(4)  Twenty dollars ($20.00) for a trailer or semitrailer designed for use as living quarters for human beings. 
(5)  Ten dollars ($10.00), plus thirty cents ($0.30) per one hundred (100) pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for each motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer used as a common carrier of passengers, operating in intracity transportation over the public streets, roads, bridges and routes of the city. 
(6)  Ten dollars ($10.00), plus forty-five cents ($0.45) per one hundred (100) pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for each motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer kept or used for rent or for hire or operated under a lease without a chauffeur for the transportation of passengers. This fee does not apply to vehicles used as common carriers. 
(7)  Ten dollars ($10.00), plus forty-five cents ($0.45) per one hundred (100) pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for a taxicab or other vehicle kept for rent or hire and operated with a chauffeur for the transportation of passengers. This fee does not apply to vehicles used as common carriers. 
(8)  Seventeen dollars ($17.00) for a motorcycle with or without a sidecar. 
(9)  Twenty dollars ($20.00) for a bus used exclusively for transportation to and from Sunday school or church, for the purpose of divine worship. 
(10)  Ten dollars ($10.00), plus forty-five cents ($0.45) per one hundred (100) pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for other passenger-carrying vehicles. 
In addition to the fees set forth above, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be imposed for the annual registration of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer referred to above exceeding four thousand (4,000) pounds. 
(b)  Means for computing fees. The manufacturer's shipping weight or scale weight shall be used for computing all fees imposed by this section when based upon the weight of the vehicle. 
(c)  Burden of proof. The applicant for a license shall bear the burden of proof that the vehicle for which a license is sought is entitled, by weight, design and use, to be licensed for the amount tendered by the applicant to the city treasurer. 
(d)  Exception to subsections (a)(6) and (7). The fees imposed by subsection (a)(6) and (7) above to be paid for the operation of motor vehicles used for rent or hire shall not be required for the operation of any motor vehicle with a normal seating capacity of not more than six (6) adult persons including the driver. 
(1)  While used not-for-profit in transporting persons who, as a common undertaking, bear or agree to bear all or a part of the actual cost of such operation; or 
(2)  While used by a lessee renting or hiring such vehicle for a period of twelve (12) months or longer under a written lease or agreement; and, for the purpose of this section, every such motor vehicle shall be treated as a private motor vehicle for which the license fee shall be Thirty-five dollars ($35.00); provided, however, that if such vehicle exceeds the weight of four thousand (4,000) pounds, such fee shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
(e)  Exemption carriers operating under certificates of public convenience and necessity. The above provisions of this section shall not apply to any carrier operating under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the state corporation commission for buses operated in special or chartered party service, nor shall the provisions of subsections (a)(6) and (7) above apply to any carrier operating under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the state corporation commission or the interstate commerce commission, or under a local franchise granted by any city or town. 
(f)  No license fee shall be charged for motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers that do not have situs in the city as described in this article for any portion of the year between January 1, and June 30 of the license year. 
(g)  The license fee imposed by this article shall be in addition to any other city license tax. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07; Ord. No. 10-0009, 5-12-10; Ord. No. 12-0026, 5-9-12) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 12-0026, adopted May 19, 2012, shall be effective and the charges applied to billings made by the city on and after July 1, 2012. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-694 and 752.  
Sec. 21-42. - For vehicles not designed or used for transportation of passengers—Generally. 
(a)  The annual city license fee to be paid by owners of all motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers not designed and used for the transportation of passengers, except as otherwise herein provided, shall be determined by the gross weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles of which it is a part, when loaded to the maximum capacity for which it is registered and licensed by the state, according to the license fees herein set forth. There shall be paid a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) plus twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred (100) pounds, or major fraction thereof, of such gross weight, for vehicles weighing ten thousand one (10,001) pounds up to eighty thousand (80,000) pounds. 
(b)  In the case of a combination of tractor truck and a trailer or semitrailer, each vehicle constituting a part of such combination shall be licensed as a separate vehicle and a separate license shall be issued therefore. The fee for a trailer or semitrailer unit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). The fee for each tractor unit shall be as prescribed in subsection (a) above, based on gross weight, such gross weight being determined by the aggregate gross weight of the entire combination of vehicles of which the tractor unit constitutes a part; provided that, in no case shall the tax for a tractor unit be less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than one hundred five dollars ($105.00). 
(c)  The annual city license fee to be paid by the owner of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer upon which well-drilling machinery is attached and which is permanently used solely for transporting such machinery shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07; Ord. No. 10-0011, 5-12-10) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 10-0011, adopted May 12, 2010, shall be effective and the charges applied to billings made by the city on and after January 1, 2010. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-694, 694.1, 697 and 700.  
Sec. 21-43. - For one- and two-wheeled trailers. 
The annual city license tax to be paid by the owner of a one- or two-wheeled trailer of a cradle flatbed or open pickup type, which has a body width not greater than the width of the motor vehicle to which it is attached at any time of operation and which is pulled or towed by a passenger car or station wagon or a pickup or panel truck having an actual gross vehicle weight not exceeding five thousand (5,000) pounds, and which is used for carrying property not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds at any one (1) time, shall be six dollars and fifty cents ($6.50). Nothing in this section shall be construed as applying a tax to trailers or semitrailers designed for use as living quarters for human beings or to those trailers or semitrailers operated under lease or rental agreement or operated for compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 21-44. - Tax not to exceed amount of state tax. 
If any license tax imposed by this article shall exceed, when computed in accordance with the terms of this article, the amount of the license tax imposed by the state on the same motor vehicle trailer or semitrailer, the license tax imposed upon such vehicle by this article shall be in an amount equal to the license tax imposed by the state and in no case shall the license tax imposed by this article exceed the amount of the license tax imposed by the state on the same vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 21-45. - Determination of tax on vehicles used as service or wrecking cranes. 
For the purpose of determining the annual city license tax to be paid by the owners of motor vehicles used as service or wrecking cranes, such motor vehicles, when used in connection with the business of any person engaged in selling motor vehicles or repairing the same, shall be treated as other similar private motor vehicles and not as motor vehicles operating for compensation or for hire. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 21-46. - When collection of tax to begin. 
The city treasurer shall begin collecting the license taxes imposed by this article by November 10th of the preceding license year. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 21-47. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-48. - Applicant to present state registration card. 
Each applicant for a license under this article shall present to the commissioner of the revenue the state registration card for the vehicle to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Secs. 21-49—21-63. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-64. - Refund of tax. 
(a)  Any person paying a license tax on a vehicle under the requirements of this article shall be entitled to a refund upon furnishing proof, by affidavit or otherwise, satisfactory to the commissioner of the revenue that such license is no longer required under this article. No refund shall be made after January fifteenth of such year. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall issue to any person entitled to receive the refund provided for in this section a certificate showing such person to be entitled to a refund of the amount stated in such certificate and the treasurer shall forward a copy of such certificate to the director of finance authorizing a refund to the person and in the amount set forth in such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 21-65. - Giving false affidavit under article. 
Any person who shall give a false affidavit under the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Sec. 21-66. - Agreement with department of motor vehicles. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall enter into a formal agreement with the commissioner of the state department of motor vehicles (DMV) whereby DMV will refuse to issue or renew any state vehicle registration of any applicant who owes to the city any vehicle license fee or personal property taxes, including delinquent taxes. Before being issued any state vehicle registration or renewal of such license or registration by DMV, the applicant shall first satisfy DMV that all such local vehicle license fees and personal property taxes. 
(b)  DMV shall charge a reasonable fee to cover the costs of such enforcement action, and the treasurer shall add the cost of this fee to the delinquent tax bill. 
(c)  The treasurer shall notify DMV in the manner provided for in the agreement with DMV and supply to DMV information necessary to identify the debtor whose registration or renewal is to be denied. 
(Ord. No. 1492, 9-26-07)  
Secs. 21-67—21-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT FOR OPERATION OF OVERSIZE OR OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0005, adopted May 12, 2010, shall be effective on and after July 1, 2010. 
 
Sec. 21-86. - General authority to issue. 
The director of public works, or his designee may, issue permits conditioned as deemed necessary or advisable, authorizing the operation of vehicles, or combinations thereof, the width, height, length or weight of which exceed that permitted by the state law adopted by section 21-1, if such operation will not damage any infrastructure, render the streets dangerous or otherwise unduly impair the free flow of traffic thereon. The issuance of permits shall be in accordance with the City of Hampton Moving and Hauling Policy Manual, attached herewith and incorporated herein by reference. Permits issued in accordance with this section shall be designated as single trip, general blanket permit, or restricted blanket permit, as defined in the City of Hampton Moving and Hauling Policy. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 10-0005, 5-12-10) 
State Law reference— Maximum size and weight of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1101 et seq.; authority of city to issue permits for oversize and overweight vehicles, § 46.2-1139.  
Sec. 21-87. - Blanket permits. 
General blanket and restricted blanket permits may be issued under section 21-86 of this article to any individual, business entity, government agency or a utility company for a specific vehicle owned or operated by it, subject to the requirements of the city's moving and hauling policy. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 10-0005, 5-12-10)  
Sec. 21-88. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0005, adopted May 12, 2010, effective July 1, 2010, repealed § 21-88, which pertained to penalty for violation of weight limits and derived from Ord. No. 983, adopted Nov. 14, 1990.  
Sec. 21-89. - Effect of issuance of state permit for operation over primary routes. 
A person shall be deemed to have obtained a permit from the director of public works or his designee for the operation of an overweight, overwidth, overlength, overheight or unlicensed vehicle if such person is operating such vehicle pursuant to a permit issued by an appropriate agency or entity of the Commonwealth of Virginia over primary routes through the city. A permit shall be required and may be issued for the movement of overweight, overwidth, overlength, overheight or unlicensed vehicles over all other streets in the city, whether or not the permittee has a permit from the state highway and transportation commission. 
(Ord. No. 10-0005, 5-12-10)  
Sec. 21-90. - Permit required for transport of super loads. 
No person shall move on, transport over, carry along or convey upon any street of the city any super load, as that term is defined by the city's moving and hauling policy, or anything so heavy as to require the use of structural deck plating, skids or rollers for the transporting thereof, unless such person shall have secured a permit to do so from the director of public works or his designee, and has complied with the city's moving and hauling policy. 
(Ord. No. 10-0005, 5-12-10)  
Sec. 21-91. - Applicant's bond or insurance. 
Before issuing any permit pursuant to this article, the director of public works or his designee shall require the applicant to file evidence of insurance or a bond, in the form of a cash bond, corporate surety bond, or irrevocable letter of credit, adequate to protect the city from any liability or damage to streets which may arise from the permitted operation and which in no instance shall be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 10-0005, 5-12-10)  
Sec. 21-92. - Permit fees and charges. 
A permit fee of seventy-five ($75.00) shall be paid to the city before any single move permit (excluding super loads) shall be issued under this article; provided, however, that (i) the fee for each general blanket permit shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first vehicle owned, leased or controlled by a person or business entity and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional vehicle owned, leased or controlled by such person or entity or (ii) the fee per vehicle for each restricted blanket permit issued under section 21-87 shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). A permit fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be paid to the city before any super load permit for a single move, shall be issued under this article. No blanket permits are available for super loads. 
(Ord. No. 10-0005, 5-12-10)  
Sec. 21-93. - Agreement to comply with permit and the city's moving and hauling policy and to repair damages caused by oversized or overweight vehicles. 
(a)  Acceptance of a permit by the applicant requires that he/she certify that the vehicle load can and will be moved in strict compliance with the terms set forth in the permit and in the city's moving and hauling policy, that the operator of the vehicle is properly licensed to operate the vehicle on public highways and that all information submitted to secure the permit is accurate. No person, owner, representative, agent or employee of the permittee shall knowingly allow anyone to violate the regulations or restrictions set forth in the permit and the city's moving and hauling policy. 
(b)  By the acceptance of a permit under this article for the operation of an oversized or overweight vehicle, or by the operation of such a vehicle when no permit from the city is required by virtue of the provisions of section 21-89, a person agrees to restore or repair any damage caused by the vehicle to any street or appurtenances thereto. 
(Ord. No. 10-0005, 5-12-10)  
Sec. 21-94. - Conditions of permit for overlength vehicles. 
Unless otherwise specified in the permit, every permit issued under this article for the operation of an overlength vehicle shall be deemed to include the following: 
(1)  The permittee agrees to give adequate warning to the traveling public of the overlength vehicle and further agrees that the maximum overhang shall not exceed one-third ( 1/3 ) of the overall length of the load. 
(2)  The permittee shall not permit the overlength load or any part thereof to drag upon the roadway, regardless of whether overhang has been permitted. 
(Ord. No. 10-0005, 5-12-10)  
Secs. 21-95—21-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES—GENERALLY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Regulations governing bicycle riders, § 6-16 et seq. 
State Law reference— Vehicle operation generally, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800 et seq. 
 
Sec. 21-101. - Use of broken wheels. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause or suffer to be operated, upon any public street or highway of this city any motor vehicle having a wheel so broken or in such a state of disrepair as to cause injury to the pavement of such street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Tire cleats, chains and studs, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1044.  
Sec. 21-102. - Tail gates. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, trailer or other vehicle equipped with a tail gate to lower or open the tail gate thereon, or to suffer or permit such tail gate to be lowered or opened, except during the time the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded, and except during the time the load on the vehicle necessitates a lowered or opened tail gate as a support for the load. It shall be the duty of the operator of any such vehicle to see that the tail gate of such vehicle is kept closed or raised, except during the time hereinbefore specified. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-103. - Through streets—Designated. 
Those streets and parts of streets described below are hereby declared to be through streets for the purpose of this chapter: 
	Name of Street 	Portions Thereof 
(1) 	Aberdeen Road 	From Pembroke Avenue to Todds Lane 
(2) 	Andrews Boulevard 	From Mercury Boulevard to Old Buckroe Road 
(3) 	Armistead Avenue 	From Settlers Landing Road to Wythe Creek Road 
(4) 	Back River Road 	From Thornette Street to Bassett Street 
(5) 	Beach Road 	From Bloxom's Corner to Grand View 
(6) 	Bell Street 	From Shell Road to Pembroke Avenue 
(7) 	Big Bethel Road 	From Briarfield Road to York county line 
(8) 	Briarfield Road 	From Queen Street to Newport News city line 
(9) 	Charlton Drive 	From Mercury Boulevard to Towler Drive 
(10) 	Chesapeake Avenue 	From LaSalle Avenue to Newport News city line 
(11) 	Clemwood Parkway 	From Fox Hill Road to Little Back River Road 
(12) 	Coliseum Drive 	From Pine Chapel Road to Marcella Road 
(13) 	County Street 	From Interstate 64 to Willard Avenue 
(14) 	Cunningham Drive 	From Lakeshore Drive to Mercury Boulevard 
(15) 	East Queen Street 	From the Queen Street Bridge to Tyler Street 
(16) 	Farmington Boulevard 	From Todds Lane to Estate Drive 
(17) 	Fox Hill Road 	From Mercury Boulevard to Bloxom's Corner 
(18) 	"G" Street 	From Pembroke Avenue to Mimosa Crescent 
(19) 	Grimes Road 	From Pembroke Avenue to Smithman Circle 
(20) 	Hampton Roads Avenue 	From Chesapeake Avenue to Shell Road 
(21) 	Harris Creek Road 	From Fox Hill Road to dead end 
(22) 	Ivy Home Road 	From Victoria Boulevard to dead end 
(23) 	Kecoughtan Road 	From Settlers Landing Road to Newport News city line 
(24) 	LaSalle Avenue 	From Chesapeake Avenue to Langley Air Force Base 
(25) 	Little Back River Road 	From Roland Drive to Harris Creek Road 
(26) 	Mallory Street 	From National Avenue to Richmond Drive 
(27) 	Mercury Boulevard 	From Fort Monroe gate to Newport News city line 
(28) 	Northampton Drive 	From Todds Lane to Churchill Drive 
(29) 	North King Street 	From Lincoln Street to Langley Air Force Base 
(30) 	Old Buckroe Road 	From Woodland Road to Fox Hill Road 
(31) 	Orcutt Avenue 	From Todds Lane to Newport News city line 
(32) 	Pembroke Avenue 	From First Street to Newport News city line 
(33) 	Pine Chapel Road 	From Armistead Avenue to Queen Street 
(34) 	Powhatan Parkway 	From Briarfield Road to Harbor Drive 
(35) 	Rip Rap Road 	From Spring Street to King Street 
(36) 	Salters Creek Road 	From Powhatan Parkway to Queen Street 
(37) 	Saunders Road 	From Big Bethel Road to Newport News city line 
(38) 	Shell Road 	From Thornette Street to Newport News city line 
(39) 	Tide Mill Lane 	From Armistead Avenue to LaSalle Avenue 
(40) 	Todds Lane 	From Mercury Boulevard to Newport News city line 
(41) 	Tyler Street 	From Gatewood Drive to Interstate 64 
(42) 	Victoria 	From Bridge Street to Newport News city line Boulevard 
(43) 	Weaver Road 	From Queen Street to Newport News city line 
(44) 	West Queen Street 	From Armistead Avenue to Mercury Boulevard 
(45) 	Whealton Road 	From Mercury Boulevard to Todds Lane 
(46) 	Willow Oaks Boulevard 	From Fox Hill Road to Little Back River Road 
(47) 	Winchester Drive 	From Todds Lane to Headrow Terrace 
(48) 	Woodland Road 	From County Street to Fox Hill Road 
 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate stop and yield right-of-way intersections, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301.  
Sec. 21-104. - Same—Erection of signs at intersections and duty of drivers approaching same. 
(a)  Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to place and maintain a stop or yield sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such by an ordinance of the city, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop or yield signs shall be erected at the approach of either of such streets as may be determined by the city manager upon the basis of the safety of the public. 
(b)  The duty of the driver of a vehicle approaching any sign erected pursuant to this section shall be as prescribed in § 46.2-821 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-105. - One-way streets. 
(a)  Whenever any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the director of public works shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys designated by any provision of this code or other ordinance of the city as one-way, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction, when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(c)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction upon the following streets and alleys or portions thereof: 
	Name of Street 	Portion of Street 	One-Way Direction 
(1) 	Armstrong Drive 	Between Stratford Road and Roads View Avenue 	Southerly 
(2) 	Barksdale Road 	Between Armstrong Drive and Roads View Avenue 	Southerly 
(3) 	Burns Street 	Between VanPatten Road and Stratford Road 	Northerly 
(4) 	Clyde Street 	Between Roads View Avenue and Stratford Road 	Northerly 
(5) 	Kecoughtan Service Road 	Between Armstrong Drive and Clyde Street 	Easterly 
(6) 	Roads View Avenue 	Between Armstrong Drive and Clyde Street 	Easterly 
(7) 	Seaboard Avenue 	Between Mallory Street and Second Street 	Southerly 
(8) 	Thornette Street 	Between Back River Road andEngland Avenue 	Westerly 
(9) 	Van Patten Drive 	Between Armstrong Drive and ClydeStreet 	Easterly 
 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1060, 7-8-92; Ord. No. 08-0021, 10-22-08) 
State Law reference— One-way roadways and highways, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-806.  
Sec. 21-106. - Driving over new pavement, closed street, etc. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or vehicle or walk over any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any highway, when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over such pavement or marking or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-107. - Driving across sidewalks or gutters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or back any vehicle across the sidewalk of any street, paved or unimproved, or across any gutter, except where permanent driveways have been constructed for this purpose and except when permits or authorizations for public use vehicles have been issued by the city manager for temporary use of the sidewalk for such purpose, under such conditions and regulations as he may prescribe. No such permits shall be issued for a period of more than sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Stop required before entering highway from sidewalk, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-826.  
Sec. 21-108. - Authority of city manager as to speed limits. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the speed limits fixed pursuant to this chapter, the city manager is expressly authorized to increase or decrease the speed of all streets maintained by the city; provided, that such areas or points are clearly indicated by markers or signs and such speed shall be based on an engineering or traffic investigation pursuant to § 46.2-1300 of the Code of Virginia. The city manager is further authorized to fix the speed on streets of the city for congested areas or curves, right angle turns or other dangerous points on the streets, when such areas or points are clearly indicated by markers or signs and such speed limits are based on an engineering or traffic investigation. 
(b)  The city manager is expressly authorized to reduce for a temporary period not to exceed sixty (60) days, without such engineering and traffic investigation, the speed limit on any street or highway of the city on which men are working or where the roadway is under construction or repair. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle in excess of any speed limit fixed by the city manager in accord with the provisions of this section, if such speed limit is clearly indicated by markers or signs. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-109. - Maximum speed on bridges. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any bridge open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in the city at a speed which is greater than that which can be maintained thereon with safety to such structure. The maximum speed for each such bridge shall be determined by the city manager and shall be displayed on suitable signs at the ends of each such bridge. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Special speed limitation on bridges, tunnels and interstates, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-881.  
Sec. 21-110. - Driving while under influence of alcohol or drugs; adoption of state law. 
Pursuant to the provisions of § 46.2-1313 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of article 2 (section 18.2-266 et seq.) of chapter 7 of title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and as amended in the future, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set out herein and are hereby made applicable within the city. References herein to "highways of the state" shall be deemed to refer to streets, highways and alleys within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any section of the Code of Virginia which is adopted by this section. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1006, 4-10-91; Ord. No. 1016, 6-26-91; Ord. No. 1054, 6-24-92; Ord. No. 1067, 9-23-92; Ord. No. 1090, 6-9-93; Ord. No. 1110, 1-12-94; Ord. No. 1124, 6-8-94; Ord. No. 1135, 1-11-95; Ord. No. 1140, 6-14-95; Ord. No. 1166, 6-12-96; Ord. No. 1189, 7-9-97; Ord. No. 1219, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07) 
Cross reference— Operating boat, water skis, etc., while intoxicated or under influence of drugs, § 7-34; public drunkenness, § 24-13. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313.  
Sec. 21-111. - Reimbursement of expenses incurred while responding to DUI incidents. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of section 21-110 of this Code or Virginia Code sections 18.2-266 or 18.2-51.4, all pertaining to operation of a motor vehicle while impaired by drugs or alcohol, when his operation of a motor vehicle while so impaired is the proximate cause of any accident or incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response by the city, shall be liable to the city in a separate civil action for the reasonable expenses thereof, in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in the aggregate for a particular accident or incident occurring in the city. 
(b)  An "appropriate emergency response" includes all costs of providing law enforcement, firefighters, rescue and emergency medical services. 
(Ord. No. 1213, 5-27-98) 
State Law reference— Reimbursement of expenses incurred in responding to DUI and related incidents, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1716.  
Sec. 21-112. - Driving or parking in certain flooded areas prohibited; removal and storage authorized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or watercraft on a flooded highway, street, alley, or parking lot, regardless of whether such highway, street, alley, or parking lot is publicly or privately owned, in such a manner as to increase the level of floodwaters to a level that causes or could reasonably be expected to cause damage to any real or personal property. The city will cause to be erected signs warning operators of motor vehicles and watercraft of the prohibition and penalties associated with this subsection. A violation of this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $250. 
(b)  During flooding events, the city manager or his designee may designate certain highways, streets, alleys, or parking lots as dangerous flood areas, and prohibit any parking or operation of motor vehicles or watercraft in such areas for the duration of the flooding event. Any prohibition created by this subsection shall not apply to a person who must drive in the designated area in order to evacuate to a safer location, and who does so safely without endangering himself or the person or property of another. A violation of this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $50. 
(c)  Any vehicle or watercraft that is (i) stalled, stuck, parked or abandoned on any highway, street, alley, or parking lot that has been designated as a dangerous flood area by the city manager or his designee in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, or (ii) stalled, stuck or abandoned on any highway, street, alley or parking lot that is posted with signage in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, may be removed and stored at the request of the police division or the public works department. The owner of any such vehicle will be charged a reasonable fee for such removal or storage in addition to any fines noted in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall apply to any law enforcement officer, firefighter, or emergency medical services personnel engaged in the performance of his duties nor to the operator of any vehicle owned or controlled by the public works department, the department of transportation, or a public utility agency as defined in Virginia Code § 56-265.1. 
(Ord. No. 16-0013 , 7-13-16) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800.3; 46.2-1302.  
Sec. 21-113. - Improper driving; use of handheld communication device while driving vehicle. 
(a)  Any person who drives a motor vehicle on any public street or highway in the city while using any handheld personal communications device where such use diverts the driver's attention from the operation of the motor vehicle is guilty of distracted driving. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to an operator (i) of any emergency vehicle while he is engaged in the performance of his official duties; (ii) who is lawfully stopped or parked; (iii) using a handheld personal communications device to report an emergency; or, (iv) using a handheld radio-based communications device during an emergency or disaster relief operation. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The provisions of this section shall not preclude prosecution under any other statute. 
(d)  A violation of this section is a traffic infraction punishable, for a first offense by a fine of $125.00 and, for a second or subsequent offense, by a fine of $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 19-0001 , 1-9-19)  
Secs. 21-114—21-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Deposit of advertising matter on parked vehicles, § 3-2; parking of bicycles, § 6-30; stopping or parking of vehicles used for sale of ice cream, §§ 15-171—15-173; parking of mobile homes on streets, § 20-3; parking fees at Hampton Coliseum, § 26-78. 
State Law reference— General authority of city to regulate parking, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1365, adopted March 10, 2004, amended Art. V, Div. 1, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 21-126—21-150. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 21-126. - General prohibitions. 
No person, except as specifically provided otherwise, shall stop, stand, park or leave any vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places, whether signs prohibiting such parking, standing or stopping are erected or not: 
(1)  On a sidewalk or walkway; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant, whether such fire hydrant is located on public or private property. In the case of private property, a summons may be issued by a police officer of this city, or other authorized representative of the police division, without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of such private property; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(7)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the city manager has indicated a different length by signs or markers; 
(9)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)  Within fifteen (15) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance, the latter only when properly marked; 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)  Within twenty (20) feet from the intersection of curb lines or, if none, within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of property lines, at an intersection of streets; 
(14)  Upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or within a highway tunnel. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04) 
State Law reference— Parking in front of private driveway, near driveway or intersection, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1239.  
Sec. 21-127. - Disobeying official sign or direction of police officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park or stand a vehicle in any place contrary to the directions of any official sign or the direction of a police officer or other authorized representative of the police division. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04) 
State Law reference— Failure to obey order of conservator of the peace, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-464; disregarding signal by law enforcement officer to stop, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-817.  
Sec. 21-128. - Keys to be removed from unattended vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a vehicle unattended in a public place without removing the ignition keys from such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-129. - General authority of city manager as to parking. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to classify vehicles with reference to parking and he may designate the time, place and manner in which vehicles may be parked on city streets, and may make and enforce such additional rules and regulations as parking conditions may require. 
(b)  When any parking regulation is established pursuant to this article, the city manager shall cause to be erected appropriate signs or markers so that an ordinarily observant person, who may be affected by such regulation, will be aware of such regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220.  
Sec. 21-130. - Parking within designated space required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on the streets, avenues or public parking lots of the city where lines or makings are painted or buttons or any other markers are placed, except within the spaces indicated for such parking. Every vehicle parked alongside of or next to any curbing or within any public parking lot shall be parked within the lines, markings or buttons as established. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any such line, marking or button or to park such vehicle in such a position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such line, marking or button. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-131. - Parallel parking require; exceptions. 
No vehicle shall be parked on any street except parallel to, and with the rear wheels not further than twelve (12) inches from the right hand edge of the curb or street, except that a vehicle may be parked not further than twelve (12) inches from the parallel to the left-hand curb or edge of a one-way street, other than dual-lane or divided street, and except that a vehicle may be parked at an angle, where permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-132. - Right to parking space. 
Whenever the driver of a vehicle pulls up parallel with a parked vehicle for the purpose of backing into the parking space behind such parked vehicle, he shall have the first privilege of using such parking space, and no driver of any other vehicle shall drive his vehicle into such space or stop immediately behind the first vehicle in such a way as to black access to the parking space. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-133. - Parking in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-134. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale, washing such vehicle for compensation or greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-135. - Limited parking zones for banks. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to designate and mark fifteen (15) minute parking zones along the curb adjacent to each of the banks in the city, provided such parking will not create a traffic hazard and provided the cost of providing the necessary signs is paid by the bank making application for such regulation. No such zone shall be designated when the applicant has parking space on its own premises or convenient to such bank. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-136. - Time limit for parking of trucks, trailers, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, other than a private passenger automobile, sedan delivery or pickup truck, one (1) ton or under, or bus used for the transportation of students (public or private schools), upon any street in the city for a longer period of time than one (1) hour, except when in the process of loading and unloading or on streets in commercial or industrial zoning districts; provided, however, that where a parking period of less than one (1) hour is described and designated on any street, then the parking of all vehicles, including private passenger automobiles, sedan delivery and pickup trucks, one (1) ton or under, and buses used for the transportation of students (public or private schools), shall be limited to the parking period so designated. 
(b)  In the instance where the place of business is legally located within a residential district, only one (1) commercial vehicle directly related to that business may be parked at such place of business, provided it complies with all the parking regulations of the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall result in the issuance of a parking citation. Any owner of a vehicle to which has been attached a parking citation pursuant to this section may, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of the business day following the date of the issuance of such citation, pay as directed in the citation, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for each hour or fraction thereof, during which the vehicle was parked in violation. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 ; Ord. No. 19-0005 , 5-8-19) 
State Law reference— Code of Virginia § 46.2-1220  
Sec. 21-137. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1414, adopted Jan. 11, 2006, repealed § 21-137, which pertained to parking for more than forty-eight hours. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 21-138. - Parking in fire lanes. 
No person shall park or stand a vehicle in any fire lane, whether on public or private property, provided such fire lane has been classified as such by the fire chief and is clearly designated for use as a fire lane by pavement markings and signs approved by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-139. - Parking in space reserved for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  Definition. When used in this section, "person with a disability" or "persons with disabilities" means a person with a disability that limits or impairs his ability to walk or that creates a concern for his safety while walking as defined in § 46.2-1240 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities unless such vehicle is displaying (i) disabled parking license plates, (ii) an organizational removable windshield placard, (iii) a temporary or permanent removable windshield placard issue under § 46.2-1241 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or (iv) DV disabled parking license plates issued under subsection B of § 46.2-739 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person who is not a person with a disability, to stop or park a vehicle in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities except when transporting a person with a disability in the vehicle that is so stopped or parked. 
(d)  In the case of private property, a summons or citation may be issued by a police officer, a volunteer serving pursuant to § 46.2-1244 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or other authorized representatives of the police division without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of such private property. 
(e)  Spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall be identified by above-grade signs, in accordance with the provisions of § 36-99.11 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(f)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to appoint persons to enforce the provisions of this section. Such persons shall wear a uniform as prescribed by the chief of police. 
(g)  In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the vehicle described in the summons or parking ticket, citation, or warrant was parked in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by chapter 6 of title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation. 
(h)  No violation of this section shall be dismissed for a property owner's failure to comply strictly with the requirements for disabled parking signs set forth in § 36-99.11 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, provided the space is clearly distinguishable as a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk or that create a concern for their safety while walking. 
(i)  Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). No portion of said fine may be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07; Ord. No. 19-0005 , 5-8-19) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1242.  
Sec. 21-139.1. - Parking near curb ramp. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle so as to prevent the use of a curb ramp. 
(b)  Application. This section shall apply to both public property and privately owned property open to the public. In the case of private property, a summons or citation may be issued by law enforcement officers or other authorized representatives of the police division without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of such private property. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04) 
State Law reference— Authority for the above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1306.1.  
Sec. 21-140. - Parking in taxicab stand. 
No person shall park a vehicle, other than a taxicab, in a taxicab stand designated as provided in section 38-141 of this Code, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in such areas for the immediate purpose of loading or unloading passengers and while actually engaged therein, when such stopping does not interfere with the driver of a taxicab desiring to use such area. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-141. - Parking in bus stop. 
No person shall park a vehicle, other than a bus, in a bus stop, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in such areas for the immediate purpose of loading or unloading passengers and while actually engaged therein, when such stopping does not interfere with the driver of a bus desiring to use such area. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-142. - Stopping or parking in loading zones. 
No person shall stop or park a vehicle in a loading zone except for the immediate and continuous unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials from or onto a truck or passengers to or from a passenger vehicle during hours when such zones are restricted to parking for loading purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-143. - Moving vehicle of another into no parking area or away from curb. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any area wherein parking or stopping is prohibited by this chapter, or away from a curb for such a distance as is made unlawful by section 21-131. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-144. - Leaving vehicle on private property without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof, on the private property of any other person without his consent. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04)  
Sec. 21-145. - Issuance of parking citations. 
Law enforcement officers of the city, or other authorized and uniformed employees of the city or treasurer, shall attach to any vehicle parked or standing in violation of this chapter a citation giving notice to the owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation thereof and instructing such owner to report as directed upon the citation in regard to such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 1384, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 19-0005 , 5-8-19) 
State Law reference— Code of Virginia § 46.2-1220  
Sec. 21-146. - Penalties for parking violations. 
Any owner of a vehicle to which has been attached a parking violation pursuant to section 21-145 may, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of the business day following the date of the issuance of such citation, pay, as directed in the citation, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of forty dollars ($40.00) for each violation of this chapter; provided, however, that for the violation of § 46.2-888 of the Code of Virginia or section 21-138, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid for each violation of such section. For the violation of any other section of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided, and for a violation of section 21-126(10) the penalty shall be as provided in section 21-2. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 19-0005 , 5-8-19) 
State Law reference— Code of Virginia § 46.2-1220  
Sec. 21-147. - Collection of an accounting for uncontested parking citation penalties. 
The uncontested payment of parking citation penalties under section 21-146 shall be collected and accounted for by the treasurer's office or the police division. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04) 
State Law reference— Requirement for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1225.  
Sec. 21-148. - Contest of parking citations. 
Any person who shall desire to contest a parking citation shall present the citation to the treasurer's office or the police division within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the citation to register his/her intent to contest the violation. Failure to initiate action within thirty (30) days shall constitute waiver and the matter shall proceed for collection. Upon timely registration of intent to contest, the citation shall be certified by the police division or treasurer on an appropriate form to the general district court. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 1384, 10-13-04) 
State Law reference— Certification required, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1225.  
Sec. 21-149. - Procedure for delinquent parking citations. 
(a)  The treasurer or the police division shall cause a complaint or summons to be issued for delinquent parking citations. 
(b)  Before any summons shall issue for the prosecution of a violation of any provision of this article or any other ordinance of this city regulating parking, the violator shall have been first notified by mail, at his last known address or at the address shown for such violator on the records of the department, that he may pay the fine provided by law for such violation, within five (5) days of receipt of such notice, and the authorized person issuing such summons shall be notified that the violator has failed to pay such fine within such time. The notice required by this section shall be contained in an envelope bearing the words "law enforcement notice" stamped or printed on the face thereof in all capital letters, bold face type, no smaller than the print size used for the primary address on the envelope. If "window" envelopes are used, the words "Law-Enforcement Notice" shall be clearly visible through the window of the envelop. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-941.  
Sec. 21-150. - Presumption in prosecutions for parking violations. 
In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the city governing the parking of a vehicle, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint or summons was parked in violation of such provision, together with proof that the defendant was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute, in evidence, a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 1365, 3-10-04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220.  
Secs. 21-151—21-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT PROGRAM[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for permit parking, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1230. 
 
Sec. 21-161. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division the following definitions apply: 
Block means one (1) side of a section of a street between its intersection with two (2) adjoining streets, or a section of street five hundred (500) feet in length, whichever is shorter with residential properties having street addresses within such section. 
Residential area is one which is either designated as a residential zoning district or which contains streets primarily abutted by residential property and non-business property, such as schools, parks, churches, hospitals and nursing homes, and designated as such by the city traffic/transportation engineer or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1424, 6-14-06)  
Sec. 21-162. - Inclusion of block in program. 
(a)  A block on a street within a residential area shall be deemed eligible for inclusion in the residential parking permit program in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  A petition requesting inclusion in such program, signed by residents, or their authorized representatives, of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the households within such block, must be filed with the city manager. 
(2)  A seven-day parking survey of the block referred to in the petition shall be conducted, the results of which must indicate that, for five (5) days or more, vehicles occupy at least seventy-five (75) percent of the curb faces or road shoulders during peak parking periods and that at least thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3 ) percent of such vehicles are owned by persons not residing on the block. 
(b)  In the event that all requirements of this section are met, the city manager shall designate the eligible block as within a residential parking permit program area. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-163. - Erection of signs in designated areas. 
When a residential parking permit area has been designated by ordinance or by the procedure outlined in this division, the city traffic/transportation engineer shall cause two-hour parking signs to be erected in such area indicating conditions under which parking shall be permitted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this division, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in such area for longer than two (2) hours, when such signs are in place. 
Residential parking permit areas without at least one-half (½) of the residential lots with off-street parking (driveways) shall cause the two-hour parking by non-permit holders to be eliminated. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-164. - Permit generally. 
(a)  Following the designation of a residential parking permit area by ordinance or by the procedure outlined in this division, the city traffic/transportation engineer shall issue appropriate parking permits for such area. Such a permit shall be issued, upon application and payment of the prescribed fee, only to a motor vehicle owner or operator who resides on property immediately adjacent to a street, avenue or other location within the residential parking permit area, and for only such vehicles as are normally garaged at such residence. 
(b)  An applicant for a permit under this division shall present his vehicle registration and driver's license along with the permit application. Other information may be required as deemed necessary by the city traffic/transportation engineer in order to guarantee proper issuance of the permit. 
(c)  An annual residential parking permit fee of five dollars ($5.00) per vehicle is hereby established to cover the administrative costs of issuing or renewing a permit pursuant to this division. The permit shall be renewed annually pursuant to such procedures as the city traffic/transportation engineer shall established. 
(d)  A permit issued under this division shall be displayed on the rear bumper of the vehicle for which issued, so as to be clearly visible. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-165. - Temporary and visitor permits. 
(a)  The city traffic/transportation engineer may issue temporary and visitor parking permits for special uses and under special conditions within a designated residential parking area. Visitor permits shall be issued for a maximum period of seven (7) days and temporary permits shall be issued for a maximum period of thirty (30) days. Such permits shall be displayed in such a manner as to be legible through the front windshield of the vehicle. 
(b)  Temporary and visitor permits issued under this division may be renewed for good cause, but such renewals shall not be used as a ruse to avoid the intent of the residential parking permit program. 
(c)  There shall be no fee for the issuance of temporary or visitor permits under this section. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-166. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle displaying in the manner prescribed in this division, a valid permit issued under this division may park such vehicle in the designated residential parking area for which the permit was issued beyond the two-hour limit provided for in section 21-163, provided such parking is not otherwise prohibited by other sections of this chapter. 
(b)  A permit issued under this division shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder a parking space within a designated residential parking permit area. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-167. - Unauthorized use or display of permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or display, or allow to be used or displayed, a permit issued under this division upon any vehicle other than the vehicle for which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-168. - Obtaining permit by fraud. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself as eligible for a permit under this division or to furnish any false information in an application to the city traffic/transportation engineer in order to obtain such a permit. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-169. - Revocation of permit. 
The city traffic/transportation engineer is authorized to revoke a permit issued under this division, if the holder thereof is found to be in violation of this division, and upon written notification thereof, the holder shall surrender such permit to the city traffic/transportation engineer. Failure, when so requested, to surrender such permit shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-170. - Towing of vehicle parked in violation of division. 
Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this division may be towed at the discretion of the police division. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Secs. 21-171—21-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PEDESTRIANS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Pedestrians, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-924 et seq. 
 
Sec. 21-186. - Regulation of pedestrian traffic by city manager. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks of the city by the erection or placing of proper signs and markers indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-187. - Duty to obey traffic signs and signals and orders of police officers. 
(a)  Pedestrians shall obey all signs and signals erected or placed on any of the streets, avenues, lanes and alleys in the city for the direction and control of travel and traffic, and shall also obey all orders of any police officer engaged in directing travel and traffic on such streets, avenues, lanes and alleys. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall, be fined not more than five dollars ($5.00) for each offense. Any person given a written summons or notice for violation of this section may, within twenty-four (24) hours of the time when such summons or notice was received, pay as directed upon the notice of violation as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation the sum of one dollar ($1.00) for each offense. Failure of such person to make such payment at the appropriate place, as directed on the notice or summons, shall render such person subject to the penalty as provided above. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Pedestrian control signals, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-925.  
Sec. 21-188. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-0003 , adopted February 24, 2016, repealed § 21-188, which pertained to distribution of handbills, solicitation of contributions and sales of goods or services on public roads and designated highways prohibited and derived from Ord. No. 10-0019, adopted July 14, 2010, and Ord. No. 10-0022, adopted September 8, 2010.  
Secs. 21-189—21-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned, immobilized, unattended and trespassing vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200 et seq. 
 
Sec. 21-201. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer or part of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer that: 
(1)  Is inoperable and is left unattended on public property, other than an interstate highway or primary highway, for more than forty-eight (48) hours; or 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours; 
(3)  Has remained for more than forty-eight (48) hours on private property, without the consent of the property's owner, regardless of whether it was brought onto the private property with the consent of the owner or person in control of the private property; 
(4)  Is inoperable, left unattended, or both, on an interstate highway; or 
(5)  Is inoperable, left unattended, or both, on the shoulder of a primary highway. 
Demolisher means any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer into processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle such vehicle. 
Garagekeeper means any operator of any commercial parking place, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, maintenance or sale of motor vehicles. 
Inoperable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is inoperable and whose fair market value, as determined by the city's official responsible for assessing motor vehicles under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3503, is less than the cost of its restoration to an operable condition. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200.  
Sec. 21-202. - Notices required by article to be in writing; when such notices deemed given. 
All notices which are required to be given by this article shall be in writing and shall be deemed given when mailed by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 21-203. - Charges for towing and storing vehicle under article. 
The city shall charge the owner of a vehicle taken into custody or removed under this article the cost of towing such vehicle and a reasonable storage fee for each day or portion thereof that the vehicle is stored by the city. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1229, 9-9-98)  
Sec. 21-204. - Authority of city to take into custody; salvage of parts; determination of vehicles operability and storage of operable motor vehicle. 
(a)  The city may take into custody any abandoned motor vehicle. In such connection, the city may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or hire persons, equipment and facilities or firms or corporations who may be independent contractors for the purpose of removing, preserving and storing abandoned motor vehicles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or salvage any parts from any abandoned motor vehicle which has been taken into the custody of the city; provided, however, that fuel tanks and wheels may be salvaged when such vehicle is to be demolished by the city or by a demolisher on contract with the city. 
(c)  Every abandoned motor vehicle which is taken into custody by the city under this article shall be transported to the city garage where it will be examined by the city manager or the city manager's designee. The examiner shall determine whether or not the abandoned motor vehicle is inoperable and by virtue of its condition cannot be feasibly restored to operable condition. All vehicles determined to be operable shall be stored at the public works yard or at a location designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to take abandoned vehicles into custody, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1201.  
Sec. 21-205. - Notice to owner of vehicle taken into custody. 
Within fifteen (15) days after the city takes an abandoned motor vehicle into custody, it shall, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, notify the owner of record of the motor vehicle and all persons having security interest in the vehicle of record, that it has been taken into custody. The notice shall (1) state the year, make, model, and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle; (2) set forth the location of the facility where it is being held; (3) inform the owner and any persons having security interests of their right to reclaim it within fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice after payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody. The notice shall state that the failure of the owner or persons having security interests to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall constitute a waiver by the owner and all persons having any security interest of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle, and consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. 
If records of the department contain no address for the owner or no address of any person shown by the department's records to have a security interest, or if the identity and addresses of the owner and all persons having security interests cannot be determined with reasonable certainty, notice by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice pursuant to this article as to any person who cannot be notified pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this section. Notice by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned motor vehicles. Any notice of this kind shall be within the time requirements prescribed by this section for notice by mail and shall have the same contents required for a notice by mail. 
The consequences of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle shall be as set forth in a notice given in accordance with and pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Vehicle removal certificates, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1202.1.  
Sec. 21-206. - Sale of vehicle at public auction; disposition of proceeds. 
If an abandoned motor vehicle is not reclaimed as provided for in section 21-205, the city or its authorized agent shall, notwithstanding the provisions of § 46.2-617 of the Code of Virginia, sell it at public auction. The purchaser of the motor vehicle shall take title to the motor vehicle free of all liens and claims of ownership of others, shall receive a sales receipt at the auction, and shall be entitled to apply to and receive from the department a certificate of title and registration card for the vehicle. The sales receipt from the sale shall be sufficient title only for purposes of transferring the vehicle to a demolisher for demolition, wrecking, or dismantling, and in that case no further titling of the vehicle shall be necessary; however, such demolisher shall provide the department acceptable documentation indicating that the vehicle has been demolished. From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle the locality or its authorized agent shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to section 21-205. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or any person having security interests in the vehicle, as their interests may appear, for ninety (90) days, and then be deposited into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1203.  
Sec. 21-207. - Vehicles abandoned in garages. 
Notwithstanding section 21-201, any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof shall be considered abandoned and may be reported by the garagekeeper to the city if it has been left in a garage for more than ten (10) days or for more than ten (10) days beyond the period the vehicle was to remain on the premises pursuant to a contract, after notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record and all persons having security interests of record therein, to reclaim the vehicle within fifteen (15) days of the notice. Any abandoned motor vehicle left in a garage may be taken into custody by the city in accordance with section 21-204 and shall be subject to the notice and sale provisions contained in sections 21-205 and 21-206. If, however, the vehicle is reclaimed in accordance with section 21-205, the person reclaiming it, in addition to the other charges required to be paid, shall pay the reasonable charges of the garagekeeper, unless otherwise provided by contract. If the vehicle is sold pursuant to section 21-206, any garagekeeper's charges shall be paid from, and to the extent of, the excess of the proceeds of sale after paying the expenses of the auction, the costs of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the vehicle in custody and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to section 21-205. Except as otherwise provided in this article, nothing in this section shall restrict any rights conferred on any person under §§ 43-32 through 43-36 of the Code of Virginia. 
For the purposes of this section, "garage" means any commercial parking place, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, maintenance, or sale of motor vehicles whether of not the vehicle has been brought to that location with the consent of the owner or person in control of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1204.  
Sec. 21-208. - Demolition of inoperable abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, any inoperable motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer, or part of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer which has been taken into custody pursuant to other provisions of this article, may be disposed of to a demolisher, without the title and without the notification procedures, required by this article, by the person or locality on whose property or in whose possession the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is found. The demolisher, on taking custody of the inoperable abandoned motor vehicle shall notify the department on forms and in the manner prescribed by the commissioner. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no other report or notice shall be required in this instance. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof, which is disposed of to a demolisher pursuant to this section shall be demolished by the demolisher. It shall be unlawful for the demolisher to remove or salvage any parts from such vehicle, with the exception of fuel tanks and wheels, it the vehicle is crushed on site. 
(c)  The city shall be eligible for reimbursement from the commissioner in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each inoperable abandoned motor vehicle disposed of by the city or on contract with the city under this section. The city shall certify, on forms provided by the department, that a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or major portion thereof, has been abandoned on property located within the city and that it has been examined by the fleet manager or his assistant, who has determined that, prior to demolition, such vehicle is inoperable and cannot be feasibly restored to an operable condition, and that such vehicle has been disposed of by a demolisher. The city shall submit to the department the identification number or motor number of each vehicle for which reimbursement is requested, or an acceptable reason why such number is not furnished. The city shall not be eligible for reimbursement on vehicles which it acquires from sources outside its jurisdiction nor on vehicles it receives from dealers engaged in the business of dismantling used automobiles. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1205, 46.2-1207.  
Sec. 21-209. - Removal and disposition of vehicles constituting traffic hazard or illegally parked or abandoned on public or private property. 
(a)  Whenever any unattended motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or part thereof found on the public streets or public grounds constitutes a hazard to traffic, or is parked in such manner as to be in violation of law, or whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is left unattended for more than ten (10) days upon any public property or privately owned property other than the property of the owner of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or is abandoned upon such public property or privately owned property without the permission of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof, or whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is stalled or rendered immobile as the result of adverse weather conditions or other emergency situations on any public roadway, any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may be removed for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage area or garage; however, no such vehicle shall be removed from privately owned premises without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. The owner, lessee or occupant of the premises who requests the removal shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of the removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof, is abandoned if: 
(1)  It lacks either a current license plate or a current city tag or decal or a valid state inspection certificate or sticker; and 
(2)  It has been in a specific location for four (4) days without being removed. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the person removing or directing the removal of any vehicle under this section to immediately make a report thereof to the chief of police, giving the type of vehicle, registration information and such other information as the person making the report may have concerning the vehicle or its owner and the reason for its removal. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the police division to notify the owner of a vehicle removed under this section, as soon as possible, that the vehicle has been impounded and the procedures for repossessing the same, provided the vehicle has not already been released from the city vehicle impounding yard. 
(e)  The owner of a vehicle impounded under this section shall, before taking possession thereof, pay to the city all the costs of removal and storage, as set forth in section 21-203, and the costs of locating the owner of the vehicle. 
(f)  The police division shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded pursuant to this section. 
(g)  If the owner of a vehicle impounded under this section fails or refuses to pay the costs referred to in subsection (e) above, or if the identity or whereabouts of such owner is unknown and unascertainable, after a diligent search has been made, and after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the department against the vehicle or part thereof, the police division shall treat the vehicle as an abandoned vehicle under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200 et seq., or shall proceed as provided in the remainder of subsection (g) and subsection (h) of this section, as authorized by law. After holding the vehicle thirty (30) days and after due notice of sale, the city shall cause the vehicle to be disposed of at public sale and the proceeds from the sale shall be forwarded by the selling officer to the city treasurer. If the value of such vehicle is determined by three (3) disinterested dealers or garagekeepers to be less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) it may be disposed of by private sale or junked, in lieu of such public sale. 
(h)  The finance department shall pay, from the proceeds of a sale pursuant to this section, the cost of removal, investigation as to the ownership and liens and notice of sale, and the balance of such proceeds shall be held for the owner of the vehicle and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership, provided the owner makes application therefor within three (3) years of the date of sale. If the owner fails to make timely application, the balance of such proceeds shall be deposited to the general fund or any special fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1213, 46.2-1215.  
Sec. 21-210. - Further provisions as to vehicles abandoned on private property. 
(a)  Upon complaint of the owner of any private property upon which any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof, has been abandoned for more than seventy-two (72) hours, such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof, may be removed by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage garage or area. The owners of private property which is normally open to the public for parking shall post or cause to be posted signs warning that vehicles left on the property for more than seventy-two (72) hours will be towed or removed at their owners' expense. Any such owner so requesting the removal of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof, shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of the removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(b)  In the case of the removal, under this section, of a vehicle which cannot be readily sold at public auction, such vehicle may be disposed of by private sale or junked. In all other respects, the preceding provisions of this article shall apply to such removals; provided, that the disposal of the vehicle may be carried out either under such preceding provisions or under the provisions hereof as follows: After a diligent search for the owner, after notice to the owner at the owner's last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the division against such vehicle and after the vehicle has been held at least sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 21-211. - Sale of personal property found in unattended or abandoned vehicle. 
Any personal property found in any unattended or abandoned motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may be sold incident to the sale of such vehicle as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 983, 11-14-90)  
ARTICLE VIII. - POLICE-REQUESTED TOWING[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of city to regulate towing, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1217. 
 
Sec. 21-212. - Towing advisory board; created. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Virginia Code Section 46.2-1217, 1950, as amended, an advisory board, composed of representatives of law enforcement agencies, towing and recovery operators and the general public was created by Resolution No. 00-2242, adopted by the Hampton City Council on November 8, 2000, to review towing practices and advise city council with regard to appropriate provisions of any ordinance pertaining to the towing of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1341, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 21-213. - Definitions 
Unless otherwise defined in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Day or storage day means a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours. 
Operator means any person operating a towing company or tow vehicle. 
Person means a natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation and bodies politic and their legal successors. 
Police-requested tow means towing request made by a law-enforcement officer at the request of the owner or operator of an unattended, abandoned or immobile motor vehicle when no specific service provider is requested by such owner or operator. 
Tow means the actual hooking up and attachment of the motor vehicle to be towed to the tow vehicle and subsequent relocation of the motor vehicle being towed. 
Towing company means any person engaged in the business of towing vehicles. 
Tow vehicle means any motor vehicle designated or adapted to tow, haul or otherwise remove another motor vehicle. 
Unusual recovery means the recovery of: 
• Motor vehicles, which have driven completely or partially off a bridge or overpass. 
• Motor vehicles stuck in mud or water. 
• Motor vehicles requiring extrication from a tree, utility pole or other comparable object. 
• Motor vehicles, which are on their sides or roofs and which require being righted. 
(Ord. No. 1341, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 21-214. - Assistance in obtaining tow truck service. 
Whenever it shall be necessary to procure a tow truck to render services at the scene of any traffic accident or traffic hazard, any police officer present shall assist the operator or owner of a distressed motor vehicle in obtaining tow vehicle services. If the owner or operator requests that a specific towing company be called, such request shall be honored unless the officer in charge determines, in his discretion that the operator requested is located at too great a distance or is otherwise unavailable to furnish the required services in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 1341, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 21-215. - Administration of tow list. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall maintain a list of tow operators who shall be called in sequence to provide services at the scene of accidents or traffic hazards or other such incidents. The list shall be utilized only in those cases where the owner or operator of a distressed motor vehicle does not, for any reason, provide the police officer in charge with the name of a tow operator available to perform the required services in a timely manner. 
(b)  The list of tow operators shall be maintained and administered by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee may prescribe conditions for tow operators who apply to be included in the tow list, and he may also establish rules and regulations, which must be obeyed by tow operators who are listed. In promulgating such, rules and regulations, the city manager or his designee may address the following matters including but not limited to: 
(1)  Compliance with minimum safety standards. 
(2)  Ownership or possession of all equipment and facilities deemed necessary by the chief of police to provide essential services. 
(3)  Adherence to the fee schedule adopted by the city council as set forth below: 
a.  No hook up and initial towing fee shall exceed one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00). 
b.  For towing a vehicle between 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or on any Saturday, Sunday or holiday, an additional fee of ten dollars ($10.00) may be charged. 
c.  If a call requires more than one (1) tow vehicle, the fee per tow vehicle shall not exceed the single tow vehicle fees set out herein. 
d.  No other additional services may be charged other than those listed below with the maximum amount which may be charged: 
Unusual Recovery Fee 	$62.50 per ½ hour. 
Wait Time 	$25.00 per ½ hour following the first hour after arrival. 
Storage fee 	$28.00 per day after 1st 24 hrs 
Vehicle Title Processing Pursuant to Virginia Code Section 46.2-1202, et seq. 	Reasonable Fee 
(Documentation Required) 
Heavy Duty Tow Fee (gross weight exceeds 26,000 lbs.) 	$285.00 
 
(4)  Maintaining of a business office accessible to patrons during reasonable business hours. 
(5)  Access to the tow lot or vehicle storage area. 
(6)  Keeping accurate and complete records of all transactions governed by this section. 
(7)  Maintaining proper custody of towed vehicles and their contents. 
(8)  Insurance requirements, operator license and business license requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1341, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 08-0006, 1-23-08)  
Sec. 21-215.1. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 3, misdemeanor and a Class 2, misdemeanor for subsequent convictions. 
(Ord. No. 1341, 11-13-02; Ord. No. 1465, 3-1-07; Ord. No. 08-0006, 1-23-08)  
Sec. 21-215.2. - Posting of allowable fees and services. 
All persons engaged in police requested towing shall prominently display at their main place of business and any place where they may store vehicles as a result of a police requested tow a comprehensive list of the allowed fees for towing, recovery and storage services pursuant to section 21-215. 
(Ord. No. 08-0006, 1-23-08)  
ARTICLE IX. - OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Operation of golf carts, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-916.1. 
 
Sec. 21-216. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them: 
Golf cart means an electric, self-propelled vehicle that is designed to transport persons playing golf and their equipment on a golf course. 
Public highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in the city, including the streets and alleys, and, for law-enforcement purposes, the entire width between the boundary lines of all private roads or private streets that have been specifically designated "highways," as that term is defined in § 46.2-100 of the State Code, by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1420, 3-8-06)  
Sec. 21-217. - Operation of golf carts on public highways not otherwise designated for such operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a golf cart on or over any public highway in the city, except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1420, 3-8-06)  
Sec. 21-218. - Designation of public highways of the city for golf cart operation; posting of signs. 
(a)  All requests for designation of specific public highways for operation of golf cart shall be directed to the director of public works. The director of public works shall perform an engineering study and make a report thereon to the city manager. The city manager shall after review of the report either recommend or deny the request. The decision of the city manager to deny such request shall be final. 
(b)  Pursuant to § 46.2-916.2 of the Code of Virginia, and upon the city manager's recommendation city council may authorize by ordinance, the operation of golf carts on designated public highways within the city after (i) considering the speed, volume, and character of motor vehicle traffic using such highways, and (ii) determining that golf cart operation on particular highways is compatible with state and local transportation plans and consistent with the Commonwealth's statewide pedestrian policy. No public highway of the city shall be designated for use by golf carts if such golf cart operations will impede the safe and efficient flow of motor vehicle traffic, or if the highway's posted speed limit is greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(c)  Any public highway of the city designated for golf cart operations shall be posted with signs indicating this designation. 
(Ord. No. 1420, 3-8-06; Ord. No. 08-0023, 12-17-08) 
State Law reference— Authority to allow golf carts on highways, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-916.2.  
Sec. 21-219. - Limitations. 
Golf cart operations on designated public highways of the city shall be in accordance with the following limitations: 
(1)  No person shall operate a golf cart on a public highway of the city unless that highway is designated for golf cart operations and is posted with the required sign. 
(2)  No golf cart shall be driven across any highway at an inter section where the highway being crossed has a posted speed limit of more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(3)  No person shall operate any golf cart on any designated public highway of the city unless he has in his possession a valid driver's license. 
(4)  No golf cart shall be operated on any designated public highway of the city without displaying a slow-moving vehicle emblem in conformity with Virginia Code § 46.2-1081. 
(5)  No person shall operate any golf cart on any designated public highway of the city between sunset and sunrise, unless equipped with lights as required in Article 3 (§ 46.2-1010 et seq.) of Chapter 10 of the State Code. 
(6)  Golf carts operating on designated public highways of the city pursuant to this article shall be insured by a policy of liability insurance with coverage of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident. In lieu of coverage provided by an insurance policy, the owner of such golf cart may self-insure the liability coverage if the Commissioner of the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles has issued a certificate of self-insurance pursuant to § 46.2-368 of the State Code. 
(Ord. No. 1420, 3-8-06)  
Sec. 21-220. - Exceptions. 
The limitations set forth in section 21-219 (1) and (2) above shall not apply to golf carts being operated as follows: 
(1)  To cross a highway from one (1) portion of a golf course to another portion thereof or to another adjacent golf course; or to travel between a person's home and golf course if (i) the trip would not be longer than one-half (½) mile in either direction, and (ii) the speed limit on the road is no more than thirty-five (35) miles per hour; 
(2)  To the extent necessary for city employees and city contractors to fulfill a governmental purpose, or as otherwise authorized by the city manager or his designee, provided the golf cart is not operated on a public highway of the city with a posted speed limit over thirty-five (35) miles per hour; 
(3)  As necessary by employees of public or private two-year or four-year institutions of higher education if operating on highways within the property limits of such institutions, provided the golf cart is being operated on highways with speed limits of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less. 
(Ord. No. 1420, 3-8-06)  
Sec. 21-221. - Public highways designated for golf cart use. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the City Code to the contrary, the following public highways or portions of public highways in the city are designated for use by golf carts in accordance with the provisions of this article and state law: 
(1)  Adriatic Drive. 
(2)  Grandview Drive. 
(3)  State Park Drive from the entrance to Grandview Nature Preserve crossing Beach Road to the end of the improved road south of Beach Road (approximately nine hundred ninety (990) feet as of the date of the adoption of this section.) 
(4)  Elizabeth Lakes Drive from Bromley Drive south to the traffic circle terminus. 
(5)  Elizabeth Lakes Drive from Club Run south to the traffic circle terminus. 
(6)  Green Spring Court. 
(7)  Weyanoke Court. 
(8)  Brandon Court. 
(9)  Swanns Point Circle. 
(10)  Ambler Court. 
(11)  Blake Circle. 
(12)  Castlewood Court. 
(13)  Agecroft Court. 
(14)  Effington Court. 
(15)  Abington Court. 
(16)  Gunston Hall Court. 
(17)  Shelley Court. 
(18)  Level Green Court. 
(19)  Sharon Bass Drive. 
(20)  Chipper Lane. 
(21)  Tiffany Court. 
(22)  Brians Court. 
Golf carts shall travel in the proper travel lane with the direction of the traffic flow, and shall obey all traffic signs and signals on such public highways. 
(Ord. No. 1429, 8-10-06; Ord. No. 09-0004, 4-8-09; Ord. No. 11-0005, 6-8-11) 
State Law reference— Authority to allow golf carts on highways, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-916.2.  
Chapter 22 - NOISE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Noisy animals or birds, § 5-9; disturbing the peace by loud or unusual noise, § 24-11; use of sound-amplification equipment in parks, § 26-29. 
State Law reference— Applicabilty of local noise ordinances to certain sport shooting ragnes, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-917. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Violations of chapter. 
(a)  No person shall be charged with a violation of the provisions of section 22-3.1 or 22-9 unless (1) a complainant appears before a magistrate and requests a summons to be issued, (2) a violation is committed in the presence of a police officer or (3) in the case of a violation of section 22-9(3) the violation is committed in the presence of a police officer or animal control officer for the city. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of section 22-3.1 or 22-9 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any person convicted of a second offense within less than five (5) years after a first offense under this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Any person convicted of a third offense within less than ten (10) years after a first offense under this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(c)  Each day a violation continues unabated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Criminal enforcement against a person violating this article shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action permitted by this Code or the Code of Virginia to abate the violation. 
(Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 10-0023, 9-8-10; Ord. No. 11-0002, 2-9-11) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 22-2. - Definitions. 
Instruments, machines, or devices. Refers to any musical instrument, radio, phonograph, compact disc player, cassette tape player, amplifier, loudspeaker, public address system, portable personal sound reproduction system, bullhorn, or any other machine or device, for producing, reproducing or amplification of sound. 
Plainly audible. Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. Specific words or phrases need not be discernible. The detection of bass reverberations is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound. 
(Ord. No. 15-0029 , 10-28-15)  
Sec. 22-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0023, adopted Sept. 8, 2010, repealed § 22-3, which pertained to playing of radios, televisions, musical instruments, etc. and derived from Code 1956, § 15-3; Code 1964, § 26-3; Ord. No. 1199, 9-24-97; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06.  
Sec. 22-3.1. - Amplified music or outdoor bands in the downtown area. 
It shall be unlawful in the downtown areas zoned DT-1, DT-2, or DT-3 for any person, including the owner or manager on duty of any establishment or promoter of any event, to produce or allow to be produced a sound or noise from amplified music or an outdoor band which exceeds a noise level measurement of sixty (60) dBA upon the real property of another. Such noise is hereby prohibited and declared to be loud, disturbing and unlawful noise in violation of this section. This section shall be enforced by the police department and/or the codes compliance department. Sound level measurements shall be admissible evidence of any alleged unlawful noise if made with a sound level meter using the "A" weighing scale in accordance with the American National Standard Institute. 
(Ord. No. 1199, 9-24-97; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 10-0023, 9-8-10; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 22-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0023, adopted Sept. 8, 2010, repealed § 22-4, which pertained to use of drums, loudspeakers, etc. and derived from Code 1956, § 15-6; Code 1964, § 26-6; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06.  
Sec. 22-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0023, adopted Sept. 8, 2010, repealed § 22-5, which pertained to shouting, hooting, etc., on streets and derived from Code 1956, § 15-4; Code 1964, § 26-4; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06.  
Sec. 22-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0023, adopted Sept. 8, 2010, repealed § 22-6, which pertained to noise from vehicles generally and derived from Code 1956, § 15-5; Code 1964, § 26-5; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06.  
Sec. 22-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0023, adopted Sept. 8, 2010, repealed § 22-7, which pertained to sounding of vehicle horn or other signal device and derived from Code 1956, § 15-2; Code 1964, § 26-2; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06.  
Sec. 22-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0023, adopted Sept. 8, 2010, repealed § 22-8, which pertained to building and excavating operations at night and derived from Code 1956, § 15-7; Code 1964, § 26-7; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06.  
Sec. 22-9. - Prohibited noises enumerated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to be caused any of the following prohibited sounds or noises: 
(1)  Social gatherings and parties. Allowing any noise between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. generated from a gathering of two (2) or more people that is plainly audible (i) inside the confines of the dwelling unit, house or apartment of another person or (ii) in a residential area, at one hundred (100) or more feet from the gathering. 
(2)  Instruments, machines, or devices. Instruments, machines, or devices operated in such a manner or with such volume or duration that it is plainly audible (i) inside the confines of the dwelling unit, house or apartment of another person; (ii) at a distance of 100 or more feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; or (iii) at a distance of 50 or more feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(3)  Noisy animals. Allowing any animal to cause any sound or noise such that it is plainly audible (i) inside the confines of the dwelling unit, house or apartment of another person at least once a minute for ten (10) consecutive minutes or (ii) at one hundred (100) or more feet from the animal at least once a minute for ten (10) consecutive minutes or (iii) after more than one complaint has been received and after the owner or other responsible person has been advised of the complaints and that such noise is unlawful. 
(4)  Trash and recycling collection. The creation of any sound or noise between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. that is plainly audible in a residential area, except those areas zoned C-1 "Neighborhood Commercial District", C-2 "Limited Commercial District" and C-3 "General Commercial District", when the sound or noise is produced in connection with the loading or unloading of refuse, waste or recycling collection vehicles. 
(5)  Street cleaning and construction. The creation of any sound or noise between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. that is plainly audible in a residential area, except those areas zoned C-1 "Neighborhood Commercial District", C-2 "Limited Commercial District" and C-3 "General Commercial District", when the sound or noise is produced in connection with (i) the cleaning of streets or parking lots or (ii) construction or demolition activities. 
(6)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, whistling, singing, and other vocal sounds, any of which occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to create a plainly audible sound (i) inside the confines of the dwelling unit, house or apartment of another person; (ii) on public property or a public right-of-way; or (iii) on any privately-owned street, sidewalk or parking lot open to the public. 
(7)  Amplified sound from vehicles. Playing, using or operating, or permitting the playing, use or operation of, any radio, stereo, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker or other electronic device or mechanical equipment used for the amplification of sound, which is located on or within a motor vehicle and which is plainly audible from outside the motor vehicle at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the playing of music or jingles by an ice cream truck or similar mobile food-service vehicle, provided such vehicle may emit sounds otherwise prohibited by this subsection only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(8)  Lawn care activities. Creating any sound or noise plainly audible in residential areas between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in connection with lawn care, leaf removal, gardening, tree maintenance or removal or other landscaping, lawn or timbering activities. 
(Ord. No. 10-0023, 9-8-10; Ord. No. 11-0002, 2-9-11; Ord. No. 13-0015, 7-10-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0029 , 10-28-15)  
Sec. 22-10. - Exemptions. 
No provisions of this article shall apply to: 
(1)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; 
(2)  The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work or law enforcement activities; 
(3)  Activities sponsored by the city; 
(4)  Activities authorized by a special events permit or fireworks permit issued by the city; 
(5)  Normal and customary use of outdoor recreational facilities owned or leased by the city; 
(6)  Normal and customary use of open-air venues permitted by the city zoning ordinance; 
(7)  Customary and regularly scheduled public school, private school, or college/university activities taking place on the school or college/university's property; performances or practices by marching bands, school orchestras or ensembles and similar groups or individuals who are members of such groups; athletic contests or practices; and, other school-funded activities; or 
(8)  Activities for which the regulation of noise has been preempted by federal law. 
(Ord. No. 10-0023, 9-8-10; Ord. No. 15-0029 , 10-28-15)  
Secs. 22-11—22-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0023, adopted Sept. 8, 2010, repealed §§ 22-21—22-27, 22-36—22-41, which pertained to sound trucks and derived from Code 1956, §§ 15-8—15-11, 15-14—15-19; Ord. No. 80, § 33; Code 1964, §§ 26-8, 26-11—26-16, 26-18—26-21; Ord. No. 1449, adopted Dec. 14, 2006. The user's attention is directed to § 22-9. 
 
Secs. 22-21—22-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTOUR DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 22-50. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the Noise Contour District to insure that all buildings and structures in which families or households live, or in which sleeping accommodations are provided, as further described in "Use Group R" of the International Building Code, as amended, within those areas of Hampton that are likely to be impacted by aircraft noise associated with Langley Air Force Base make adequate provision for sound reduction in exterior walls, doors, windows, etc. to minimize the impact of such noise on occupants, and to insure that purchasers of property within this zone are aware of the associated noise levels. The district regulations deal with noise attenuation in all buildings and structures classified as "Use Group R" of the International Building Code, as amended, and with disclosure to potential purchasers of the existence of the associated noise. 
(Ord. No. 1063, 8-27-92; Ord. No. 1071, 12-9-92; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 22-51. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the Noise Contour District shall be as delineated on the Noise Overlay Map which is incorporated into and made a part of the official zoning map of the city, and shall include the lands shown as being within the 65 dB DNL contour of the Noise Contours Map of the Langley AFB Air Installation Compatible Use Zone Report, 1990, as updated. A copy of such map shall be located in the office of the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 1063, 8-27-92; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 11-0006, 6-8-11)  
Sec. 22-52. - Noise attenuation. 
(a)  Any structure or addition classified as "Use Group R" of the International Building Code, as amended, built or placed within the Noise Contour District on or after October 1, 1992 shall be constructed to provide acoustical treatment measures which achieve a maximum interior noise level of 45 dB DNL. Acoustical treatment measures shall not be required of garages, storage areas, or any other structure whose primary function is not the habitation of people. 
(1)  Within the 75 or greater dB DNL contour line, the use of roof and exterior wall assemblies which have a laboratory sound transmission class (STC) of at least 49, and doors and windows which have a laboratory STC of at least 38 shall be required. 
(2)  Within the 70—74 dB DNL contour line, the use of roof and exterior wall assemblies which have a laboratory sound transmission class (STC) of at least 44, and doors and windows which have a laboratory STC of at least 33 shall be required. 
(3)  Within the 65—69 dB DNL contour line the use of roof and exterior wall assemblies which have a laboratory sound transmission class (STC) of at least 39, and doors and windows which have a laboratory STC of at least 28 shall be required. 
(b)  In lieu of the materials specified in section 22-52(a), certification by an acoustical engineer that the construction practices and/or materials of the structure shall achieve the required interior noise level shall be submitted to the building official for approval prior to the release of any building permits. 
(c)  For purposes of this article, the term "day-night average sound level (DNL)" is a twenty-four (24) hour energy average sound level expressed in dBA, with a ten-decibel penalty applied to noise occurring between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and the term "sound transmission class (STC) rating" is a single number rating characterizing the sound reduction performance of a material tested in accordance with ASTM E 90-90, "Laboratory Measurement of Airborne Sound Transmission Loss of Building Partitions". 
(Ord. No. 1063, 8-27-92; Ord. No. 1071, 12-9-92; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 11-0006, 6-8-11)  
Sec. 22-53. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals as to whether alternatives to the materials specified in section 22-52(a) are actually equivalent to those materials may be made in writing to the city manager within ninety (90) days of the decision of the building official. The decision of the city manager shall be given in writing to the appellant within ten (10) working days of the date the appeal is filed. 
(b)  Appeals of the decision of the city manager may be made in writing to the city council within thirty (30) days of the city manager's written decision. In the event such an appeal is filed, the city council shall schedule at least one public hearing on the matter and render its decision within ninety (90) days of the date the appeal of the city manager's decision is filed. The city council may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the city manager or return the matter to the city manager for further consideration. 
(Ord. No. 1063, 8-27-92; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 11-0006, 6-8-11)  
Sec. 22-54. - Disclosure. 
(a)  The following statement shall be placed on all subdivision plats and site plans pertaining to properties within the Noise Contour District: "Noise Disclosure—This property, either partially or wholly, lies within the City of Hampton's Noise Contour District and may be subject to above average noise levels due to its proximity to the flight operations at Langley Air Force Base. 
(b)  The provisions of Virginia Residential Property Disclosure Act (Virginia Code §§ 55-517—55-525), as applicable to required disclosures regarding real property in localities in which a military air installation is located, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(c)  The provisions of Virginia Code § 55-248.12:1, pertaining to required disclosures in rentals of residential property in localities in which a military air installation is located, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(d)  Any person who fails to provide the disclosure required by this section shall be subject to the remedies provided in Virginia Code § 55-524 or 55-248.12:1, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1063, 8-27-92; Ord. No. 1068, 10-14-92; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 11-0006, 6-8-11)  
Sec. 22-55. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1063, 8-27-92; Ord. No. 1449, 12-14-06)  
Chapter 23 - OBSCENITY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinances paralleling state misdemeanor statutes, § 2.01c. 
Cross reference— Management not to permit violation of obscenity laws in massage parlors, § 19-4; obscene conduct in massage parlors, § 19-14; obscene or offensive language generally, § 24-11; public profanity, § 24-14. 
State Law reference— Obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-342 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinance similar to the provisions of this article, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.2; obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-342 et seq. 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions with respect to violation of state law on obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-380.  
Sec. 23-2. - "Obscene" defined. 
The word "obscene," where it appears in this article, shall mean that which, considered as a whole, has as its dominant theme or purpose an appeal to the prurient interest in sex, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, excretory functions or products thereof or sadomasochistic abuse, and which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters and which, taken as a whole, does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-1; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372.  
Sec. 23-3. - Obscene items enumerated. 
For the purposes of this article, obscene items shall include: 
(1)  Any obscene book; or 
(2)  Any obscene leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, booklet, picture, painting, bumper sticker, drawing, photograph, film, negative, slide, motion picture, videotape recording; or 
(3)  Any obscene figure, object, article, instrument, novelty device or recording or transcription used or intended to be used in disseminating any obscene song, ballad, words or sounds; or 
(4)  Any obscene writing, picture or similar visual representation, or sound recording, stored in an electronic or other medium retrievable in a perceivable form. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-2; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-373.  
Sec. 23-4. - Production, publication, sale, possession, etc., of obscene items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to: 
(1)  Prepare any obscene item for the purpose of sale or distribution; or 
(2)  Print, copy, manufacture, produce or reproduce any obscene item for purposes of sale or distribution; or 
(3)  Publish, sell, rent, lend, transport in intracity commerce, or distribute or exhibit any obscene item, or offer to do any of these things; or 
(4)  Have in his possession, with intent to sell, rent, lend, transport or distribute, any obscene item. 
(b)  Possession in public or in a public place of any obscene item shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "distribute" shall mean delivery in person, by mail, messenger or by any other means by which obscene items may pass from one person to another. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-3; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-374.  
Sec. 23-5. - Obscene exhibitions and performances generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to: 
(1)  Produce, promote, prepare, present, manage, direct, carry on or participate in any obscene exhibition or performance, including the exhibition or performance of any obscene motion picture, play, drama, show, entertainment, exposition, tableau or scene; provided, that no employee of any person or legal entity operating a theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place which presents such obscene exhibition or performance shall be subject to prosecution under this section if the employee is not the manager of the theatre or any officer of such entity, and has no financial interest in such theatre other than receiving salary and wages; or 
(2)  Own, lease or manage any theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place and lease, let, lend or permit such theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place to be used for the purpose of presenting such obscene exhibition or performance or to fail to post prominently therein the name and address of a person resident in the locality who is the manager of such theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-4; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-375.  
Sec. 23-6. - Advertising obscene items, exhibitions or performances generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to prepare, print, publish or circulate, or cause to be prepared, printed, published or circulated, any notice or advertisement of any obscene item referred to in section 23-3 or of any obscene performance or exhibition proscribed in section 23-5, stating or indicating where such obscene item, exhibition or performance may be purchased, obtained, seen or heard. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-5; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-376.  
Sec. 23-7. - Obscene placards, posters, bills, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to expose, place, display, post up, exhibit, paint, print or mark, or cause to be exposed, placed, displayed, posted, exhibited, painted, printed or marked, in or on any building, structure, billboard, wall or fence, or on any street, or in or upon any public place, any placard, poster, banner, bill, writing or picture which is obscene, or which advertises or promotes any obscene item referred to in section 23-3 or any obscene exhibition or performance proscribed in section 23-5, or knowingly to permit the same to be displayed on property belonging to or controlled by him. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-6; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-377.  
Sec. 23-8. - Coercing acceptance of obscene articles or publications. 
No person shall, as a condition to any sale, allocation, consignment or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or publication, require that the purchaser or consignee receive for resale any other article, book or other publication which is obscene; nor shall any person deny or threaten to deny any franchise or impose or threaten to impose any penalty, financial or otherwise, by reason of the failure or refusal of any person to accept such articles, books or publications, or by reason of the return thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-7; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-378.  
Sec. 23-9. - Obscene photographs, slides and motion pictures. 
Every person who knowingly: 
(1)  Photographs himself or any other person, for purposes of preparing an obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; or 
(2)  Models, poses, acts or otherwise assists in the preparation of any obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-8; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-382.  
Sec. 23-10. - Showing previews of certain motion pictures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any trailer or preview of any motion picture which has a motion picture industry rating which would not permit persons in the audience viewing the feature motion picture to see the complete motion picture from which the trailer or preview is taken. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-14; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-386.  
Sec. 23-11. - Obscene visual material utilizing children or having children as subject. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "sexually explicit visual material" means a picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar visual representation which is obscene for children and which depicts nudity, sexual excitement, sexual conduct, sexual intercourse or sadomasochistic abuse, as defined in section 23-31, or a book, magazine or pamphlet which contains such a visual representation. An undeveloped photograph or similar visual material may be sexually explicit material, notwithstanding that processing or other acts may be required to make its sexually explicit content apparent. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, sexually explicit visual material is "obscene for children" when the material meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Considered as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest of children, as determined by the experience of children in the contemporary community; 
(2)  It affronts contemporary standards of adults as to what is suitable matter for children; and 
(3)  Considered as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political and scientific value for children. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Accost, entice or solicit a person less than eighteen (18) years of age with intent to induce or force such person to perform in or be a subject of sexually explicit visual material; or 
(2)  Produce or make, or attempt or prepare to produce or make, sexually explicit visual material which utilizes or has as a subject a person less than eighteen (18) years of age; or 
(3)  Knowingly take part in or participate in the filming, photographing or other reproduction of sexually explicit visual material which utilizes or has as a subject a person less than eighteen (18) years of age; or 
(4)  Sell, distribute or give away, at wholesale or for resale, sexually explicit visual material which utilizes or has as a subject a person less than eighteen (18) years of age; or 
(5)  Sell or distribute, at retail or not for resale, sexually explicit visual material which utilizes or has as a subject a person less than eighteen (18) years of age; or 
(6)  Knowingly finance, or attempt or prepare to finance, sexually explicit visual material which utilizes or has as a subject a person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, a person who is depicted as or presents the appearance of being less than eighteen (18) years of age in sexually explicit visual material is prima facie presumed to be less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-15; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-374.1.  
Sec. 23-12. - Indecent exposure generally. 
No person shall intentionally make an obscene display or exposure of his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where others are present, and no person shall procure another to so expose himself. No person shall be deemed in violation of this section for breastfeeding a child in any public place or any place where others are present. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-9; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
Cross reference— Indecent exposure in parks, playgrounds, etc., § 26-36. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387.  
Sec. 23-13. - Indecent exposure by entertainers, waitresses, waiters, etc. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section the phrase "expose, exhibit or display nude breast or breasts" shall mean the exposure, exhibition or display of a portion of the female breast or breasts below the uppermost portion of the areola (the pigmented area surrounding the nipple of a breast), assuming a normal standing position of the female; and the term "lower torso" shall mean that portion of the male or female body consisting of the private parts or genital organs and the anal cleft or cleavage of the buttocks. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any female person eighteen (18) years of age or older to expose, exhibit or display her nude breast or breasts under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  While performing any dance or other type of entertainment in or at a tavern, restaurant or any public place in the city serving food or beverages for compensation, charging an admission fee or receiving a donation, or in any private club or organization wherein dues or membership fees are charged. 
(2)  While working as a waitress, bartender or other type of employment in or at a tavern, restaurant or any public place in the city serving food or beverages for compensation, charging an admission fee or receiving a donation, or in any private club or organization wherein dues or membership fees are charged. 
This subsection includes, but is not limited to, the wearing of any costume, garment or material which, by virtue of construction or transparency of material, exposes, exhibits or displays such female's breast or breasts under the above conditions. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of age or older to expose, exhibit or display his or her lower torso under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  While performing any dance or other type of entertainment in or at a tavern, restaurant or any public place in the city serving food or beverages for compensation, charging an admission fee or receiving a donation, or in any private club or organization wherein dues or membership fees are charged. 
(2)  While working as a waitress, waiter or bartender or other similar type of employee in or at a tavern, restaurant or any public place in the city serving food or beverages for compensation, charging an admission fee or receiving a donation, or in any private club or organization wherein dues or membership fees are charged. 
This subsection includes, but is not limited to, the wearing of any costume, garment or material which, by virtue of construction or transparency of material, exposes, exhibits or displays such person's lower torso under the above conditions. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or any other person lawfully in charge of a tavern, restaurant or any public place in the city serving food or beverages for compensation, charging an admission fee or receiving a donation, or any private club or organization wherein dues or membership fees are charged, to procure, assist or knowingly to permit any person to violate the provisions of this section in such place. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the exercise of First Amendment rights of freedom of expression. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-22; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 23-14. - Public display of obscene materials. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this subsection: 
(1)  The word "knowledge" includes actual or constructive knowledge of the subject material. A person shall be deemed to have constructive knowledge of its character and content if such person has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable and prudent person on notice as to the suspect nature of the material. 
(2)  The terms "nudity", "sexual conduct" and "sadomasochistic abuse" shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 23-31. 
(3)  The term "prurient interest" shall mean a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters. 
(4)  The term "transportation facility" means any conveyance, premise or place used for or in connection with public passenger transportation, whether by air, railroad, motor vehicle or any other method. It includes aircraft, watercraft, railroad cars, buses and airboat, railroad and bus terminals and stations and all appurtenances thereto. 
(b)  The public display of nudity, sexual conduct and sadomasochistic abuse within the city is a public nuisance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display within the city offensive sexual material when, with knowledge of its character and content, such person displays or permits to be displayed, in or on any window, showcase, newsstand, display rack, wall, billboard, display board, viewing screen, moving picture screen, marquee or similar place, in such manner that the display is easily visible from or on any public street, sidewalk, thoroughfare, transportation facility, newsstand or any other business or commercial establishment open to the general public, any pictorial, three (3) dimensional or other visual representation of a person or a portion of the human body that predominately appeals to the prurient interest in sex and that: 
(1)  Depicts nudity or sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse; or 
(2)  Depicts or appears to depict nudity or sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse, with the area of the male or female subject's unclothed or apparently unclothed genitals, pubic area or buttocks, or of the female subject's unclothed or apparently unclothed breast, obscured by a covering or mark placed or printed on or in front of the material displayed or obscured or altered in any other manner. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-10; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 23-15. - Employing or permitting minor to assist in violation of article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to hire, employ, use or permit any minor to do or assist in doing any act or thing constituting an offense under this article. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-11; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-379.  
Sec. 23-16. - Proceeding against obscene book. 
(a)  Whenever he has reasonable cause to believe that any person is engaged in the sale or commercial distribution of any obscene book, any citizen or the attorney for the commonwealth of the city or the city attorney may institute a proceeding in the circuit court for adjudication of the obscenity of the book. 
(b)  The proceeding referred to in subsection (a) above shall be instituted by filing with the court a petition: 
(1)  Directed against the book by name or description; 
(2)  Alleging the obscene nature of the book; and 
(3)  Listing the names and addresses, if known, of the author, publisher and all other persons interested in its sale or commercial distribution. 
(c)  Upon the filing of a petition pursuant to this section, the court, in term or in vacation, shall forthwith examine the book alleged to be obscene. If the court finds no probable cause to believe the book obscene, the judge thereof shall dismiss the petition, but if the court finds probable cause to believe the book obscene, the judge thereof shall issue an order to show cause why the book should not be adjudicated obscene. The order to show cause shall be: 
(1)  Directed against the book by name or description; 
(2)  Published once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the city; 
(3)  If their names and addresses are known, served by registered mail upon the author, publisher and all other persons interested in the sale or commercial distribution of the book; and 
(4)  Returnable twenty-one (21) days after its service by registered mail or the commencement of its publication, whichever is later. 
(d)  When an order to show cause is issued pursuant to this section, and upon four (4) days' notice to be given to the persons and in the manner prescribed by the court, the court may issue a temporary restraining order against the sale or distribution of the book alleged to be obscene. 
(e)  On or before the return date specified in the order to show cause issued under this section, the author, publisher and any person interested in the sale or commercial distribution of the book may appear and file an answer. The court may, by order, permit any other person to appear and file an answer amicus curiae. 
(f)  If no one appears and files an answer on or before the return date specified in the order to show cause issued pursuant to this section, the court, upon being satisfied that the book is obscene, shall order the clerk of the court to enter judgment that the book is obscene, but the court, in its discretion, may except from its judgment a restricted category of persons to whom the book is not obscene. 
(g)  If an appearance is entered and an answer filed, the court shall order the proceeding set on the calendar for a prompt hearing. The court shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the rules of civil procedure applicable to the trial of cases by the court without a jury. At the hearing, the court shall receive evidence, including the testimony of experts, if such evidence be offered, pertaining to: 
(1)  The artistic, literary, medical, scientific, cultural and educational values, if any, of the book considered as a whole; 
(2)  The degree of public acceptance of the book, or books of similar character, within the city; 
(3)  The intent of the author and publisher of the book; 
(4)  The reputation of the author and publisher; 
(5)  The advertising, promotion and other circumstances relating to the sale of the book; 
(6)  The nature of classes of persons, including scholars, scientists and physicians, for whom the book may not have prurient appeal, and who may be subject to exception pursuant to subsection (f) above. 
(h)  In making a decision on the obscenity of the book, the court shall consider, among other things, the evidence offered pursuant to subsection (g), if any, and shall make a written determination upon every such consideration relied upon in the proceeding in his findings of fact and conclusions of law or in a memorandum accompanying them. 
(i)  If it finds the book not obscene, the court shall order the clerk of the court to enter judgment accordingly. If it finds the book obscene, the court shall order the clerk of the court to enter judgment that the book is obscene, but the court, in its discretion, may except from its judgment a restricted category of persons to whom the book is not obscene. 
(j)  While a temporary restraining order made pursuant to subsection (d) is in effect, or after the entry of a judgment pursuant to subsection (f), or after the entry of judgment pursuant to subsection (i), any person who publishes, sells, rents, lends, transports in the city, or commercially distributes or exhibits the book, or has the book in his possession with intent to publish, sell, rent, lend, transport or commercially distribute or exhibit the book, is presumed to have knowledge that the book is obscene under the provisions of this article. 
(k)  Any party to a proceeding under this section, including the petitioner, may appeal from the judgment of the court to the Supreme Court of Virginia, as otherwise provided by law. 
(l)  It is expressly provided that the petition and proceeding authorized under this section, relating to books alleged to be obscene, shall be intended only to establish scienter in cases where the establishment of such scienter is thought to be useful or desirable by the petitioner; and the provisions of this section shall in nowise be construed to be a necessary prerequisite to the filing of criminal charges under this article. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-12; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-384.  
Sec. 23-17. - Section 23-16 applicable to motion picture film. 
The provisions of section 23-16 shall apply mutatis mutandis in the case of motion picture film. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-13; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-385.  
Sec. 23-18. - Exceptions from article. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any book, magazine or other printed or manuscript material by any library, school or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation; 
(2)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any work of art by any museum of fine arts, school or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation; 
(3)  The exhibition or performance of any play, drama, tableau or motion picture by any theatre, museum of fine arts, school or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-15; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-383.  
Secs. 23-19—23-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROHIBITED SALES, LOANS, ETC., TO JUVENILES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to adopt ordinance similar to provisions of this article, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.2. 
 
Sec. 23-31. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Harmful to juveniles means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, when it: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of juveniles; 
(2)  Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for juveniles; and 
(3)  Is, when taken as a whole, lacking in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for juveniles. 
Juvenile means a person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
Knowingly means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both the character and content of any material described herein, which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and the age of the juvenile; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such juvenile. 
Nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Sadomasochistic abuse means actual or explicitly simulated flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
Sexual conduct means actual or explicitly simulated acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be female, breast. 
Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-18; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-390.  
Sec. 23-32. - Unlawful acts generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or loan to a juvenile, knowing or having reason to know that such person is a juvenile, or to knowingly display for commercial purpose in a manner whereby juveniles may examine and peruse: 
(1)  Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film in any format or medium, electronic file or message containing an image, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles; or 
(2)  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, electronic file or message containing words, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in paragraph (1) of this subsection, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to juveniles. 
However, if a person uses services of an Internet service provider or an electronic mail service provider in committing act prohibited under this section, such Internet service provider or electronic mail service provider shall not be held responsible for violating this section. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-19; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.  
Sec. 23-33. - Admitting juveniles to premises exhibiting obscene films or other presentations; such films not to be visible to juveniles from public way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell to a juvenile an admission ticket or pass, or knowingly to admit a juvenile to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles, or to exhibit any such motion picture at any such premises which are not designed to prevent viewing from any public way of such motion picture by juveniles not admitted to any such premises. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-19; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.  
Sec. 23-34. - Misrepresentation to persons mentioned in sections 23-32 and 23-33 as to juvenile's age, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to falsely represent to any person mentioned in section 23-32 or 23-33, or to his agent, that such juvenile is eighteen (18) years of age or older, with the intent to procure any material set forth in section 23-32, or with the intent to procure such juvenile's admission to any motion picture, show or other presentation, as set forth in section 23-33. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to make a false representation to any person mentioned in section 23-32 or 23-33, or to his agent, that he is the parent or guardian of any juvenile, or that any juvenile is eighteen (18) years of age, with the intent to procure any material set forth in section 23-32, or with the intent to procure such juvenile's admission to any motion picture, show or other presentation, as set forth in section 23-33. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-19; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.  
Sec. 23-35. - Display of obscene materials at business establishments open to juveniles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit, expose or display in public, at a newsstand or any other business or commercial establishment frequented by juveniles or where juveniles are or may be invited as a part of the general public: 
(1)  Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles; or 
(2)  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in paragraph (1) of this subsection, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to juveniles. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-20; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 23-36. - Exceptions from article. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any work of art, book, magazine or other printed or manuscript material by any accredited museum, library, school or institution of higher learning. 
(2)  The exhibition or performance of any play, drama, tableau, or motion picture by any theatre, museum, school or institution of higher learning, either supported by public appropriation or which is an accredited institution supported by private funds. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-21; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.1.  
Secs. 23-37—23-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STUDIOS PROVIDING NUDE OR PARTIALLY NUDE MODELS 
 
Sec. 23-51. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the phrase "nude or partially nude" shall mean the exposure or display of the nipple of the female breast or the pigmented portion adjacent thereto, otherwise defined as the areola, or the exposure or display of that portion of the male or female body consisting of the private parts or genital organs. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-29; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 23-52. - To be closed during certain hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of providing live nude or partially nude models to be painted, sketched or photographed by the general public to remain open to such business between the hours of 10:00 p.m., and 6:00 a.m., the following day. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-27; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 23-53. - Information to be filed with chief of police. 
(a)  Each person who shall engage in the business in the city of providing live nude or partially nude models to be painted, sketched or photographed, whether by appointment or otherwise, shall file with the chief of police his name, age and current residential address and business address, together with all addresses for the previous five (5) years. Such person shall also file with the chief of police the name, age, residential address and occupation of each model employed or to be employed in such business. 
(b)  Each day any person shall engage in the business referred to in this section and employ a model or models in such business, without providing the information as required by this section, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-24; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 23-54. - Registration of customers; using false name by customer. 
(a)  Each person who shall engage in the business in the city of providing live nude or partially nude models to be painted, sketched or photographed shall at all times keep and maintain therein a book or register in which shall be inscribed, with ink or indelible pencil, the name and address of each customer, in his or her own handwriting, with a clear and definite showing of the model or models painted, sketched or photographed, by name. Such book or register shall be maintained for a period of two (2) years from the date of each entry, and shall be open to inspection by the law-enforcement officers of the city at reasonable hours. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sign or cause to be signed, in the book or register referred to in subsection (a) above, false or fictitious name when seeking to paint, sketch or photograph a model or models. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-25; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 23-55. - Minors prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a business in the city which provides live nude or partially nude models for painting, sketching or photographing to permit any other person to be a model, manager, clerk or employee in such business, if such other person is under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a business in the city which provides live nude or partially nude models for painting, sketching or photographing to permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to paint, sketch or photograph any such model, to be present when any such model is being painted, sketched or photographed or to reside in or frequent any such place when open for business. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-28; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 23-56. - Third person to be present when model being photographed or painted. 
In order to protect such models, it shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of providing live nude or partially nude models to be painted, sketched or photographed by the general public to allow or permit the painting, sketching or photographing of live nude or partially nude models in a room unless there be present in the room a responsible adult individual in addition to the model and the customer. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-26; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 23-57. - Obscene photographs or paintings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business in the city which provides models or facilities for obscene sketching, painting or photographing of the human figure, where the nude or partially nude model's posture or the reproduction of the nude or partially nude model, whether by sketching, painting or photographing, appear in a manner which: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient interests; and 
(2)  Is patently offensive to contemporary community standards; and 
(3)  Is utterly without redeeming social value. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a nude or partially nude model or to present any posture whereby the reproduction thereof shall appear in a manner which: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient interests; and 
(2)  Is offensive to contemporary community standards; and 
(3)  Is utterly without redeeming social value. 
(Code 1964, § 27.2-23; Ord. No. 650, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1450, 12-14-06)  
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES—MISCELLANEOUS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinances paralleling state misdemeanor statutes, § 2.01c. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Attempt to commit misdemeanor. 
Every person who shall attempt to commit an offense which is a misdemeanor shall be punishable by the same punishment prescribed for the offense, the commission of which was the object of the attempt. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-7; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-27.  
Sec. 24-2. - Curfew for certain minors. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, as used in this section, shall mean the following: 
(1)  The word "guardian" shall mean a legal guardian or other adult person having care, custody or control of a minor. 
(2)  The word "minor" shall mean a person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of fourteen (14) years to be present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless accompanied by his/her parent or guardian or unless such minor is on an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian or is engaged in a lawful employment or going directly to the place of such employment or returning directly to his place of residence from the place of such employment. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of fourteen (14) years but under the age of eighteen (18) years to be present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday, unless accompanied by his/her parent or guardian or unless such minor is on an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian or is engaged in a lawful employment or going directly to the place of such employment or returning directly to his place of residence from the place of such employment. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any minor to permit, allow or encourage such minor to be present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, in violation of provisions of subsections (b) or (c) of this section. 
(e)  Exceptions. In the following cases, a minor in or upon a public place under the circumstances prohibited by subsections (b) and (c), shall not be in violation of this section: 
(1)  When a minor is in a motor vehicle engaged in interstate travel. This is intended, from excess of caution, to exempt from regulation bona fide interstate travel through, beginning or ending, in the city. 
(2)  When the minor was attending an activity on the property of or sponsored by a city or state agency or body, or a school or a religious organization, or was returning to the minor's place of residence therefrom, without detour or stop. 
(3)  When a minor is a volunteer firefighter or volunteer rescue squad member and is responding to emergency calls in that capacity. 
(f)  Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section, or who shall knowingly give a false name, address or telephone number to a law enforcement officer, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. In addition, any minor found guilty of violating this section may be subject to any order of disposition authorized by Code of Virginia, 1950, Section 16.1-278.4, as amended. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor who has been emancipated. 
( Ord. No. 13-0016, 8-14-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0017, 5-27-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-0016 , adopted August 14, 2013, repealed the former § 24-2 and enacted a new § 24-2 as set out herein. The former § 24-2 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
State Law reference— Curfew ordinances authorized, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.  
Sec. 24-2.1. - Curfews after declarations of emergency. 
(a)  Pursuant to the police powers granted to the city by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1102, and in the interest of promoting public safety, the city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to impose a curfew after the declaration of an emergency, in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Curfew" means an order issued by the city manager prohibiting persons from being present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city or any portion thereof designated by the city manager during specified times of the day or night; 
(2)  "City manager" means the city manager or his designee; 
(3)  "Natural disaster" means any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave, earthquake, drought, fire or other natural catastrophe resulting in damage, hardship, suffering or possible loss of life; and 
(4)  "Manmade disaster" means any condition following an attack by an enemy or foreign nation upon the City of Hampton that results in substantial damage of property or injury to persons in the United States, and may be by use of bombs, missiles, shell fire, nuclear, radiological, chemical or biological means or other weapons or by overt paramilitary actions; terrorism, foreign and domestic; any industrial, nuclear or transportation accident, explosion, conflagration, power failure, or other condition such as sabotage, oil spills, and other injurious environmental contaminations that threaten or cause damage to property, human suffering, hardship or loss of life. 
(c)  The city manager may declare a curfew if he deems such action necessary for the preservation of life or property, the implementation of emergency mitigation, preparedness, response actions or recovery actions anticipated or resulting from the dangers caused by a natural or manmade disaster or the resulting effects thereof, pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  The authority conferred upon the city manager by this section shall arise only after either the state or the city declares an emergency in accordance with the provisions of Virginia Code §§ 44-146.19 or 44-146.21 for a geographical area located within the city; 
(2)  The curfew shall be announced in such manner as is reasonably calculated to provide notice to the public of the imposition of the curfew. Termination of curfew shall be in like manner; 
(3)  The declaration of a curfew, circumstances justifying its imposition, time and areas of the city in which the curfew is in effect, and the means and time of the public announcement of the curfew shall be recorded in a written document signed by the city manager and maintained in the records of the city; 
(4)  No curfew shall be imposed except in areas and at times that can be justified as necessary for the public safety. 
(5)  The action of the city manager in imposing a curfew during a natural or manmade disaster shall be ratified by the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(d)  After the declaration and public announcement of a curfew, it shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  Any person, after having been warned by a law-enforcement officer, to remain on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, in any portion of the city designated by the city manager; and 
(2)  The owner or proprietor of any retail, wholesale or eating and drinking establishment, entertainment venue or similar establishment, or other person in control of such establishment, to allow any person to remain on the premises without the express written permission of the city manager; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to lodging establishments serving registered guests. 
(e)  The following persons shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while on duty or traveling to and from work: 
(1)  Hospital personnel; 
(2)  City employees and volunteers; 
(3)  Military personnel; 
(4)  Employees of public utility companies; 
(5)  Private emergency medical transport workers; and 
(6)  Other emergency workers as authorized by the city manager. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or restrict travel to a hospital in the event of a medical emergency, nor shall such travel be considered in violation of this section. 
(g)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 11-0011, 9-7-11)  
Sec. 24-3. - Curfew for minors—Parent or guardian permitting violation of section 24-2. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 2 misdemeanor for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor to knowingly permit such minor to violate any provisions of section 24-2. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the parent, guardian or other adult person having care or custody of a minor who is a member of the Armed Service of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 5, §§ 2, 3, 6; Code 1964, §§ 12-2, 12-5; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 2 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-4. - Curfew for minors—Prima facie evidence as to violation of sections 24-2 and 24-3. 
In any court proceedings involving section 24-2 or 24-3, the fact that the minor in question, unaccompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person, is found upon any street, alley or other place enumerated in section 24-2 after 12:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m., shall be prima facie evidence that such minor is there unlawfully, that no reasonable excuse exists therefor and that the parent, guardian or adult person having the care or custody of such minor knows and is permitting such minor to violate section 24-2. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 4; Code 1964, § 12-3; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 24-5. - Prohibited trick or treat activities. 
(a)  If any person over the age of 12 years shall engage in the activity commonly known as "trick or treat" or any other activity of similar character or nature under any name whatsoever, he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting any parent, guardian or other responsible person, having lawfully in his custody a child 12 years or younger, from accompanying such child who is playing "trick or treat" for the purpose of caring for, looking after or protecting such child. 
(b)  If any person shall engage in the activity commonly known as "trick or treat" or any other activity of similar character or nature under any name whatsoever after 8:00 p.m., he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, §§ 27.1-46, 27.1-47; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 16-0016 , 10-26-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-6. - Obstructing justice; resisting arrest; penalty. 
(a)  If any person without just cause knowingly obstructs a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, attorney for the commonwealth, witness, any law-enforcement officer, or animal control officer employed pursuant to the Code of Virginia § 3.2-6555 in the performance of his duties as such or fails or refuses without just cause to cease such obstruction when requested to do so by such judge, magistrate, justice, juror, attorney for the commonwealth, witness, law-enforcement officer, or animal control officer employed pursuant to the Code of Virginia § 3.2-6555, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who, by threats, or force, knowingly attempts to intimidate or impede a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, attorney for the Commonwealth, witness, any law-enforcement officer, or animal control officer employed pursuant to the Code of Virginia § 3.2-6555 lawfully engaged in his duties as such, or to obstruct or impede the administration of justice in any court, is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person who knowingly and willfully makes any materially false statement or representation to a law-enforcement officer or animal control officer employed pursuant to the Code of Virginia § 3.2-6555 who is in the course of conducting an investigation of a crime by another is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-19; Ord. No. 1033, 1-22-92; Ord. No. 1101, 9-8-93; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 18-0001 , 2-14-18) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; repeal not to affect violations under former ordinance, § 2-88. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460.  
Sec. 24-7. - Fleeing from a law-enforcement officer; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who intentionally prevents or attempts to prevent a law-enforcement officer from lawfully arresting him, with our without a warrant, is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent a lawful arrest means fleeing from a law-enforcement officer when (i) the officer applies physical force to the person, or (ii) the officer communicates to the person that he is under arrest and (a) the officer has the legal authority and the immediate physical ability to place the person under arrest, and (b) a reasonable person who receives such communication knows or should know that he is not free to leave. 
(Ord. No. 603, 1-10-79; Code 1964, § 27.1-19.1; Ord. No. 1034, 1-22-92; Ord. No. 1102, 9-8-93; Ord. No. 1171, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 18-0001 , 2-14-18) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-479.1.  
Sec. 24-8. - Calling ambulance or fire-fighting apparatus without cause; malicious activation of fire alarm in public building. 
(a)  Any person who, without just cause therefor, calls or summons, by telephone or otherwise, any ambulance or fire-fighting apparatus, or any person who maliciously activates a manual or automatic fire alarm in any building used for public assembly or for other public use, including, but not limited to, schools, theaters, stores, office buildings, shopping centers and malls, coliseums and arenas, regardless of whether fire apparatus responds or not, shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  A violation of this section may be prosecuted either in the jurisdiction from which the call or summons was made or in the jurisdiction where the call or summons was received. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-4; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.  
Sec. 24-9. - Assault and battery. 
Any person who commits an unjustified assault or battery upon another, which does not amount to a felony, as defined by the laws of the state, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-5; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Assault and battery, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57.  
Sec. 24-10. - Abusive language. 
If any person shall, in the presence or hearing of another, curse or abuse such other person, or use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relations, or otherwise use such language, under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, he shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-1; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-416.  
Sec. 24-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-0001, adopted Jan. 9, 2013, repealed § 24-11, which pertained to disturbing the peace generally and derived from Ord. No. 603, adopted Jan. 10, 1979; Code 1964, § 27.1-6.2; Ord. No. 1466, adopted March 28, 2007.  
Sec. 24-12. - Disorderly conduct in public places. 
(a)  A person is guilty of disorderly conduct and a Class 1 misdemeanor if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he: 
(1)  In any street, highway or public building, or while in or on a public conveyance or public place, engages in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; or 
(2)  Willfully, or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts any meeting of the city council or any other public body within the city, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if such disruption prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of such meeting or has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such disruption is directed; Or 
(3)  Willfully or while intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts the operation of any school or other activity conducted or sponsored by any school, if the disruption prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the operation or activity or has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed. 
(b)  However, the conduct prohibited under subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display or any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under this chapter. 
(c)  The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance, meeting, operation or activity may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-27; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415.  
Sec. 24-13. - Public drunkenness. 
Any person who, being intoxicated as defined by the law of the state, shall appear in public in the city shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-12; Ord. No. 08-0009, 3-12-08) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388.  
Sec. 24-13.1. - Drinking, etc., alcoholic beverages in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to drink alcoholic beverages or offer a drink to another, whether accepted or not, at or in any public place in the city. 
(b)  This section shall not prevent any person from drinking alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another under the circumstances stated in subsection B, C or D of section 4.1-308 of the Code of Virginia or section 26-37 of this Code. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the terms "alcoholic beverages" and "public place" shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 4.1-100 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 768, 2-8-84; Ord. No. 801, 6-12-85; Ord. No. 1226, 8-19-98; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Provisions similar to subsection (a) above, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-308; authority of city to adopt above section, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-128.  
Sec. 24-13.2. - Drinking or possession of alcoholic beverages in or on public school grounds. 
If any person, in or upon the grounds of any free public elementary or secondary school, during school hours or school or student activities, shall take a drink of any alcoholic beverage or have in his possession any alcoholic beverage, he shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 768, 2-8-84; Ord. No. 779, 9-12-84; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 2 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-309; authority of city to adopt above section, § 4.1-128.  
Sec. 24-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1002, adopted March 13, 1991, repealed § 24-14. Prior to such ordinance, § 24-14 pertained to public profanity and was derived from Ord. No. 601, adopted Dec. 13, 1978, and Code 1964, § 27.1-25.  
Sec. 24-15. - Unlawful assemblies generally. 
Whenever three (3) or more persons assembled share the common intent to advance some lawful or unlawful purpose by the commission of an act or acts of unlawful force or violence likely to jeopardize seriously public safety, peace or order, and the assembly actually tends to inspire persons of ordinary courage with well-grounded fear of serious and immediate breaches of public safety, peace or order, then such assembly is an unlawful assembly. Every person who participates in any unlawful assembly shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-6; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions and conditions under which above offense constitutes a felony, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-406.  
Sec. 24-16. - Remaining at place of riot or unlawful assembly after warning to disperse. 
Every person, except the owner or lessee of the premises, his family and nonrioting guests, and public officers and persons assisting them, who remains at the place of any riot or unlawful assembly after having been lawfully warned to disperse, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 603, 1-10-79; Code 1964, § 27.1-6.1) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-407.  
Sec. 24-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1001, adopted March 13, 1991, repealed § 24-17. Prior to such ordinance, § 24-17 pertained to littering and was derived from Ord. No. 700, adopted Aug. 12, 1981 and Code 1964, § 27.1-28.1.  
Sec. 24-18. - Obstructing free passage of others. 
Any person who, in any public place or on any private property open to the public, unreasonably or unnecessarily obstructs the free passage of other persons to and from or within such public place or private property and who shall fail or refuse to cease such obstruction or move on when requested to do so by the owner or lessee, or agent or employee of such owner or lessee, or by a duly authorized law-enforcement officer, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit lawful picketing. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-28; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-404.  
Sec. 24-19. - Fights, brawls, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a fight, combat or brawl in the city. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-13; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-20. - Adultery and fornication generally. 
(a)  Any person, being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any person not his or her spouse shall be deemed guilty of adultery. 
(b)  Any person, not being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any other person shall be deemed guilty of fornication. 
(c)  Any person committing adultery or fornication shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 477; Code 1964, §§ 35-1—35-3) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11; management of massage parlors not to permit violations of above section, § 24-20. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-344, 18.2-365, 18.2-366.  
Sec. 24-21. - Adultery and fornication by persons forbidden to marry. 
Any person who commits adultery or fornication with any person whom he or she is forbidden by law to marry shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to a person committing adultery or fornication with his daughter or grand-daughter, or with her son or grandson, or her father or his mother. 
(Code 1964, § 35-4; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; management of massage parlors not to permit violations of above section, § 24-20. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-366, which declares adultery or fornication by persons mentioned in subsection B thereof to be a felony.  
Sec. 24-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-0022 , adopted November 13, 2013, repealed § 24-22, which pertained to lewd and lascivious cohabitation. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 24-23. - Prostitution generally. 
Any person who, for money or its equivalent, commits adultery, fornication or any act in violation of section 18.2-361 of the Code of Virginia, or offers to commit adultery, fornication or any act in violation of section 18.2-361 or 18.2-346 (B) of the Code of Virginia, and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof, shall be guilty of being a prostitute, or prostitution, which shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 35-6; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; management of massage parlors not to permit violations of above section, § 24-20. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-346.  
Sec. 24-24. - Bawdy places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to keep any bawdy place or to reside in or at or visit, for immoral purposes, any bawdy place. Each and every day such bawdy place shall be kept, resided in or visited shall constitute a separate offense. In a prosecution under this section the general reputation of the place may be proved. 
(b)  As used in this section, "bawdy place" shall mean any place within or without any building or structure which is used or is to be used for lewdness, assignation or prostitution. 
(Code 1964, §§ 35-7, 35-8; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-347.  
Sec. 24-25. - Aiding prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person or any officer, employee or agent of any person, with knowledge of, or good reason to believe, the immoral purpose of such visit, to take or transport or assist in taking or transporting, or offer to take or transport, on foot or in any way, any person to a place, whether within or without any building or structure, used or to be used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution within this city; or to procure or assist in procuring, for the purpose of illicit sexual intercourse or any act violative of section 18.2-361 of the Code of Virginia, or to give any information or direction to any person with intent to enable such person to commit an act of prostitution. 
(Code 1964, § 35-9; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-348.  
Sec. 24-26. - Using vehicle to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for the owner or chauffeur of any vehicle, with knowledge or reason to believe the same is to be used for such purpose, to use the same or allow the same to be used for the purpose of prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, or to aid or promote such prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse by the use of any such vehicle. 
(Code 1964, § 35-10; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-349.  
Sec. 24-27. - Confinement at city or county farm or hospital of persons violating sections 24-23 through 24-26. 
Every person convicted of being a prostitute under section 24-23 and every person convicted of violating any of the provisions of sections 24-24 through 24-26 may, in the discretion of the court or judge, be confined at a city or county farm or hospital available for such confinement, in lieu of confinement in jail. 
(Ord. No. 477; Code 1964, § 35-11; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-350.  
Sec. 24-28. - Fraudulent use of pay phones, parking meters and other coin-operated machines. 
Any person who shall operate, cause to be operated or attempt to operate or cause to be operated any coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine that operates on the coin-in-the-slot principle, whether of like kind or not, designed only to receive lawful coins of the United States of America, in connection with the use or enjoyment of telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges or any other service, or the sale of merchandise or other property, by means of a slug or any false, counterfeit, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever, not authorized by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine; who shall obtain or receive telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges, merchandise or any other service or property from any such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, designed only to receive lawful coins of the United States of America, without depositing in or surrendering to such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine lawful coins of the United States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-9; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-179.  
Sec. 24-29. - Scalping tickets to public events. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resell for profit any ticket for admission to any sporting event, theatrical production, lecture, motion picture or any other event open to the public for which tickets are ordinarily sold, except in the case of religious, charitable or educational organizations where all or a portion of the admission price reverts to the sponsoring group and the resale for profit of such ticket is authorized by the sponsor of the event and the manager or owner of the facility in which the event is being held. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-45; Ord. No. 741, 1-26-83; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-969.  
Sec. 24-30. - Throwing objects or materials at public events. 
Any person, not a bona fide participant, who shall willfully throw, project or deposit, or cause to be thrown, projected or deposited, any object or material of any kind, upon the court, field, stage or floor of any establishment at which there is being played or performed any athletic event, theatrical performance or any other event, exhibition or performance whatsoever open to the public, whether by admission charge or not, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-49; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-31. - Damaging, defacing, etc., property generally. 
Any person who shall willfully and maliciously destroy, deface, remove or injure any real or personal property of another, public or private, which shall include all public buildings, parks, playgrounds, playfields and recreation facilities, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-17; Ord. No. 754, § 27.1-17, 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; damaging property by fire, § 14-8; damaging traffic signs, § 21-348; defacing or disturbing park property, § 26-32; damaging sewers, § 30-7. 
State Law reference— Damaging property, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137 et seq.  
Sec. 24-32. - Injuring, tampering with, etc., vehicles, aircraft, etc. 
(a)  Any person who shall, individually or in association with one (1) or more others, willfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part of any vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or who shall in any other manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, climb into or upon such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief, or injury thereto, or who, while a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crank or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set into motion such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief, or injury thereto, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, except that the foregoing provision shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a bona fide repossession of a vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel by the holder of a lien on such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or by agents or employees of such lienholder. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, §§ 27.1-33—27.1-35; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-146, 18.2-147, 18.2-148.  
Sec. 24-33. - Trespass after having been forbidden to do so. 
(a)  If any person shall, without authority of law, go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign or signs posted by such person, or by the holder of any easement or other right-of-way authorized by the instrument creating such interest to post such signs, on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof at a place where it or they may be reasonably seen he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  If any person, whether he is the owner, tenant or otherwise entitled to the use of such land, building or premises, goes upon, or remains upon such land, building or premises after having been prohibited from doing so by a court of competent jurisdiction by an order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia §§ 16.1-253, 16.1-253.1, 16.1-253.4, 16.1-278.2 through 16.1-278.6, 16.1-278.8, 16.1-278.14, 16.1-278.15, 16.1-279.1, 19.2-152.8, 19.2-152.9 or Code of Virginia § 19.2-152.10 or an ex parte order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia § 20-103, and after having been served with such order, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the provisions of Code of Virginia §§ 18.2-132 through 18.2-136. 
(d)  The owner, lessee, custodian or person lawfully in charge of real property may designate the Hampton police division as a "person lawfully in charge of the property," as set forth in subsection (a), for the purpose of forbidding another to go or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises as specified in the designation. Such designation must be in writing and on file with the Hampton police division. The chief of police, or his designee, has discretion to refuse to accept any such designation. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-31; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 16-0009 , 6-8-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; application of above section to persons refusing to leave park or recreation area upon proper request, § 26-21; solicitors to receive consent prior to entry upon certain property, § 31-22. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119; § 15.2-1717.1.  
Sec. 24-34. - Peeping toms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of another and secretly or furtively peep, spy or attempt to peep or spy into or through a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure, or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure is permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy is permanent or temporary, or to do the same, without just cause, upon property owned by him and leased or rented to another under circumstances that would violate the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a peephole or other aperture to secretly or furtively peep, spy or attempt to peep or spy into a restroom, dressing room, locker room, hotel room, motel room, tanning bed, tanning booth, bedroom or other location or enclosure for the purpose of viewing any nonconsenting person who is totally nude, clad in undergarments, or in a state of undress exposing the genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breast and the circumstances are such that the person would otherwise have a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a lawful criminal investigation or a correctional official or local or regional jail official conducting surveillance for security purposes or during an investigation of alleged misconduct involving a person committed to the Department of Corrections or to a local or regional jail. 
(d)  As used in this section, "peephole" means any hole, crack or other similar opening through which a person can see. 
(e)  A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 703, 9-23-81; Code 1964, § 27.1-32; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130.  
Sec. 24-35. - Nuisances generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to cause, create, allow, permit or maintain, upon any premises in the city in his possession or under his control, any public nuisance or any condition injurious to the public health or morals or endangering the life or property of others. 
(b)  Each and every day a violation of this section is maintained or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any violation of this section, the nuisance, unless immediately abated by the person maintaining, causing or permitting the same, may be abated by the city at the expense and cost of the offender and the cost thereof shall be charged and collected as a part of the cost of the trial of the case. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-18; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Certain premises declared public nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-258.  
Sec. 24-36. - Unlawful accumulations of refuse generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or in charge or control of any lot or premises in the city, whether occupied or unoccupied, to allow, permit or have an accumulation of garbage, trash, ashes or other refuse on such lot or premises, which accumulation tends to create a health problem or nuisance. 
(b)  When an accumulation prohibited by subsection (a) above is found to exist on any unoccupied lot or premises, the owner of such lot or premises or his agent shall be given written notice by the director of public health, with a request that such accumulation be removed within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the notice. Should the owner or his agent fail to comply with the request within such time, the owner will be considered in violation of this section. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor, except that, if any person is convicted three (3) or more times, within twelve (12) successive months, of a violation of this section, such person shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor for such third or subsequent offense and, in such case, the court may, in its discretion, suspend either the fine or jail sentence, but not both. 
(d)  A violation of this section may be restrained, prohibited or enjoined by any court of equity jurisdiction in the city. 
(Ord. No. 493; Code 1964, §§ 20-18, 20-23; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty of Class 2 and 4 misdemeanors, § 1-11; solid waste, Ch. 32. 
State Law reference— Littering, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1014 et seq.  
Sec. 24-37. - Accumulations of trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other like substances and cutting of grass and weeds near residential or commercial structures. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property, or any occupant or other person who is responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of any property, occupied or vacant, including the area adjoining such property extending to the curb line or the paved portion of the roadway and/or the center line of an abutting alley, to permit the accumulation on such property of trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other like substances, except as may be placed there for purposes of collection in accordance with chapter 32.1 of this Code. In the event the owner, occupant or other person responsible for any property shall fail or refuse to remove any accumulation referred to above, or in the event the property upon which such accumulation is found is unoccupied, the city manager or his designee shall give written notice to the owner of such property to clear off and remove from the property all such trash garbage, refuse, litter and other like substances, within seven (7) days from the date of such notice. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a criminal misdemeanor with a fine of at least $100.00 but not more than $1,000.00 per violation. Each day during which the condition is ongoing shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land, or any occupant or other person who is responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of any land, occupied or vacant including the area adjoining such property extending to the curb line or the paved portion of the roadway and or the center line of an abutting alley, to permit grass, weeds and other foreign growth on such property to exceed a height of ten (10) inches, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any residential or commercial structure, or any structure designed for use in connection therewith. 
In the event the owner, occupant or other person responsible for any property shall fail or refuse to, maintain said grass, weeds and other foreign growth, the city manager or his designee shall give written notice to the owner of such property to cut or remove said growth as required by this subsection within seven (7) days from the date of such notice and to so maintain it. One such written notice per growing season (March 1 through November 30) shall satisfy the notice requirement above to authorize the city to remove or contract for the removal of any excessive growth of grass, weeds and other foreign growth for the entire growing season. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a criminal misdemeanor with a fine of at least $100.00 but not more than $1,000.00. Each day during which the condition is ongoing shall constitute a separate offense. 
The requirements of this subsection shall have no application in the following areas of the city: 
(1)  Areas required to be vegetated by the Special Public Interest—Chesapeake Bay Preservation District of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hampton; 
(2)  Vegetated wetlands, as defined in the wetlands ordinance (Chapter 41.1 of this Code); 
(3)  Coastal primary sand dunes; 
(4)  State-designated Wildlife Habitat Areas; 
(5)  Banks of detention ponds, streams, and other bodies of water, natural or manmade; 
(6)  Banks of drainage easements; 
(7)  Woodlands. For the purpose of this exemption, the term "woodlands" shall include productive and nonproductive forest lands and other areas which are used primarily to promote and preserve the growth of trees and seedlings and land covered to the extent that the operation thereon of a tractor with weed cutting apparatus is not practicable; 
(8)  Property that is currently under development, from the date duly approved land disturbance begins until a certificate of occupancy is issued; except that if work is discontinued for more than 14 consecutive days, the property is no longer exempt from these requirements; and 
(9)  Any other area required to be vegetated by reason of the application of the city zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, site plan ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, or any other ordinance or provision of law. 
(c)  Construction sites shall be maintained in such a manner as to contain trash and/or construction-related debris on the buildable portion of the site. The failure of the person responsible for or in charge of construction sites to contain trash and/or construction-related debris shall result in the issuance of a notice to correct the violation within 24 hours. Failure to obey the terms of the notice regarding construction trash or debris shall be punishable as a criminal misdemeanor with a fine of at least $100.00 but not more than $1,000.00 per violation. Each day during which the condition is ongoing shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  In case the notice referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) above cannot reasonably be served on the owner, or when such notice is mailed to the owner's last known address as shown in the office of the assessor, and such owner fails to comply with such notice within seven (7) days of the date of such notice, the land may be cleared off, cut, or cleaned by the city and the necessary expenses of such clearing, cutting, and removal shall be chargeable to such owner. The city manager shall certify such expenses to the city treasurer. Such expenses, when so certified, together with a one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) service charge, shall be collected by the treasurer pursuant to the same procedures and in the same manner as real estate taxes and shall be a real estate tax lien upon such land. 
(e)  If a violation of (a), (b) or (c) above is uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 7; Ord. No. 341; Ord. No. 693, 6-24-81; Code 1964, §§ 20-25—20-27; Ord. No. 848, 1-14-87; Ord. No. 1150, 9-13-95; Ord. No. 1181, 4-9-97; Ord. No. 1300, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 1389, 1-26-05; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 13-0006, 5-8-13, eff. 7-1-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 ; Ord. No. 15-0023 , 10-14-15) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; solid waste, Ch. 32. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-901, 15.2-1115.  
Sec. 24-38. - Abandoned or discarded refrigerators and other airtight containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind, with an interior storage area of more than two (2) cubic feet of clear space, which is airtight, without first removing the door or doors or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed, or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant, or is created, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Code 1964, § 27.1-26; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11; compliance with above section with respect to discarded refrigerators and other containers to be collected by city, § 32-36. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319.  
Sec. 24-39. - Open storage of inoperable vehicles on property zoned for residential purposes. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "shielded or screened from view" means completely precluding visibility of the subject vehicle by someone standing at ground level from outside of the property on which the vehicle is located by placing the vehicle within an area completely enclosed by any combination of the following: (1) a solid, rigid, six-foot opaque fence composed of standard fencing materials; and/or (2) a landscape arrangement of non-deciduous trees or shrubs, sufficient in height, spacing, density and circumference. The placing, draping or securing of a tarpaulin or other non-rigid cover over and around an inoperable vehicle shall not be sufficient to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to keep, or allow to be kept, on any property in the city zoned for residential purposes any inoperable vehicle unless the same is kept within a fully enclosed building or structure. However, notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, if the owner of an inoperable vehicle can demonstrate that he is actively restoring or repairing the vehicle, and if it is shielded or screened from view, the vehicle and one additional inoperable vehicle that is shielded or screened from view and being used for the restoration or repair may remain on the property. In no event shall any person keep more than two inoperable vehicles, one of which is being actively worked on, which are shielded or screened from view. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business that is regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, an "inoperable vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, as those terms are defined in Code of Virginia § 46.2-100 which is: 
(1)  Not in operating condition; or 
(2)  Does not display valid license plates; or 
(3)  Does not display an inspection decal that is valid or does display an inspection decal that has been expired for more than 60 days. However, this provision shall not apply to vehicles that are not required to be inspected by the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(d)  Upon discovery of a violation of subsection (b) of this section, the City Manager or her designee shall provide written notice of violation to the owner of the real property on which the violation is discovered. The owner of such property shall remove therefrom any inoperable vehicle located thereon in violation of this section. The city, through its own agents or employees may remove any such vehicle whenever the owner of the property, after a ten-day notice, has failed to do so. In the event the city so removes any such vehicle, the city may dispose of such vehicle after giving additional notice to the owner of the vehicle. The cost of any such removal and disposal shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle or premises and may be collected by the city as taxes are collected. Every cost authorized by this section with which the owner of the premises shall have been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such costs has been made to the city. 
(e)  An initial violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A second or subsequent violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(f)  If the violation is uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Code 1964, §§ 25.1-7, 25.1-8; Ord. No. 728, 9-8-82; Ord. No. 860, 5-27-87; Ord. No. 945, 8-9-98; Ord. No. 1000, 3-13-91; Ord. No. 1066, 9-23-92; Ord. No. 1292, 3-28-01; Ord. No. 1389, 1-26-05; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 17-0012 , 10-25-17) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; junk dealers, Ch. 27. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-905.  
Sec. 24-39.1. - Open storage of inoperable vehicles on property zoned for other than residential purposes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping on any property or parcel of land zoned for other than residential purposes, except in a fully enclosed building or structure, more than five (5) inoperable motor vehicles, trailers or semi-trailers, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, as amended. For purposes of this section, an inoperable vehicle is one which: 
(1)  Is not in operating condition; or 
(2)  For a period of sixty (60) days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle or on which there are displayed neither valid license plates nor a valid inspection decal. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following definitions: 
(1)  Residential zoned property means property that the zoning category permits single-family or multifamily residential use. 
(2)  Owner means the owner of the vehicle or, if the owner of the vehicle cannot be ascertained, the owner of the premises. 
(3)  Person means any individual, firm, corporation, owner, sole proprietorship, partnership, incorporated association, governmental body, municipal corporation, executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, agent, occupant or other legal entity who also possesses a Federal Tax ID number and a retail sales tax ID number and a current city business license and garage keepers liability insurance. 
(c)  After the sixty-day period referred to in subsection (a)(2) of this section has elapsed, any remaining inoperative vehicles must be moved to a screened area, so that there are never more than five (5) inoperative vehicles outside of the screened area at any one time. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(e)  If the violation is uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with this section. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which on June 26, 1970, was engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(Ord. No. 1285, 9-27-00; Ord. No. 1389, 1-26-05; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-905.  
Sec. 24-40. - Electric fences. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install or maintain any electric fence, regardless of power source, within the city except as provided in this section. 
(1)  Electric fences may be installed, operated or maintained only in the LFA-1 and LFA-2 Zoning Districts. 
(2)  Electric fences shall be constructed, maintained and operated in conformance with the specifications set forth in International Electrotechnical Commission Standard 60335-2-76. 
(3)  The electric charge produced by the fence upon contact shall not exceed energizer characteristics set forth in paragraph 22.108 and depicted in figure 102 of International Electrotechnical Commission Standard 60335-2-76. 
(4)  Electric fences shall be completely surrounded on the side facing the property exterior by a non-electrified fence or wall that is not less than six (6) feet in height and at least six (6) inches from the electric fence. 
(5)  Electric fences shall be clearly identified with warning signs that read "Warning—Electric Fence" or similar terms and which are posted at intervals of not less than fifty (50) feet with at least one (1) sign on each exterior perimeter side of the fence. 
(6)  No electric fence shall be installed until after certification from the building official for the city that the plans for the fence meet the requirements of this section. 
(7)  This section does not apply to professionally designed electrified devices installed near or under ground level for the purposes of keeping household pets on property. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 8-1-87; Code 1964, § 8.1-87; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 10-0020, 7-14-10; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 ) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; barbed wire, § 9-206 et seq.; electric fences to be used in mobile home parks, § 20-89. 
State Law reference— Restrictions on use of electric fences on agricultural lands, Code of Virginia, § 55-298.1 et seq.  
Sec. 24-41. - Body art and body art establishments. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Body art artist: Any person who performs the work or procedures involving invasive methods such as body piercing or tattooing to physically adorn the body of another. 
(2)  Body art establishment: Any establishment, place or premises in which body piercing or tattooing is offered or performed. 
(3)  Body art procedure: The practice of applying physical body adornment to an individual using invasive procedures or methods such as body piercing, tattooing, and other similar procedures. 
(4)  Body piercer: Any person who performs the work or act of body piercing. 
(5)  Body piercing: The act of penetrating the skin of a person to make a hole, mark or scar, generally permanent in nature. 
(6)  Body piercing establishment: Any establishment, place or premises in which body piercing is performed. 
(7)  Body piercing operator: A person who controls, operates, owns, conducts or manages any body piercing establishment, whether performing the work of body piercing or not. 
(8)  Ear piercing: The puncturing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with an instrument or mechanized ear-piercing system. 
(9)  Medical/hazardous waste: Means any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infections materials; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials during handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood and other potentially infectious materials, as defined in 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1030. 
(10)  Sharps: Any objects (sterile or contaminated) that may purposely or accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa, including, but not limited to, pre-sterilized, single-use needles, scalpel blades, razor blades, etc. 
(11)  Tattoo: To place any design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol or any other mark upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other substance resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin, including permanent make-up or permanent jewelry, by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. 
(12)  Tattoo artist: Any person who actually performs the work of tattooing. 
(13)  Tattoo establishment: Any place in which is offered or practiced the placing of designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other substance, resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin, including permanent make-up or permanent jewelry, by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. 
(14)  Tattoo operator: Any person who controls, operates, conducts or manages any tattoo establishment, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or not. 
(15)  Temporary body art event: A short-term event, festival or convention of one (1) but no more than five (5) days duration at which body art procedures and application are conducted. 
(16)  Temporary body art event operator: The person designated by the temporary body art event permit as responsible for the event. 
(b)  Compliance with section. No person shall control, operate or conduct or manage any body art establishment, temporary body art event or perform tattooing or body piercing on any person without complying with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Violations. Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Any second or subsequent violation of this section shall be punished as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to medical doctors, veterinarians, registered nurses or any other medical services personnel, licensed pursuant to Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia, when the tattoo or body piercing is applied to identify the location of a lesion, when made necessary by reconstructive surgery, to identify an animal with a code number or other identifier or to perform a valid medical or therapeutic function as determined by the health department. This section shall apply to personnel licensed pursuant to Title 54.1, and tattoo artists working under their directions, when the tattoo is applied for elective cosmetic reasons such as "permanent makeup." 
(e)  Permit required. 
(1)  No person shall control, operate, conduct or manage any body art establishment, whether actually performing the work of body art or not, without first obtaining a permit from the health department. Such an application for a permit shall be made on an application form provided by the city manager or his designee. The permit shall be clearly displayed to the public in the body art establishment at all times when the body art establishment is open for business. 
(2)  If a body art operator controls, operates, conducts, or manages more than one (1) body art establishment, the operator shall obtain and pay for a separate permit for each body art establishment located in Hampton. If there is a change in ownership, the body art operator must obtain a new permit, and pay the permit fee, prior to commencing business under the new ownership. 
(3)  The permit fee shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a one-year licensing period from January 1 to December 31. All permits issued during the course of a calendar year shall expire December 31 of that year, regardless of the date issue. For any person required to obtain a permit under the provision of this section after the first day of January, the permit fee shall be prorated as follows: between January 1 and on or before March 31, the full permit fee shall be paid; between April 1 and on or before June 30, three-fourths (¾) of the permit fee shall be paid; between July 1 and on or before September 30, one-half (½) of the permit fee shall be paid; and after September 30 of the licensing year, one-fourth (¼) of the permit fee shall be paid. 
(4)  All body art-related procedures shall be carried out in a clean, safe and sanitary manner as approved by the health department so as to minimize the potential for disease transmission. The health department is authorized to revoke a permit to operate a body art establishment upon fourteen (14) calendar days written notice whenever it determines the body art establishment is in violation of this section to a sufficient degree that it presents a significant risk to the public health. The operator of the body art establishment may request a hearing of the department within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of the written notice in order to appeal the permit revocation. The department is further authorized to suspend the permit immediately for imminent health hazards to include, but not be limited to lack of water, inoperable toilet facilities, loss of electric power, or significant damage from fire or storm. 
(f)  Body art operators and body art artists. 
(1)  No body art operator shall employ a body art artist (including himself if he works as a body art artist) until the artist has been vaccinated against hepatitis B. Prior to beginning work, the body art artist shall present a copy of his medical record or other documentation from a licensed health care provider or immunization clinic, which demonstrates that he has been immunized against hepatitis B. The body art operator shall retain this document, or a copy of it, and present it to the health department when requested and when requesting or renewing a permit. 
(2)  A body art artist may begin work as a body art artist when he has received a single dose of hepatitis B vaccine. However, the body art artist shall continue to work only if he completes the immunization series for hepatitis B within six (6) months of the date of the initial vaccination dose. If a body art artist does not complete the series within this time period, he shall cease work as a body artist at the end of that period. He may resume work only upon presentation of documentation indicating that he has completed the vaccine series. 
(3)  The body art operator shall be responsible for ensuring and documenting that all body art artists in his employment, (including himself if he works as a body art artist), are in compliance with this hepatitis B vaccination requirement and blood borne pathogen training. The body art operator shall further be responsible for notifying the health department in writing of any body art artist who fails to complete the hepatitis B vaccination series. 
(4)  No body art artist known to have chronic hepatitis B, chronic hepatitis C, or HIV infection shall be allowed to work as a tattoo artist. All body art artists shall complete annual blood borne pathogen training approved by the health department prior to beginning work. The body art artist and/or the body art operator shall present a certificate documenting that the artist has received this training, upon request by the health department, and shall display said certificate in public view. 
(g)  Body art establishment. 
(1)  All areas of the body art establishment shall be constructed and maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary manner in compliance with all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, codes and ordinances of the city and the Commonwealth of Virginia. The plans for a body art establishment, or for its renovation, shall be submitted to the health department for its approval prior to issuing a permit. 
(2)  Sleeping rooms, or arrangements for sleeping such as cots or beds, shall not be permitted in the body art establishment. 
(3)  All walls, ceilings and floors shall be smooth and easily cleaned. The floors shall not be carpeted, and neither rugs nor fabrics of any kind shall be placed on the floors. Walls and ceilings shall be painted a light color. Ceiling tiles shall be smooth, non-porous and have vinyl faces. The floors shall be swept and mopped daily. The floors shall not be swept or cleaned while body piercing or tattooing is occurring. All doors shall be tight fitting and self-closing, and all windows able to open shall be screened, to prevent the entrance of vermin. 
(4)  Adequate light, at least twenty-foot candles on all surfaces and fifty-foot candles in the location and at the level or surface where the body art is actually applied, and ventilation shall be provided. All lights shall be properly shielded to prevent breakage. 
(5)  Adequate toilet and hand-washing facilities, with hot and cold running water, shall be available and accessible in the body art establishment at all times, and shall be separate and isolated from the business area in which body art is performed. These facilities shall be for the use of customers and personnel of the body art establishment. Toilets and washing facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all times. A separate hand sink shall be provided within the body art area for use by the body art artist(s). The hand sink shall be properly provided with hot and cold running water, hand soap, and individual paper towels in a dispenser. Smoking, eating, drinking or applying make-up is prohibited in the area in which body art is performed. 
(6)  All work surfaces shall be cleaned and disinfected promptly after each customer's body art application has been completed. Other surfaces or materials with gross blood shall also be cleaned and disinfected, or disposed of as infectious waste. All areas of the body art establishment shall be accessible for inspection by the health department and its authorized representatives. The health department is authorized to conduct unannounced inspections of body art establishments. 
(7)  All inks, dyes, pigments, tools and jewelry shall be specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
(8)  Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper or plastic cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, such cups and their contents shall be discarded in the manner prescribed in the next subsection. 
(9)  Only disposable, single-use instruments shall be used to apply tattoos. These instruments shall not be reused, and shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable laws. Single-use items shall not be used on more than one (1) client for any reason. The tattoo operator shall maintain invoices or other records sufficient to demonstrate that he has obtained and used an appropriate number of instruments to apply the tattoos listed in his log book. These invoices or other documentation shall be presented to the health department at anytime the department requests them. 
(10)  Tattooing instruments and equipment that are used repeatedly and are not available as disposable items shall be sterilized prior to each use, and maintained in a sterile condition until used. All instruments and jewelry used in body piercing shall be sterilized prior to each use, and maintained in a sterile condition until used. 
(11)  Sterilization of instruments and equipment shall be accomplished by exposure to live steam in an autoclave that is operated in accordance with manufacturer's instructions to obtain that sterilization. A copy of the procedures recommended by the manufacturer for the operation of the sterilization unit it shall be made available at the establishment for inspection by the health department. The body art operator shall be responsible for maintaining a log, which indicates that the autoclave has been checked during each cycle and meets the aforementioned standards. Each load of instruments and equipment shall contain an indicator that demonstrates that the proper temperature has been achieved. A biological indicator shall be used at least every thirty (30) days to demonstrate that the procedure used is capable of killing bacteria. Printed documentation from the testing company shall be presented to the health department at anytime the department requests them. The health department is authorized to approve alternative sterilization methods. 
(12)  The skin surface to be tattooed or pierced shall be cleaned and sanitized using processes and materials approved by the health department. All hazardous waste, body fluids, and medical waste of any kind shall be disposed of in accordance with the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality's Regulated Medical Waste Regulations, 9 VAC 20-120-10 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. After use, all single-use needles, razors, and other sharps shall be immediately disposed of in accordance with the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality's Regulated Medical Waste Regulations, 9 VAC 20-120-10 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. A copy of the contract with an approved medical waste disposal company must be provided to the health department. Receipts for pickup of hazardous and medical wastes shall be maintained and provided to the health department upon request. Such medical waste shall be disposed of at least once every thirty (30) days. Failure to dispose of such hazardous and medical wastes in accordance with this section may result in immediate suspension of the body art establishment's permit to operate. 
(13)  At no time shall there be any animals in the establishment except for those used as service animals by patrons with disabilities or by public officials in their official duties. 
(h)  Written records. 
(1)  The body art operator shall create and maintain a written record for each person who receives a body art procedure. This record shall contain the information listed below, and any additional information required by the health department. Such records shall be maintained for a minimum period for four (4) years, except if the patron is under eighteen (18) years of age, in which even these records shall be maintained for a minimum of four (4) years from the eighteenth birthday of said patron and shall include the following information: 
a.  Name, address, sex and date of birth of the person receiving the body art; 
b.  Date of body art procedure; 
c.  Physical location of the body art on the body, and a description of the body art; 
d.  Name, address and office telephone number of the person performing the body art; 
e.  Parent or legal guardian written consent form for minors; 
f.  Name and address of the manufacturer of the dyes used as well as identifying information about the dye solutions and types of dyes used, including lot numbers, colors and date of expiration. This information shall be made available and released to the customer and the health department upon request; and 
g.  Name and address of the manufacturer of the jewelry used in body piercing, description of the jewelry to include color, composition and shape. This information shall be made available and released to the customer and the health department upon request. 
(2)  At such time as the body art establishment ceases doing business or is removed from the city, copies of all such records shall be provided to the health department. If the body art establishment changes its name or has a change in ownership or management, it shall continue to maintain such records in accordance with this section. 
(i)  Body art customer. 
(1)  The skin surface to be tattooed and any jewelry to be used shall be cleaned and sanitized using processes and materials approved by the health department. No person, customer or patron having any skin infection or other disease of the skin in the area where the body art is to be applied, or within twelve (12) inches of that area shall have body art performed. No person, customer or patron having a generalized skin infection or other generalized disease of the skin shall have body art performed. No body art artist having any infection or disease on the skin on his hands, arms, face, or neck shall perform body art. All infections resulting from the practice of body art which become known to the body art operator shall promptly be reported to the health department by the person owning or in charge of the body art establishment, and the infected client shall be referred to a physician by the body art establishment operator or body art artist. 
(2)  The body art artist shall provide, each customer who receives body art with a written instruction sheet detailing the procedures the customer should use to take care of the body art, indications that the body art may have become infected, a recommendation to have a possibly infected piece of body art evaluated by a physician or other licensed health care professional, and instructions to report the possibly infected body art to the health department. 
(3)  No body art shall be performed on any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without the written consent of his or her parent or guardian, and such written consent shall be kept on file for at least four (4) years at the body art establishment from the eighteenth birthday of the minor. Written proof of age shall be obtained for all customers twenty-one (21) years of age or younger before the body art is done. Written proof of age shall be photocopied and kept by the body art operator. All customers under eighteen (18) years of age shall be accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Both customer and parent or guardian shall sign a consent form and a driver's license or other appropriate form of identification of both the customer and the parent or guardian shall be photocopied and attached to the consent form. 
(4)  Body art artists and body art operators shall refuse service to any person whom the body art artist or body art operator knows, or has reason to believe, is intoxicated or under the influence of illegal or controlled drugs. 
(5)  No person shall state or imply in any advertisement or publication, written or oral and prepared or uttered for the purpose of soliciting business, that the body art establishment is endorsed, or approved by the city or by any of its departments. 
(6)  The body art artist shall wash his or her hands between customers, between working on different parts of the body on the same person, after removing gloves and after interruption of service. The body art artist shall wear protective, disposable latex or vinyl gloves while performing body art and shall wear a new pair of gloves for each client and when working on different parts of the same client. 
(7)  The name, address and telephone number of the body art establishment shall be on the heading of all waivers, care sheets, consent and other forms utilized by the body art establishment. 
(8)  The body art operator shall file with the health department annually with the license application and any renewal thereof a list of the following information for each employee: Name, permit number, home address, home phone number, and position or job title. With respect to the body art artists, the body art operator shall also submit proof of vaccination as required by subsection (f)(2). The body art operator shall amend the list accordingly and submit it to the health department immediately upon the addition of an employee or termination of an employee. 
(9)  No body art artist or body art operator shall tattoo or pierce the genitals, areola, nipple, pubic area, or buttocks of any member of the opposite sex, nor shall any male body art artist or male body art operator tattoo or pierce the breasts of any female if the tattoo or piercing is outside the areola and nipple. 
(10)  No body art artist shall perform body art on any client unless the body art artist complies with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's guidelines for the "Universal Blood and Body Fluid Precautions" and provides the client with the following disclosure: 
a.  Body art is an invasive procedure in which the skin is penetrated by a foreign object. 
b.  If proper sterilization and antiseptic procedures are not followed by body art artists, there is an increased risk of transmission of blood borne pathogens and other infections, including, but not limited to, human immunodeficiency viruses and hepatitis B and C viruses. Proper sterilization and antiseptic procedures reduce the risk of blood borne pathogen transmission but cannot entirely eliminate the risk. 
c.  Body art may cause allergic reactions in persons sensitive to dyes or the metals used in ornamentation. 
d.  Body art may involve discomfort or pain for which appropriate anesthesia cannot be legally made available by the body art artist unless such person holds the appropriate license from a Virginia Health Regulatory Board. 
(j)  Temporary body art events—Permit, requirements, responsibilities of event promoter. 
(1)  No person shall control, operate, conduct or manage a temporary body art event, whether actually performing the work of body art or not, without first obtaining a temporary body art event permit from the health department. The application for such a permit shall be made on an application form provided by the city manager or his designee. The permit shall be clearly displayed to the public at the temporary body art event at all times when the temporary event venue is open for business. The fee for a temporary body art event permit is five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(2)  A complete application for a temporary body art event permit must be received by the health department for review and approval at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the event. 
(3)  An application for a temporary body art event permit will be deemed complete if all blanks have been filled in with accurate information, including the name, address and other information for the temporary body art event promoter and the permit fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) accompanies the application. 
(4)  Only single-use, disposable equipment and supplies shall be used by artists for such events. 
(5)  All body art artists participating in a temporary body art event must possess a valid current permanent or interim license from the Commonwealth of Virginia Board of Cosmetology. A copy of that license shall be posted in plain view within the body art booth at all times during the event. 
(6)  All body art artists participating in a temporary body art event must provide proof of current bloodborne pathogen training, completed within the last twelve (12) months, to the health department upon request. 
(7)  There shall be no eating, drinking or use of tobacco products within the interior area of the body art booth. 
(8)  All temporary body art events shall be conducted inside of a closed, permanent structure that complies with subsection (g) of this section unless otherwise approved by the health department. Each vendor booth, where a body art shop, company or individual artist displays or performs their body art functions, must be a minimum of seventy-five (75) square feet in area. Vendor booths where more than one (1) body art artist is working must have an additional seventy-five (75) square feet of area for each body art station therein. A body art station consists of the table or chair in which a patron rests while receiving their body art and the equipment, supplies and chair used by the body art artist within a vendor booth. 
(9)  Conveniently located handwashing facilities shall be provided and shall be supplied with liquid soap, paper towels, and tempered water. Each handwashing station may service up to two (2) vendor booths provided that they are easily accessible, free of obstructions and properly maintained and supplied at all times. 
(10)  The temporary body art event promoter shall: 
a.  Provide copies of the client application/consent form, written client record form, aftercare information sheet and the disclosure form at least fourteen (14) days prior to the event to the health department for review. Such forms shall comply with the requirements set forth in subsections (h) and (i) of this section; 
b.  Provide a complete list of the participants (body art artists), the name of the contact person for each artist and contact information for that artist at least seven (7) days prior to the event; 
c.  Provide a copy of a contract with an approved biohazard disposal company for the event to the health department at least seven (7) days prior to the event; 
d.  Provide a complete diagram of the event layout to the health department with each booth properly labeled identifying the occupant at least seven (7) days prior to the event; 
e.  Provide to the health department, within thirty (30) days following the event, copies of all client record forms to be kept as medical records of the event; 
f.  Ensure compliance with all other applicable local, state and federal laws for this event. 
(11)  If at any time during the event, an individual artist or booth operation is in violation of this section, the health director, or his designee, may require that artist or booth cease at the event. 
(Ord. No. 1340, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 1342, 2-12-03; Ord. No. 1396, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 13-0002, 1-9-13 ) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Authority to tattoo parlors and body-piercing salons, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-912; tattooing or body piercing of minors, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-371.3.  
Sec. 24-42. - Dropping advertising or other matter from aircraft. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to drop any advertising, promotional or solicitation paper, leaflet or device, or any other matter, from aircraft flown over the city. 
(Ord. No. 216, Code 1964, § 2A-3; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; advertising, Ch. 3; solicitations, Ch. 31.  
Sec. 24-43. - Obstructing or polluting drains or waterways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, in any natural drain or natural waterway in the city, any material or substances which obstruct, stop, interfere with or are likely to obstruct, stop or interfere with the natural flow of the water along, through and over such natural drain or waterway, or to pollute or cause to be polluted the waters in, on and along such natural drain or waterway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, in, on or about any drain constructed or maintained by the city, which shall include storm sewers, mosquito-control ditches and other constructions and drains maintained by the city, any material or substance causing or likely to cause any obstruction or stoppage of the use of such drains and ditches. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-11; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11; waterways generally, Ch. 7. 
State Law reference— Obstructing or contaminating state waters, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-194.1; throwing trash, etc., into or obstructing river, creek, stream or swamp, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-194.2.  
Sec. 24-44. - Motion pictures; posting of a manager. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of presenting motion pictures, where a charge is made for admission, shall post prominently therein the name and address of a person residing in the locality who is the manager of such business. 
(b)  The word "manager" as used in this section shall be construed to mean any person designated by the business who is responsible for the presentation of the motion pictures. 
(Ord. No. 758, § 27.1-15.1, 8-24-83; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 24-45. - Pharmacist required for certain businesses selling proprietary medicines; penalty. 
(a)  The owner or proprietor of any establishment which has gross sales of proprietary medicines, nonprescription drugs and over-the-counter drugs exceeding seventy-five (75) percent of total gross sales shall employ a registered pharmacist on the premises during business hours. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. "Person" includes individual, partnership, corporation, association, governmental agency, trust, or other institution or entity. 
(Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-46. - Repealed.  
Sec. 24-47. - Sale or distribution of any imitation controlled substance—Constitutes a nuisance. 
The sale or distribution of any imitation controlled substance, as defined in Code of Virginia § 18.2-248, to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age, shall constitute a nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 27.1-44.3, 11-9-83; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Manufacturing, selling, giving, distributing, or possessing with intent to manufacture, sell, give, or distribute a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-248.  
Sec. 24-48. - Unlawful use of laser pointing devices. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, laser pointing devices is defined as any handheld device which emits light amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation which is visible to the human eye. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without good cause, to focus, point or shine the beam of a laser pointing device directly or indirectly into the eyes of another person or to focus, point or shine the beam of a laser pointing device in such a manner as to harass or annoy another person. 
(c)  Violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1233, 1-13-99; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Pointing laser at law-enforcement officer, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57.01.  
Sec. 24-49. - Urinating in public. 
Any person who urinates or defecates in public or in a place open to public view, including any street, alley, sidewalk or park, except in public restroom facilities, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1193, 9-10-97; Ord. No. 1240, 2-24-99; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07) 
State Law reference— Indecent exposure, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387; obscene sexual display, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387.1  
Secs. 24-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-0002 , adopted March 8, 2017, repealed § 24-50, which pertained to aggressive soliciting and derived from Ord. No. 1486, adopted August 15, 2007.  
Secs. 24-51—24-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CRIMINAL BLIGHT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-0010 , adopted Aug. 8, 2018, changed the title of art. II from "Drug Blight" to "Criminal Blight". 
 
Sec. 24-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings, unless the content clearly indicates otherwise: 
Affidavit means the affidavit sworn to under oath prepared by the chief of police, or his designee, in accordance with subsection 24-112(b)(1). 
Commercial sex acts means any specific activities that would constitute a criminal act under Article 3 (§ 18.2-344 et. seq.) of Chapter 8 of Title 18.2 or a substantially similar ordinance under Article I of this chapter if a criminal charge were to be filed against the individual perpetrator of such criminal activity. 
Controlled substance means illegally obtained controlled substances or marijuana, as defined in § 54.1-3401 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
Corrective action means (i) taking specific actions with respect to the buildings or structures on property that are reasonably expected to abate criminal blight on such real property, including the removal, repair or securing of any building, wall or other structure, or (ii) changing specific policies, practices, and procedures of the real property owner that are reasonably expected to abate criminal blight on real property. The chief of police, or his designee shall prepare an affidavit on behalf of the city that states specific actions to be taken on the part of the property owner that the city determines are necessary to abate the identified criminal blight on such real property and that do not impose an undue financial burden on the owner. 
Criminal blight means a condition existing on real property that endangers the public health or safety of residents of the city and is caused by (i) the regular presence on the property of persons under the influence of controlled substances; (ii) the regular use of the property for the purpose of illegally possessing, manufacturing or distributing controlled substances; (iii) the regular use of the property for engaging in commercial sex acts; or (iv) repeated acts of the malicious discharge of a firearm within any building or dwelling that would constitute a criminal act under § 18.2-279 or a substantially similar ordinance under Article 2 of Chapter 40 of Hampton City Code. 
Owner means the record owner of real property. 
Property means real property. 
(Ord. No. 1161, 2-28-96; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 18-0010 , adopted 8-8-18)  
Sec. 24-112. - Corrective action for buildings and other structures harboring illegal drug use or other criminal activity; abatement. 
(a)  This section is adopted pursuant to the powers vested in the city by § 15.2-907 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended 
(b)  The city may require the owner of real property to undertake corrective action with respect to property which has been determined to be the situs of criminal blight, or the city may undertake corrective action in accordance with the procedures described herein: 
(1)  The chief of police, or his designee, shall execute and forward to the director of community development an affidavit, citing this section and § 15.2-907 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, to the effect (i) that criminal blight exists on the property and in the manner described therein; (ii) the city has used diligence without effect to abate the criminal blight; and (iii) the criminal blight constitutes a present threat to the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  The director of community development, or his designee, shall then send a notice to the owner of the property, to be sent by (i) certified mail, return receipt requested; (ii) hand delivery; or (iii) overnight delivery by a commercial service or the United States Postal Service, to the last address listed for the owner on the city's assessment records for the property, together with a copy of such affidavit, advising that (a) the owner has up to thirty (30) days from the date thereof to undertake corrective action to abate the criminal blight described in such affidavit, and (b) the city will, if requested to do so, assist the owner in determining and coordinating the appropriate corrective action to abate the criminal blight described in such affidavit. If the owner notifies the city in writing within the 30-day period that additional time to complete the corrective action is needed, the city shall allow such owner an extension for an additional 30-day period to take such corrective action. 
(3)  If appropriate corrective action is not undertaken during such thirty-day period, or during the extension if such extension is granted by the city, the director of community development, or his designee, shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, an additional notice to the owner of the property, at the address stated in subsection b(2), stating (i) the date on which the city may commence corrective action to abate the criminal blight on the property or (ii) the date on which the city may commence legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a court order to require that the owner take such corrective action or, if the owner does not take corrective action, a court order to revoke the certificate of occupancy for such property, which date shall be no earlier than fifteen (15) days after the date of mailing of the notice. Such notice shall also reasonably describe any corrective action contemplated to be taken by the city. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner shall have a right, within 20 days after mailing notice by the city, to seek judicial relief, and the city shall initiate no corrective action while a proper petition for relief is pending before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  If the city undertakes corrective action with respect to the property after complying with the provisions of subsection (b)(3), the costs and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to, and paid by, the owner of such property and may be collected by the city as taxes are collected. 
(d)  Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property has been assessed and that remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property with the same priority as liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in articles 3 (§ 58.1-3940 et seq.) and 4 (§ 58.1-3965 et seq.) of chapter 39 of title 58.1, Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
(e)  A criminal blight proceeding pursuant to this section shall be a civil proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction in the Commonwealth. 
(f)  If the owner of real property takes timely corrective action pursuant to this section, the city shall deem the criminal blight abated, shall close the proceeding without any charge or cost to the owner, and the director of community development, or his designee, shall promptly provide written notice to the owner that the proceeding has been terminated satisfactorily. The closing of a proceeding shall not bar the city from initiating a subsequent proceeding if the criminal blight recurs. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge, diminish, limit, or waive any rights or remedies of an owner of property at law or any permits or nonconforming rights the owner may have under Chapter 22 of Title 15.2, Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended or under this ordinance. If an owner in good faith takes corrective action, and despite having taken such action, the specific criminal blight identified in the affidavit of the city persists, such owner shall be deemed to be in compliance with this section. Further, if a tenant in a rental dwelling unit, or a tenant on a manufactured home lot, is the cause of criminal blight on such property and the owner in good faith initiates legal action and pursues the same by requesting a final order by a court of competent jurisdiction, as otherwise authorized by Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, against such tenant to remedy such noncompliance or to terminate the tenancy, such owner shall be deemed in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1161, 2-28-96; Ord. No. 1263, 11-17-99; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 18-0010 , 8-8-18) 
State Law reference— Authority to require removal, repair, etc., of buildings and other structures harboring illegal drug use or other criminal activity, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907 et seq.  
ARTICLE III. - GRAFFITI 
 
Sec. 24-113. - Definition of "graffiti." 
"Graffiti" shall mean the unauthorized application by any means of any writing, painting, drawing, etching, scratching or marking of an inscription, word, figure or design of any type on any public or private building or other real estate or personal property owned, operated or maintained by a governmental entity or agency or instrumentality thereof or by any private person, firm, or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 1211, 5-27-98; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 24-114. - Graffiti prohibited; criminal penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or damage by application of graffiti any public buildings, facilities or other property, or any private buildings, facilities or other property if the damage to the private property is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(b)  Any person convicted of a violation of subsection (a) shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Upon a finding of guilt in a case tried before the court without a jury where the violation constitutes a first offense, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt, upon motion of defendant, may defer further proceedings and place defendant on probation pending completion of a plan of community service work. If defendant completes the community service work as the court prescribes, the court may discharge the defendant and dismiss the proceedings against him. Such discharge and dismissal procedure under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and operates as a conviction only for the purposes of applying this article in subsequent proceedings. If the defendant fails or refuses to complete community service as ordered by the court, the court may make final disposition of the case as otherwise provided. Any fine imposed pursuant to conviction of a minor for violations of this section shall be assessed against the minor and such minor's parents or legal guardian. 
(c)  Community service work prescribed by the court under subsection (b) shall include, to the extent feasible, the repair, restoration, or replacement of any damage or defacement to property within the city, and may include clean-up, beautification, landscaping or other appropriate community service within the city. 
(d)  Community service work prescribed by the court under subsection (b) shall be performed under the supervision of the city manager or his/her designee, who shall report on such work to the court imposing the community service work requirement at such times and in such manner as the court may direct. 
(e)  At or before the time of sentencing under this section, the court shall receive and consider any plan for making restitution or performing community service submitted by the defendant, as well as the recommendations of the city's community service supervisor concerning the plan. 
(f)  No person convicted of a violation of this article shall be placed on probation or have his sentence suspended unless such person shall make at least partial restitution for such property damage or is compelled to perform community services, or both, as is more particularly set forth in Code of Virginia, § 19.2-305.1. 
(Ord. No. 1211, 5-27-98; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 24-115. - Parental liability for cost of graffiti removal. 
In the event graffiti is applied to any public property by a minor who is living with either or both parents or a legal guardian, the city may institute an action and recover from the parents of the minor, or either of them, or from the legal guardian the costs for damages suffered by reason of the willful destruction of, or damage to, public property by the minor. The action by the city shall be subject to any limitation on the amount of recovery set forth in § 8.01-43 of the Code of Virginia or other applicable state law. Any recovery action brought by an owner for damages to private property by reason of graffiti shall be subject to the limitation set forth in § 8.01-44 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1211, 5-27-98; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 24-116. - Graffiti declared a nuisance. 
The existence of graffiti within the city limits in violation of this article is expressly declared a public nuisance, and is subject to the removal and abatement procedures specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1211, 5-27-98; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 24-117. - Removal of graffiti. 
(a)  The city manager or a designated representative of the city manager is authorized to undertake or contract for the removal or repair of the defacement of any public building, wall, fence or other structure by the application of graffiti. 
(b)  The city manager or a designated representative is also authorized to undertake or contract for the removal or repair of the defacement by graffiti of any private building, wall, fence or other structure visible from any public right-of-way in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Prior to such removal of graffiti from private property, the city manager or a designated representative shall issue to the property owner, by regular mail sent to the last address listed for the owner in city property assessment records, a notice which states: the street address and legal description of the property; that the property has been determined by the city to constitute a graffiti nuisance; that the owner must take corrective action to abate the nuisance created by such graffiti within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice; and that if the graffiti is not removed within the fifteen-day period, the city will begin removal procedures, the cost of which shall be charged to the homeowner. The notice shall further advise the owner of the right to challenge the city's determination and proposed action by requesting a meeting with a designated city official identified in the notice within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice. The city shall initiate no corrective actions while a request for such a meeting or the outcome of such a meeting is pending. The determination of the designated city official following the requested meeting shall be final. 
(2)  If no corrective action is taken by the property owner within the fifteen-day period provided above and there is no request to challenge the city's determination within that period, the city manager or a designee of the city manager shall send by regular mail an additional notice to the property owner. The second notice shall conform to the requirements of the first notice as set forth in subsection (b)(1) above and shall also state the date on which the city will commence corrective action to remove the graffiti on the property, which date shall be no earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing the second notice. Such additional notice shall also reasonably describe the corrective action contemplated to be taken by the city. Where the property owner fails to abate the nuisance within fifteen (15) days after issuance of the second notice, the city manager or a designated representative of the city manager is authorized to undertake removal efforts forthwith. 
(3)  Before entering upon private property for the purpose of graffiti removal, the city shall attempt to obtain the consent of the property owner, occupant or other responsible party. 
(c)  Where a structure defaced by graffiti is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of the graffiti by the city is authorized only after securing the consent of an authorized representative of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1211, 5-27-98; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 24-118. - Emergency removal of graffiti. 
If the city manager or his designee determines that any graffiti is an immediate danger to public health, safety or welfare and is unable to provide notice by personal service after at least two (2) attempts to do so, then forty-eight (48) hours after the later of (1) mailing notice to the property owner or other responsible party and (2) posting notice in a conspicuous place on the property, the city may remove or cause the graffiti to be removed at its expense. 
(Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07)  
Sec. 24-119. - Assessment of costs against property for removal of graffiti. 
(a)  If the city undertakes corrective action to remove graffiti from private property after complying with the notice provisions of subsection 24-117(b), the total cost for such removal and related repairs shall be chargeable to and paid by the property owner, and may be collected as a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates in the manner in which city taxes and levies are collected. 
(b)  Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property has been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property with the same priority as liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as such liens. 
(Ord. No. 1211, 5-27-98; Ord. No. 1466, 3-28-07)  
Chapter 25 - PARADES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 34. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Violations of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting or limiting in any way the city attorney or other officers of the city from applying to an appropriate court for equitable or other relief. 
(Code 1964, § 25.1-16[k]; Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Ord. No. 1451, 12-14-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 25-2. - Exceptions from chapter. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  The United States Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines and Coast Guard, the military forces of the state and the police and fire division of the city. 
(3)  Lawful picketing. 
(Code 1964, § 25.1-16[c]; Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Ord. No. 1451, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 25-3. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the word "parade" means any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, demonstration or procession of any type or any similar display in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place or public property in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 25.1-16[a]; Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Ord. No. 1451, 12-14-06)  
Secs. 25-4—25-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 25-16. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, participate in, assist, organize or start any parade, unless a permit for such parade has been obtained from the chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 25.1-16[b]; Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Ord. No. 1111, 1-26-94; Ord. No. 1451, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 25-17. - Application. 
(a)  Any person may apply to the chief of police for a permit to hold a parade. The application shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the chief of police not less than ten (10) days before the proposed date of the parade and shall state, on forms provided by the chief of police, the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade. 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the responsible officer of such organization, to include the name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson. 
(3)  The date and hours when the parade is to be conducted. 
(4)  The route, by streets and public places, to be traveled, the starting point, the termination point and the location of the speakers' platforms. 
(5)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade. 
(6)  The location, by streets or public places, of any assembly areas for such parade. 
(7)  The time for assembly by units of the parade. 
(8)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
(9)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(10)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to be a fair determination as to whether or not a permit should be issued and to assure an orderly and safe parade. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have the authority to consider any application under this section which is filed less than ten (10) days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted, giving due consideration to the urgency of the request and proper planning needs. 
(Code 1964, § 25.1-16[d, e]; Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Ord. No. 1111, 1-26-94; Ord. No. 1451, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 25-18. - Issuance or denial generally. 
(a)  The chief of police shall act upon an application for a parade permit, by issuing or denying the permit, within five (5) days after the filing of the application. 
(b)  The chief of police shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The hours of operation or conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles in the parade, or at assembly points, will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such parade route or assembly areas. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment from a station or en route to a fire. 
(4)  The conduct of the parade, by reason of its hours of operation or line of march, is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to unreasonably interfere with the right of quiet enjoyment by the citizens in the use of their property, to create a riot, disturbance or disorder, to cause a public nuisance or to result in a violation of law. 
(5)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade will not unreasonably deny to other areas of the city the public services and protection normally provided. 
(c)  If the chief of police disapproves an application for a parade permit, he shall mail to the applicant, at the address stated on the application and within five (5) days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1964, § 25.1-16[f, g]; Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Ord. No. 1111, 1-26-94; Ord. No. 1451, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 25-19. - Issuance, acceptance and effect of alternate permit. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, is empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that requested by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept such an alternate permit shall, after notice of the action by the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements and shall have the effect of a parade permit granted under this article. 
(Code 1964, § 25.1-16[h]; Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Ord. No. 1111, 1-26-94; Ord. No. 1451, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 25-20. - Contents. 
Each parade permit issued under this article shall state: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Approximate minimum speed. 
(3)  Approximate maximum speed. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be occupied by the parade (whether all or only part). 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade, in miles or fractions thereof. 
(7)  Conclusion time. 
(8)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this chapter and the orderly conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1964, § 25.1-16[i]; Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Ord. No. 1111, 1-26-94; Ord. No. 1451, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 25-21. - Compliance with directions and conditions; to be carried by leader. 
Every person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairman or other person heading or leading the parade shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1964, § 25.1-16[j]; Ord. No. 676, 12-10-80; Ord. No. 1451, 12-14-06)  
Chapter 26 - PARKS, RECREATION AND LEISURE SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-0004, adopted March 9, 2016, amended ch. 26 to change the title from "Parks and Recreation" to "Parks, Recreation and Leisure Services." 
Charter reference— Authority of city relative to recreation facilities, § 2.07. 
Cross reference— Boats, beaches and waterways, Ch. 7; operation of mobile food service facilities in parks, § 15-141; parades, Ch. 25; subdividers to make available, for public acquisition, lands for park and playground purposes, § 35-83. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to establish and maintain parks, recreation facilities, playgrounds, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1806 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 26-2. - Definition. 
When used in this Code, the phrase "parks and recreation" shall be synonymous with the phrase "parks, recreation and leisure services" when used to describe the department established by section 26-3 and the director thereof. 
When used in this chapter, the term "public park" shall be construed to include, but not be limited to, all golf courses owned by or under the jurisdiction of the city and all rules and regulations embodied in this chapter shall apply to such golf courses unless, by their nature, they could have no such application. 
(Code 1964, § 27A-4; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 458; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16)  
Sec. 26-3. - Department of parks, recreation and leisure services generally. 
(a)  There is hereby established a department of parks, recreation and leisure services. There shall be a director of parks, recreation and leisure services who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to designate the duties and responsibilities of the department of parks, recreation and leisure services. The city manager is further authorized to assign or reassign the care, management and supervision of the public grounds, buildings or areas used for, or designated for use for, parks, recreation and leisure services. 
(Code 1964, §§ 27A-1—27A-3; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 1487, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16) 
Charter reference— Authority to establish above department, § 2.07.  
Sec. 26-4. - Responsibilities of the director of parks, recreation and leisure services. 
The director of parks, recreation and leisure services shall be charged with the care, supervision, management and maintenance of all public parks, public playgrounds, public beaches, public recreation areas and such other areas belonging to the city or its agencies as may be directed by the city manager. The director of parks, recreation and leisure services shall formulate, supervise and control the recreational programs sponsored or put on by the city. 
The director of parks, recreation and leisure services shall be responsible for the supervision and control of athletic leagues which are recognized or sponsored by the city, for the promotion and formulation of public recreational entertainment programs for the people of the city and generally for the encouragement and provision of public recreation for the welfare of all the people of the city. 
The director of parks, recreation and leisure services shall also be authorized to adopt rules and regulations in order to provide for the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city in the areas under his supervision, authority and control, and to establish fees for use of the facilities and services for which he has responsibility. 
(Code 1964, §§ 27A-4, 27A-5; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 458; Ord. No. 865, 7-8-87; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 1487, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 10-0008, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16)  
Sec. 26-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1487, adopted August 15, 2007, repealed § 26-5, which pertained to responsibilities of director of recreation. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Secs. 26-6—26-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS GOVERNING PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-21. - Violation of article. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); and in addition such person shall be advised of the content of the section and requested to either comply with the section or leave the public area. In the event the person refuses to comply with the provisions of this section or to leave the area, such person shall be deemed to be trespassing and shall be prosecuted pursuant to section 24-33 of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing in subsection (a) above shall be deemed to bar a prosecution for the violation which prompted the making of the request pursuant to such subsection. 
(Ord. No. 722, 6-23-82; Ord. No. 755, § 27A-7, 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1230, 9-9-98; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide penalties for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429.  
Sec. 26-22. - Park hours. 
(a)  City parks shall be open to the public from 7:00 a.m., until sunset. "Sunset" shall be defined as the hour published in a local newspaper for the setting of the sun. In emergency situations, these hours may be modified by the director of parks, recreation and leisure services. 
(b)  For use of a park or admission to a park after the hours designated in this section, written permission must be obtained from the director of parks, recreation and leisure services. Any person or group using a park after hours, with the permission of the director, shall have available, while so using the park, written proof of the right to so use such park and shall display such proof to park authorities or police upon request. 
(c)  In determining whether to grant permission to a group or person to use a park during other than the hours designated in this section, the director of parks, recreation and leisure services shall consider the following: 
(1)  Whether the proposed use will involve unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense on the part of the city; 
(2)  Whether the proposed use will entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome police supervision by the city; 
(3)  Whether the proposed use will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the public health, welfare, safety or recreation; 
(4)  Whether the proposed use can be conducted without necessitating a general reopening of the park; and 
(5)  Whether the facilities desired have been previously reserved for another use at the date and hour requested. 
(d)  The above provisions shall not apply to Briarfield Park, which shall be a primarily active athletic facility. Approved tournaments and organized athletic events, as scheduled and staffed by the parks, recreation and leisure services department and which are permitted within the appropriate areas of the park, shall cease at 11:00 p.m. and the park shall be cleared of all persons and properly secured by 11:30 p.m. No special exceptions to this closure time shall be permitted. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, enter or remain in any park when the same is not open to the public, without the permission of the director of parks, recreation and leisure services given in accord with this section. 
(Code 1964, § 27A-7.1; Ord. No. 515; Ord. No. 654, 4-23-80; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 1487, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16)  
Sec. 26-23. - Golf course fees. 
(a)  The following definitions shall apply to this section: 
(1)  "Holidays" shall include, for each year, the following days: 
a.  New Year's Day (January first). 
b.  Lee-Jackson-King Day (third Monday in January). 
c.  Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February). 
d.  Memorial Day (last Monday in May). 
e.  Independence Day (July fourth). 
f.  Labor Day (first Monday in September). 
g.  Columbus Day (second Monday in October). 
h.  Veterans Day (November eleventh). 
i.  Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November). 
j.  Christmas Day (December twenty-fifth). 
(2)  "Senior citizens" shall mean those persons sixty (60) years of age and over and who provide proof of age. 
(3)  "Students" shall mean those persons enrolled in school through the senior high school level and who provide proof of such enrollment. 
(b)  The following green fees shall apply for use at The Woodlands Golf Course: 
(1)  Green fees: 
a.  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof on Monday through Friday ..... $17.00 
b.  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof on Saturday, Sunday and holidays ..... 19.00 
c.  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof on Monday through Friday ..... 13.00 
d.  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof on Saturday, Sunday and holidays ..... 14.00 
e.  Senior citizens ..... 10.00 
f.  Students ..... 5.00 
g.  Annual subscription fees ..... 500.00 
(2)  Annual subscription fees shall be available to senior citizens, sixty (60) years of age or older, who are residents of the City of Hampton, Virginia. The annual subscription entitles the golfer to unlimited rounds of golf Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. The subscription period will be on a fiscal-year basis. Beginning July 1, 1998, annual subscription fees will be discontinued. Senior citizens who pay the annual subscription fee for the July 1, 1997 to June 30, 1998, period by June 30, 1998, will be allowed to renew annually at the subscription rate. Those subscribers who fail to renew by June 30, 1998, or to renew in any subsequent year by June 30 will no longer be able to renew at the subscription rate. 
(3)  All senior citizen rates shall not apply on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. Student rates shall apply on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays after 1:00 p.m. 
(4)  Electric golf carts, pull carts and golf clubs are available for rental. The per person rental fee shall be as follows: 
a.  Electric golf carts: 
1.  Senior citizens: 
(a)  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... $9.00 
(b)  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 4.50 
2.  All others: 
(a)  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 10.00 
(b)  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 5.00 
b.  Pull carts: 
1.  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 2.00 
2.  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 1.00 
c.  Golf clubs: 
1.  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 15.00 
2.  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 8.00 
(c)  The following green fees shall apply for use at The Hamptons Golf Course: 
(1)  Green fees: 
a.  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof on Monday through Friday ..... $19.00 
b.  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof on Saturday, Sunday and holidays ..... 21.00 
c.  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof on Monday through Friday ..... 14.00 
d.  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof on Saturday, Sunday and holidays ..... 14.00 
e.  Senior citizens ..... 10.00 
f.  Students ..... 5.00 
(2)  All senior citizen rates shall not apply on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. Student rates shall apply on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays after 1:00 p.m. 
(3)  Electric golf carts, pull carts and golf clubs are available for rental. The per person rental fees shall be as follows: 
a.  Electric golf carts: 
1.  Senior citizens: 
(a)  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... $9.00 
(b)  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 4.50 
2.  All others: 
(a)  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 10.00 
(b)  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 5.00 
b.  Pull carts: 
1.  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 2.00 
2.  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 1.00 
c.  Golf clubs: 
1.  Eighteen (18) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 20.00 
2.  Nine (9) holes or any part thereof, per person ..... 10.00 
(d)  The city manager or his designee, after having conferred with the golf course advisory committee, shall have the authority to set and establish temporary off season rates, non-peak day rates, promotion golf packages, special rates for juniors and seniors and subscriptions to assure maximum use at rates competitive with other area golf courses during periods of decreased play and to maximize the use of the courses and golf carts. 
(Code 1964, § 27A-8.1; Ord. No. 458; Ord. No. 610, 2-14-79; Ord. No. 685, 3-25-81; Ord. No. 686, 4-28-81; Ord. No. 715, 3-24-82; Ord. No. 794, 3-13-85; Ord. No. 854, 4-8-87; Ord. No. 986, 11-28-90; Ord. No. 1039, 3-11-92; Ord. No. 1119, 5-11-94; Ord. No. 1167, 6-12-96; Ord. No. 1194, 9-10-97; Ord. No. 1216, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1299, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 1307, 6-13-01; Ord. No. 1315, 9-12-01; Ord. No. 1400, 5-11-05; Ord. No. 1405, 6-8-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Secs. 26-23.1—26-23.4. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26-23.5. - Golf course account. 
(a)  As used in this section, the words "golf course" shall refer to the City owned golf courses known as The Woodlands Golf Course and The Hamptons Golf Course. 
(b)  There shall be established within the financial records of the city a "golf course account" in which shall be recorded the appropriations made by the city council for the golf course and the revenue receipts of the golf course, including the admission taxes derived therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1228, 9-9-98; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-24. - Reservation of golf course for tournaments. 
The city's golf course may be reserved for private tournaments upon application to the golf course manager; provided, however, that should such tournament be held on two (2) consecutive days or should the scheduled tee-off times for any one day exceed four (4) hours, the application must be approved by the city manager prior to such tournament. 
(Code 1964, § 27A-8.2; Ord. No. 458; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-24.5. - Sewage disposal at campsite areas. 
All sewage and wastewater from camping units, including sink, shower, laundry, lavatory, commode and kitchen waste, shall be discharged or disposed of into an approved collecting or disposing system. All sewage and wastewater shall be discharged into a direct sewer hookup, held in the holding tank on camper-type units until disposal at an approved dump station, or held in a portable, sealed container until disposal at an approved dump station. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or for any person to dispose of or attempt to dispose of sewage or wastewater upon the surface of the ground, subsurface or into a stream, river, lake or into an open container or in any other unapproved manner. 
(Ord. No. 756, § 27A-8.3, 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1487, adopted August 15, 2007, repealed § 26-25, which pertained to camping. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 26-26. - Reservation of areas for use by specific individuals or groups. 
(a)  In order to provide for the orderly use of public parks and recreation areas, the director of parks, recreation and leisure services is hereby granted the authority to reserve certain areas, such as picnic shelters and ball fields, for use by specific individuals or groups of individuals for such periods of time as he shall deem proper. 
(b)  No person shall, after having been advised that an area has been reserved pursuant to this section, use or occupy such area during the time of such reservation, unless he is a member of the group for which the area is reserved. 
(Code 1964, §§ 27A-6, 27A-7; Ord. No. 181; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 482; Ord. No. 494; Ord. No. 688, 5-13-81; Ord. No. 755, § 27A-7(a), 6-22-83; Ord. No. 826, 5-28-86; Ord. No. 1145, 8-9-95; Ord. No. 1329, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 10-0008, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16)  
Sec. 26-26.1. - Park and outdoor facilities fees. 
(a)  Park and outdoor facilities fees are fees that cover the city's cost to provide basic support to events held at city parks and other city outdoor facilities. This support includes, but is not limited to, monitoring and supervising the event, janitorial services, trash collection, utilities, and routine site restoration when the activity is over. 
(b)  Event organizers who conduct events on public parks and outdoor facilities shall pay a "Park and Outdoor Facilities Fee" as set forth in the "City of Hampton Park and Outdoor Facilities Rental List," which shall be kept on file with the department of parks, recreation and leisure services. The director of parks, recreation and leisure services is authorized at his discretion to exempt certain events from paying park and outdoor facilities fees. 
(Ord. No. 1352, 5-14-03; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 15-0027 , 10-28-15; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16)  
Sec. 26-27. - Theatrical entertainments or other performances generally. 
No person shall give any theatrical entertainment or any performance required to be licensed under chapter 18.1 of this Code in a public park or recreation area of the city, except by written permission of the director of parks. 
(Code 1964, § 27A-7; Ord. No. 181; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 482; Ord. No. 494; Ord. No. 688, 5-13-81; Ord. No. 755, § 27A-7(b), 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Secs. 26-28—26-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-0030 , adopted October 28, 2015, repealed §§ 26-28 and 26-29, which pertained to live band performances and operation of radios, tape players, compact disc players, loud speakers or other devices used for the amplication of sound and derived from Code of 1964 § 27A-7; Ord. No. 181; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 482; Ord. No. 494; Ord. No. 688, adopted May, 13 1981; Ord. No. 755 § 27A-7(i); Ord. No. 1452, adopted December 14, 2006; Ord. No. 1487, adopted August 15, 2007; Ord. No. 12-0036, adopted August 8, 2012.  
Sec. 26-30. - Sales, solicitations, etc., generally. 
No person shall sell, solicit or beg within any public park or recreation area of the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in section 26-31 and except that bona fide civic or charitable organizations may solicit funds or sell merchandise subject to the written consent of the director of parks, recreation and leisure services. 
(Code 1964, § 27A-7; Ord. No. 181; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 482; Ord. No. 494; Ord. No. 688, 5-13-81; Ord. No. 755, § 27A-7(c), (c)(2), 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 1487, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16) 
Cross reference— Solicitations generally, Ch. 31.  
Sec. 26-31. - Operation of mobile food service facilities in specific parks and public areas. 
(a)  Mobile food service facilities, as approved by the director of public health according to the provisions of article IV of chapter 15 of this Code, shall be allowed to operate in areas designated as public parks and recreation areas, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  For the protection of the public the operation referred to in subsection (a) above shall be subject to the approval of, and reasonable regulation of, the director of parks, recreation and leisure services, such regulation to include the number of facilities per park or recreational area. 
(c)  The hours during which mobile food service facilities shall be allowed to operate under this section shall be from 10:00 a.m. to sunset, or as approved by the director of parks, recreation and leisure services. 
(d)  Each operator of a mobile food service facility operating pursuant to this section shall carry with him, at all times while operating his facility, written evidence of approval by the director of parks, recreation and leisure services. No such approval granted by the director of parks, recreation and leisure services shall be valid for a period longer than one year from the date granted. Any such approval shall be revocable or suspended by the director of parks, recreation and leisure services for violation of any ordinance of the city, law of the commonwealth or regulation issued under this section. 
(Code 1964, § 27A-7; Ord. No. 181; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 482; Ord. No. 494; Ord. No. 688, 5-13-81; Ord. No. 755, § 27A-7(c)(1), 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1011, 6-12-91; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16) 
Cross reference— Operation of mobile food service facilities in parks generally, § 15-141.  
Sec. 26-31.1. - Granting of concession rights by city. 
The city reserves the right to award concession rights to operate at Briarfield Park, Darling Stadium and The Hampton Golf Course. The concession contracts shall be subject to the direction, supervision and control of the city manager or his designee. All concessionaires shall comply with the health and safety requirements specified in chapter 15. The hours during which concessionaires can operate at these facilities are as follows: 
(1)  Briarfield Park: 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Hampton Golf Course: As needed. Darling Stadium: As needed. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 27A-7(c)(3), 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-32. - Posting advertisement; defacing or disturbing property. 
No person shall post or display any sign, banner or advertisement, willfully and maliciously destroy, deface, remove, write upon, mutilate or otherwise disturb any building, bench, ornament, tree, flower or other property in any public park, public building or any public recreational area in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 27A-7; Ord. No. 181; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 482; Ord. No. 494; Ord. No. 688, 5-13-81; Ord. No. 755, § 27A-7(d), 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06) 
Cross reference— Advertising generally, Ch. 3; damaging property generally, § 24-31. 
State Law reference— Damaging property, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137 et seq.  
Sec. 26-33. - Unlawful driving of vehicles. 
No person shall drive any motor vehicle, with the exception of emergency vehicles and other authorized vehicles, upon the grass footways or elsewhere in the public parks, public playgrounds, public beaches or public recreational areas of the city other than upon the roads or parking areas of such public parks, public playgrounds, public beaches or public recreational areas of the city; provided, that the director of parks, recreation and leisure services may permit the temporary use of such areas for parking of vehicles for the transportation of goods or materials for use on the premises. 
(Code 1964, § 27A-7; Ord. No. 181; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 482; Ord. No. 494; Ord. No. 688, 5-13-81; Ord. No. 755, § 27A-7(e), 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1130, 10-26-94; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 1487, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21.  
Sec. 26-34. - Unlawful riding or leading of horses. 
No person shall ride or lead any horse, pony or similar animal, normally used for recreation, in any public park or recreation area of the city, except on paths or areas specifically set aside for such use. 
(Code 1964, § 27A-7; Ord. No. 181; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 482; Ord. No. 494; Ord. No. 688, 6-13-81; Ord. No. 755, § 27A-7(f), 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06) 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 5.  
Sec. 26-35. - Fishing. 
No person shall fish in any fresh water ponds or lakes located in public parks or at the end of each of the cross streets which intersect Chesapeake Avenue between LaSalle Avenue and Manteo Avenue, inclusive; provided, however, that fishing may take place at such fresh water ponds or lakes at such times and in a manner as are permitted by regulations posted at such ponds or lakes, such regulations to bear the signature of the city manager. 
(Code 1964, § 27A-7; Ord. No. 181; Ord. No. 290; Ord. No. 482; Ord. No. 494; Ord. No. 688, 5-13-81; Ord. No. 755, § 27A-7(g), 6-22-83; Ord. No. 957, 12-13-89; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-36. - Obscene or indecent exposure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make an obscene display or exposure of his person or to intentionally display or expose his private parts in any public park, public beach or public recreation area of the city. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1230, 9-9-98; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06) 
State Law reference— Indecent exposure, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387; obscene sexual display, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387.1.  
Sec. 26-37. - Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No person shall drink alcoholic beverages, or carry on or about his person any containers of alcoholic beverages, while in or on the public parks, public playgrounds, public beaches or public recreation areas of the city, unless a permit authorizing the same is first obtained from the city's director of parks, recreation and leisure services and the state's department of alcoholic beverage control. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1230, 9-9-98; Ord. No. 1236, 1-27-99; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 1487, 8-15-07; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16)  
Sec. 26-38. - Application of article to public streets, public rights-of-way and grounds of public buildings subject to a special events permit. 
For the purposes of this article the term "public park and recreation area" shall include public streets, public rights-of-way and the grounds of all public buildings in the city when they are subject to a special events permit. 
(Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 12-0036, 8-8-12)  
Secs. 26-39—26-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HAMPTON TENNIS CENTER 
 
Sec. 26-51. - Designation and general duties of director of parks, recreation and leisure services. 
The director of parks, recreation and leisure services (hereinafter "director") shall be charged with the care, management and supervision of the Hampton Tennis Center. 
(Ord. No. 1330, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16)  
Sec. 26-52. - Operating hours. 
The Hampton Tennis Center shall be open daily from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., from April 15th through October 31st, or as long as, in the discretion of the director, the weather conditions allow. The director is given the latitude to close the facilities if there are not sufficient reservations to justify keeping them open. 
(Ord. No. 1330, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-53. - Fees generally. 
(a)  The Hampton Tennis Center court rental fee shall be three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) for each thirty (30) minutes of court time or seven dollars ($7.00) for each hour of court time. 
(b)  The tennis ball machine is available for rental at four dollars ($4.00) per hour, plus the normal court fee. 
(Ord. No. 1330, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-54. - Fees for lessons. 
(a)  When used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Adult clinic means instruction provided to a group of players age eighteen (18) and up by a tennis professional. 
(2)  Adult workout means instruction and playtime provided to a group of players age eighteen (18) and up by a tennis professional. 
(3)  Junior camp means instruction provided to a group of players between the ages of seven (7) and seventeen (17) by a tennis professional and consisting of a two-week period. 
(4)  Junior clinic means instruction provided to a group of players between the ages of seven (7) and seventeen (17) by a tennis professional. 
(5)  Peewee clinic means instruction provided to a group of players age six (6) and under by a tennis professional. 
(6)  Private lessons mean one-on-one instruction provided by a tennis professional. 
(7)  Semi-private lessons mean instruction provided to two (2) players by a tennis professional. 
(b)  Tennis lessons are available at the Hampton Tennis Center at the following rates: 
(1)  Private lessons, per hour ..... $30.00 
(2)  Semi-private lessons, per hour, per person ..... 15.00 
(3)  Clinic, peewee, forty-five (45) minutes ..... 40.00 
(4)  Clinic, junior, per hour ..... 48.00 
(5)  Clinic, adult, per hour ..... 56.00 
(6)  Workout, adult, one (1) hour ..... 64.00 
(7)  Workout, adult, one and one-half (1.5) hours ..... 80.00 
(8)  Camp, junior ..... 90.00 
When paying for lessons, no additional court fee shall be charged pursuant to section 26-53. 
(Ord. No. 1330, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-55. - Use for tournaments. 
The Hampton Tennis Center may be reserved for tournaments, provided an application for a facility use permit is submitted to the director of parks, recreation and leisure services for approval at least two (2) weeks prior to the date of intended use and the court fee is paid at least two (2) days prior to the tournament. The tournament rate shall be set by the director of parks, recreation and leisure services. 
(Ord. No. 1330, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06; Ord. No. 16-0004 , 3-9-16)  
Sec. 26-56. - Fees for season passes. 
(a)  When used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(1)  Family means persons residing in one (1) household consisting of three (3) or more related individuals. 
(2)  Junior means an individual less than eighteen (18) years old. 
(b)  Season passes are available at the Hampton Tennis Center at the following rates: 
(1)  Individual ..... $115.00 
(2)  Two-person household ..... 210.00 
(3)  Family ..... 235.00 
(4)  Junior ..... 30.00 
Season passes are good for one (1) season and can be used to play in one (1) league per season. 
(Ord. No. 1330, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Secs. 26-57—26-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HAMPTON COLISEUM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Scalping tickets to public events, § 24-29; throwing objects or materials at public events, § 24-30. 
 
Sec. 26-71. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the word "coliseum" means the facility known as the Hampton Coliseum, located at or near the intersection of Pine Chapel Road and Interstate Route 64. 
(Ord. No. 1393, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-72. - General responsibilities of director. 
Subject to the appropriations provided by law, the ordinances of the city and the supervision and direction of the city manager, the coliseum director shall be charged with the custody, care, control, operation, maintenance and regulation of the coliseum, including the hiring and firing of personnel. Within appropriations provided by law, he may promote the use of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 1393, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-73. - Fidelity bonds for certain personnel. 
The city manager may require certain Hampton Coliseum staff involved in the handling of money to be bonded in such amount as determined by the city manager after consultation with the city's risk manager. The surety company must be licensed or authorized to do business in the state and approved as surety by the city's director of finance. The form of such bond shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1393, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-74. - Finances generally. 
(a)  There shall be established within the financial records of the city a "Hampton Coliseum Fund," in which shall be recorded the appropriations made by the city council and the revenue receipts of the coliseum itself, including amusement tax and meal tax monies. 
(b)  All money received as a result of the use or occupancy of the coliseum shall be deposited in a qualified public depository as determined by the treasurer and the director of finance immediately on the first day that the qualified public depository is open for conduct of business after receipt of the funds. 
(c)  All expenditures of funds for the coliseum, with the exception of petty cash accounted for by receipts, shall be through the department of finance on appropriate forms as determined by the director of finance. 
(d)  A special bank account for the settlement of events pursuant to contractual obligations may be established with the approval of the city manager. If established, checks drawn on the account shall be signed by the coliseum director or assistant coliseum director and countersigned by the box office manager or assistant box office manager. 
(Ord. No. 1393, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-75. - Purchases. 
The purchase of materials and supplies for the coliseum shall be pursuant to general city regulations, except that the coliseum director is authorized to purchase such items as may be required for concessions, daily operations or events. An account of such purchases made shall be submitted at least monthly to the director of finance on appropriate forms as determined by the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 1393, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-76. - Scheduling of events; licensing of use; contracts for exhibitions and performances. 
(a)  The coliseum director shall have the power and authority to schedule events and license the use of the premises at the coliseum and, subject to the limitations herein provided, may contract for exhibitions and various types of events. 
(b)  In negotiating and contracting for exhibitions or events, the coliseum director shall not obligate, and shall not have the power or the authority to obligate, the city within any fiscal year to a total of obligations which is in excess of a sum determined by adding the appropriations of the city council and revenues received from exhibitions and events held at the coliseum, and subtracting all expenditures for the care, maintenance and operation of the coliseum. Depreciation charges are not considered as expenditures in keeping with the intent of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1393, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-77. - Use charges. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided by the city council, the following shall be applicable for rates charged for use of the coliseum: 
(1)  The coliseum director shall establish from time to time a current schedule of fees, rentals, rates and charges and, subject to such limits and guidelines as the city manager may impose, may negotiate such fees, rentals, rates and charges giving due consideration to event-related costs and expenses such as the number of required service personnel, the necessary promotional work, the length of rental time, the season and the standard charges for similar rentals. 
(Ord. No. 1393, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-78. - Parking fees. 
(a)  Parking at the Hampton Coliseum shall remain under the control of the city, and unless otherwise specifically provided by the city council, the following shall be applicable for rates charged for parking at the Hampton Coliseum: 
(1)  The coliseum director shall establish from time to time a current schedule of parking fees and, subject to such limits and guidelines as the city manager may impose, may negotiate or waive such parking fee based on the type of event. 
(b)  The driver of any motor vehicle failing to pay the parking charge provided for in this section, when notice thereof is posted, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 1393, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-79. - Concessions. 
All concessions shall be subject to the direction, supervision and control of the coliseum director or the director's designee; provided that, with the prior written approval of the city manager, a licensee of the premises may be authorized certain concession rights during rental of the facility. Caterers shall be permitted to serve on the premises only with the approval and consent of the coliseum director or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 1393, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Secs. 26-80—26-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MUSEUM 
 
Sec. 26-101. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the word "museum" means the facility known as the Virginia Air and Space Center and Hampton Roads History Center located at 600 Settlers Landing Road in this city. 
(Ord. No. 1055, 6-24-92; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-102. - Museum account. 
There shall be established within the financial records of the city a "museum account", in which shall be recorded the admissions tax revenue derived from the museum. 
(Ord. No. 1055, 6-24-92; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06) 
Cross reference— Admissions tax, § 37-276 et seq.  
Secs. 26-103—26-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - THE AMERICAN THEATRE 
 
Sec. 26-110. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the word "theatre" means the facility known as the American Theatre, located at 125 E. Mellen Street, in this city. 
(Ord. No. 1278, 5-24-00; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-111. - General responsibilities of director. 
Subject to the appropriations provided by law, the ordinances of the city and the supervision and direction of the city manager, the theatre director shall be charged with the custody, care, control, operation, maintenance and regulation of the theatre, including the hiring and firing of personnel. Within appropriations provided by law, he may promote the use of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 1278, 5-24-00; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-112. - Finances generally. 
(a)  There shall be established within the financial records of the city "The American Theatre Account," in which shall be recorded the appropriations made by the city council and the revenue receipts of the theatre itself, including admission tax and meal tax monies. 
(b)  All money received as a result of the use or occupancy of the theatre and all money received by the theatre division shall be paid into the appropriate city fund, shall be reported to the department of finance on forms provided by that department and shall be deposited in a qualified public depository immediately on the first day that the qualified public depository is open for conduct of business after receipt of the funds. 
(Ord. No. 1278, 5-24-00; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-113. - Purchases. 
The purchase of materials and supplies for the theatre shall be pursuant to general city regulations, except that the theatre director is authorized to purchase such items as may be required for concessions or events at the theatre. A monthly account of all purchases made shall be submitted to the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 1278, 5-24-00; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-114. - Scheduling of events; licensing of use; contracts for exhibitions and performances. 
(a)  The theatre director shall have the power and authority to schedule events and license the use of the premises at the theatre and, subject to the limitations herein provided, may contract for exhibitions and various types of performances. 
(b)  In negotiating and contracting for exhibitions, the theatre director shall not obligate, and shall not have the power or the authority to obligate, the city within any fiscal year to a total of obligations which is in excess of a sum determined by adding the appropriations of the city council, and subtracting all expenditures for the care, maintenance and operation of the theatre. Depreciation charges are not considered as expenditures in keeping with the intent of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1278, 5-24-00; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-115. - Use charges. 
The city council shall approve a schedule of charges for use of the theatre upon recommendation of the arts commission. 
(Ord. No. 1278, 5-24-00; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-116. - Concessions. 
The theatre shall operate all concessions at the theatre and such concessions shall be subject to the direction, supervision and control of the theatre director or his designee; provided that, with the prior written approval of the theatre director, a licensee of the premises may be authorized certain concession rights during rental of the facility. Caterers shall be permitted to serve on the premises only with the approval and consent of the theatre director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1278, 5-24-00; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Secs. 26-117—26-124. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - HAMPTON ROADS CONVENTION CENTER 
 
Sec. 26-125. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the words "convention center" mean the facility known as the Hampton Roads Convention Center, located at or near the intersection of Pine Chapel Road and Interstate Route 64. 
(Ord. No. 1394, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-126. - General responsibilities of director. 
Subject to the appropriations provided by law, the ordinances of the city and the supervision and direction of the city manager, the convention center director shall be charged with the custody, care, control, operation, maintenance and regulation of the convention center, including the hiring and firing of personnel. Within appropriations provided by law, the director may promote the use of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 1394, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-127. - Fidelity bonds for certain personnel. 
The city manager may require certain convention center staff involved in the handling of money to be bonded in such amount as determined by the city manager after consultation with the city's risk manager. The surety company must be licensed or authorized to do business in the state and approved as surety by the city's director of finance. The form of such bond shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1394, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-128. - Finances generally. 
(a)  There shall be established within the financial records of the city a "Hampton Roads Convention Center Fund," in which shall be recorded the appropriations made by the city council and the revenue receipts of the convention center itself, including admissions tax and meal tax monies. 
(b)  All money received as a result of the use or occupancy of the convention center shall be deposited in a qualified public depository, as determined by the treasurer and the director of finance, immediately on the first day that the qualified public depository is open for conduct of business after receipt of the funds. 
(c)  All expenditures of funds for the convention center, with the exception of petty cash accounted for by receipts, shall be through the department of finance on appropriate forms as determined by the director of finance. 
(d)  A special bank account for the settlement of events pursuant to contractual obligations may be established with the approval of the city manager. If established, checks drawn on the account shall be signed by the convention center director or assistant convention center director and countersigned by the box office manager or assistant box office manager. 
(Ord. No. 1394, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-129. - Purchases. 
The purchase of materials and supplies for the convention center shall be pursuant to general city regulations, except that the convention center director is authorized to purchase such items as may be required for concessions, daily operations or events. An account of such purchases made shall be submitted at least monthly to the director of finance on appropriate forms as determined by the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 1394, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06) 
Charter reference— Purchases generally, § 2-141 et seq.  
Sec. 26-130. - Scheduling of events; licensing of use; contracts for exhibitions and performances. 
(a)  The convention center director shall have the power and authority to schedule events and license the use of the premises at the convention center and, subject to the limitations herein provided, may contract for exhibitions and various types of events. 
(b)  In negotiating and contracting for exhibitions or events, the convention center director shall not obligate, and shall not have the power or the authority to obligate, the city within any fiscal year to a total of obligations which is in excess of a sum determined by adding the appropriations of the city council and revenues received from exhibitions and events held at the convention center, and subtracting all expenditures for the care, maintenance and operation of the convention center. Depreciation charges are not considered as expenditures in keeping with the intent of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1394, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-131. - Use charges. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided by the city council, the following shall be applicable for rates charged for use of the convention center: 
(1)  The convention center director shall establish from time to time a current schedule of fees, rentals, rates and charges and, subject to such limits and guidelines as the city manager may impose, may negotiate such fees, rentals, rates and charges giving due consideration to event-related costs and expenses such as the number of required service personnel, the necessary promotional work, the length of rental time, the season and the standard charges for similar rentals. 
(2)  The city manager or the city manager's designee, is authorized to waive the payment of rental fees and charges with respect to city sponsored events or activities. 
(Ord. No. 1394, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-132. - Parking fees. 
(a)  Parking at the convention center shall remain under the control of the city, and unless otherwise specifically provided by the city council, the following shall be applicable for rates charged for parking at the convention center: 
(1)  The convention center director shall establish from time to time a current schedule of parking fees and, subject to such limits and guidelines as the city manager may impose, may negotiate or waive such parking fee based on the type of event. 
(b)  The driver of any motor vehicle failing to pay the parking charge provided for in this section, when notice thereof is posted, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 1394, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Sec. 26-133. - Concessions. 
All concessions shall be subject to the direction, supervision and control of the convention center director or the director's designee; provided that, with the prior written approval of the city manager, a licensee of the premises may be authorized certain concession rights during rental of the facility. Caterers shall be permitted to serve on the premises only with the approval and consent of the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 1394, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1452, 12-14-06)  
Secs. 26-134—26-150. - Reserved.  
Chapter 27 - PAWNBROKERS; JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-0024 , adopted January 1, 2014, amended chapter 27 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 27, §§ 27-1—27-10, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Reports required of dealers in secondhand bicycles, § 6-5; license tax on pawnbrokers, § 18.1-40; open storage of inoperative vehicles on property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes, § 24-39. 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4001 et seq.; junk and secondhand dealers, § 59.1-117 et seq. 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Definitions. 
"Pawnbroker" means any person who lends or advances money or other things for profit on the pledge and possession of tangible personal property, or other valuable things, other than securities or written or printed evidences of indebtedness or title, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back to the seller at a stipulated price. 
"Secondhand dealer" means any person who buys, sells, barters or exchanges used or secondhand articles, including but not limited to such items as firearms, office machines, household appliances, radios, television sets, cellphones, electronic equipment, sporting equipment, photographic equipment, or any other secondhand merchandise intended to be resold for use as such. This definition does not include those persons who exclusively buy, sell, barter or exchange used or secondhand clothing, furniture and non-electronic children's articles; nor does it include those persons who buy, sell, barter or exchange used or secondhand items defined and regulated by chapter 27.1. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27-2. - Violations of chapter. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to any penalty that may be imposed for a violation of this chapter, upon the second conviction of any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer for a violation of this chapter, the judge of a court of competent jurisdiction may, at his discretion, revoke or suspend the license of the offender. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27-3. - Officers may examine records or property; warrantless search and seizure authorized. 
Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer and every person in the employ of such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall admit to his place of business, during regular business hours, any duly authorized law-enforcement officer of the City of Hampton, Virginia, or any law-enforcement official of the state or federal government. The pawnbroker or secondhand dealer or their employee shall permit the officer to (i) examine all records required to be maintained by this chapter and any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen and (ii) search for and take into possession any article known to him to be missing, or known or believed by him to have been stolen. However, the officer shall not take possession of any article without providing to the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer a receipt. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27-4. - Identification numbers on property acquired. 
No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall remove, change, alter or conceal any serial or other identification number which may be attached or affixed to any property of any kind received by such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, without the consent of the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee, nor shall such dealer knowingly take in pawn, buy or acquire or keep in his possession any such property, the serial or identification number of which has been removed, changed or altered, without the consent of the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27-5. - Property pawned or purchased not to be disfigured or changed. 
No property of any kind received on deposit or pledged or purchased by any pawnbroker shall be disfigured or its identity destroyed or affected in any manner whatsoever, (i) so long as it continues in pawn or in the possession of the pawnbroker while in pawn or (ii) in an effort to obtain a serial number or other information for identification purposes. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27-6. - Record of purchases. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of every transaction where an article is taken in pawn, bought or acquired by such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer in the course of his business. The information shall be recorded at the time of the transaction, on a form approved by the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee, and shall include: 
(1)  A complete description and statement of ownership of each article taken in pawn, bought or acquired from the person selling or pledging the article and the price paid for such item. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms on each article. 
(2)  The date, time, and place of receiving the article and the initials of the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer or employee receiving the article. 
(3)  The full name, residence address, telephone number, and driver's license number or other identifying credential, as defined in subsection (c), of the person selling or pledging the article, together with a particular description, including the height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair and eye color, and any other identifying marks, of such person. 
(4)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of an identifying credential, as defined in subsection (c). The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon; 
(5)  A digital image of the identifying credential used by the person involved in the transaction; 
(6)  A digital image of the article taken in pawn, bought or acquired from the person selling or pledging the article; and, 
(7)  All other facts and circumstances respecting such transaction. 
(b)  In addition to the information required by subsection (a), pawnbrokers shall include the following information in their account of the transaction: 
(1)  The amount of money loaned on the article at the time of pledging the same. 
(2)  The rate of interest to be paid on such loan. 
(3)  The terms and conditions of the loan, including the period for which any such loan may be made. 
(4)  All other facts and circumstances respecting such loan. 
(c)  An "identifying credential" is any valid operator's license, any valid chauffeur's license, or any valid identification card issued by a governmental agency. The photograph, date of birth, and signature of the person attempting to pledge or sell an article under this section must be affixed on the operator's license, chauffeur's license, or identification card in order for it to qualify as an identifying credential. No operator's license, chauffeur's license, or identification card shall be considered valid for the purpose of qualifying as an identifying credential if presented to pawnbroker or secondhand dealer or employee after its date of expiration. 
(d)  All records required by this section shall be retained by the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer for not less than twenty-four (24) months. Such records may be maintained by the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer in an electronic format at his place of business. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0018, 6-10-15 )  
Sec. 27-7. - Prohibited purchases. 
(a)  No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall take in pawn, buy or acquire any secondhand article from any seller who is under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall take in pawn, buy or acquire any secondhand article from any seller who the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such article, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
(c)  No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall take in pawn, buy or acquire any secondhand article without first (i) ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identifying credential as defined in section 27-6, and at least one other corroborating means of identification, and (ii) obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27-8. - Retention of purchases. 
(a)  No pawnbroker shall sell any pawn or pledge until (i) it has been in his possession for the minimum term set forth in the memorandum, but not less than thirty (30) calendar days, plus a grace period of 15 calendar days and (ii) a statement of ownership is obtained from the pawner. 
(b)  Every secondhand dealer shall retain all secondhand articles acquired by him for a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days from the date on which a copy of the daily report required by section 27-10 is received by the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee. Until the expiration of this period, the secondhand dealer shall not sell, alter or dispose of any acquired item, in whole or in part. If an item is to be removed from the City of Hampton prior to the expiration of the fifteen (15) day period, the secondhand dealer must return the item to the City of Hampton, upon request of the chief of police or his designee, at the secondhand dealer's own expense, if the item is determined to be potential evidence in a criminal investigation. Any such item must be returned to the City of Hampton within seventy-two (72) hours of a request being made to the secondhand dealer. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 ; Ord. No. 17-0013 , 11-8-17)  
Sec. 27-9. - Record of sales. 
Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall keep and maintain, for at least twenty-four (24) months, an accurate and legible record of the full name and residential address of every person to whom he sells any secondhand article in its original form after the waiting period required by section 27-8. This record shall also show the full name and residential address of the seller from whom the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer acquired such article. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27-10. - Daily reports. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall furnish each business day, by 1:00 p.m., to the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee, a true and correct report of all articles purchased, sold, bartered or exchanged or otherwise coming into his possession, during the preceding business day, except such as is purchased at public auction. The report shall include: 
(1)  The seller's or pledger's full name, residential address, and driver's license number or other identifying credential as defined in section 27-6; 
(2)  A digital image of the identifying credential used by the seller or pledger; 
(3)  A digital image of the article sold or pledged; and 
(4)  A description of the article sold or pledged. The description shall describe each article as accurately as possible and shall include any brand name, model number, serial number, initial or name or any other identifying marks found on the article. 
(b)  The report shall be submitted in an electronic format as provided by the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee. 
(c)  If the purchase, sale or acquisition occurs during a weekend or holiday, then the submittal of the electronic report required in subsection (a) shall be made no later than 1:00 p.m. the next regular business day. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0018, 6-10-15 )  
Sec. 27-11. - Memorandum to be given pledger; fee; lost ticket charge. 
Every pawnbroker shall at the time of each loan deliver to the pawner a memorandum or note, signed by him, containing the information required by section 27-6. A lost-ticket fee of five dollars ($5.00) may be charged, provided that the pawner is notified of the fee on the ticket. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27-12. - Interest chargeable. 
(a)  No pawnbroker shall ask, demand or receive a greater rate of interest than ten percent per month on a loan of $25.00 or less, or seven (7) percent per month on a loan of more than $25.00 and less than $100.00, or five (5) percent per month on a loan of $100.00 or more, secured by a pledge of tangible personal property. No loan shall be divided for the purpose of increasing the percentage to be paid the pawnbroker. Loans may be renewed based on the original loan amount. Loans may not be issued that compound the interest or storage fees from previous loans on the same item. 
(b)  An annual percentage rate computed and disclosed under the provisions of the federal Truth-in-Lending Act shall not be deemed a violation of this section. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Chapter 27.1 - BUILDING FIXTURES, SCRAP METAL PURCHASERS AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS  
ARTICLE I. - BUILDING FIXTURES 
 
Sec. 27.1-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
"Authorized scrap metal purchaser" has the same meaning as provided for the term "scrap metal purchaser" in section 27.1-11. 
"Authorized scrap seller" means any licensed plumber, electrical contractor, HVAC contractor, or building and construction contractor. 
"Secondhand building material" means any secondhand heating or plumbing fixture or supplies, electric fixtures, or any wiring, gas fixtures or appliances, water faucets, pipes, locks, or any other secondhand fixtures of any kind or description used in the construction of a building, including air conditioning coils and air conditioning compressors. 
"Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, cooperative, limited liability company, trust, joint venture, or other private commercial entity. 
"Regularly engaged" with respect to purchasing or acquiring secondhand building material means having conducted transactions involving, or having offered for sale, more than 600 pounds combined weight of secondhand building material or enters into more than 26 combined transactions annually. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-2. - Permit required for trading in secondhand building fixtures. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall offer for sale or acquire any secondhand building material, fixtures or supplies without first obtaining a permit for the sale or acquisition of the same from the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-3. - Permit issued by chief of police; revocation. 
The chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee may issue, to persons regularly engaged in the business of collecting secondhand building materials for resale, a semiannual or annual permit covering all sales and acquisitions made by such persons. The chief of police may refuse to issue a permit, and may revoke any permit issued, to any person convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within the three years prior to the request for the permit. The applicant shall file with the chief of police, or his designee, an application form that shall include the applicant's full name, any aliases, current address, age, date of birth, sex, and fingerprints; the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's employer(s), if any; and the location of the applicant's place of business. A permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained. A fee of fifty dollars ($50) shall be charged annually for the issuance of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-4. - Who deemed a dealer. 
Every person who is regularly engaged in the purchasing or acquiring of secondhand building material for the purpose of resale or installation on the property of another shall be deemed a dealer within the meaning of the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-5. - Dealer required to show permit and identification. 
Every dealer making a sale or purchase of a secondhand fixture pursuant to the provisions of this article shall first display the permit required by section 27.1-2 and also display positive photo identification to the purchaser or seller of such fixture. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-6. - Recordkeeping requirements. 
(a)  At the time of purchasing, collecting, receiving, or acquiring a secondhand building fixture, the dealer shall be required to provide: 
(1)  The date and time of the secondhand building fixture's acquisition; and 
(2)  The address from which the property was acquired and, if available, a driver's license or other form of government identification to include the full name and date of birth of the person from whom the material was collected. 
(b)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of every transaction involving a secondhand building fixture that is collected, received, acquired, or purchased by the dealer in the course of his business. The account shall be recorded at the time of the transaction, on a form approved by the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee, and shall include: 
(1)  A complete and accurate description of the secondhand building fixture that is the subject of the transaction; 
(2)  A digital image of the secondhand building fixture that is collected, received, acquired or purchased by the dealer in the course of his business; 
(3)  All information prescribed in subsection (a) regarding date, time, location and, if available, the full name and date of birth of the person with whom the dealer conducted the transaction; 
(4)  The license plate number of the automobile or other vehicle in which the secondhand building fixture was delivered or received; and 
(5)  The number of the permit issued pursuant to section 27.1-3 in which the transaction involving a secondhand building fixture occurred. 
(c)  Records required by subsection (b) shall be maintained by the dealer at its normal place of business or at another readily accessible and secure location for a period of twenty-four (24) months. Such records may be maintained by the dealer in an electronic format. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0018, 6-10-15 )  
Sec. 27.1-7. - Daily reports. 
(a)  Every dealer shall furnish each business day, by 1:00 p.m., to the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee, a true and correct report of every secondhand building fixture purchased, acquired, or received by him during the preceding business day. The report shall include: 
(1)  An accurate description of each secondhand building fixture purchased, acquired, or received by him; 
(2)  A digital image of the secondhand building fixture that is collected, received, acquired or purchased by the dealer in the course of his business; 
(3)  The date, time and location of the secondhand build fixture's acquisition; 
(4)  The number of the dealer's permit issued pursuant to section 27.1-3; 
(5)  The license plate number of any automobile or other vehicle in which the secondhand building fixture was collected or received; and 
(6)  If available, the full name and date of birth of the person with whom the dealer conducted the transaction. 
(b)  The report shall be submitted in an electronic format as provided by the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee. 
(c)  If the purchase or acquisition occurs during a weekend or holiday, then the submittal of the electronic report required in subsection (a) shall be made no later than 1:00 p.m. the next regular business day. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0018, 6-10-15 )  
Sec. 27.1-8. - Records and places of business open to inspection. 
The records required by this article to be kept, and the places of business of all persons engaged in the acquiring, selling, receiving, or purchasing, secondhand building materials shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the City of Hampton, Virginia, or any law enforcement official of the state or federal government. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-9. - Exemptions from article. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The sale of secondhand building material taken from premises occupied by the owner, when sold by such owner on the premises, or the sale of such articles when purchased from a public utility corporation at its place of business or a governmental agency; 
(2)  Scrap metal purchasers; 
(3)  Authorized scrap sellers; 
(4)  Public utilities; 
(5)  Public transportation companies; 
(6)  Industrial and manufacturing companies; 
(7)  Marine, automobile, and aircraft salvage and wrecking companies; or 
(8)  Governmental entities. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-10. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. A person convicted of a second or subsequent offense under this article is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
ARTICLE II. - SCRAP METAL PURCHASERS 
 
Sec. 27.1-11. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article: 
"Authorized scrap seller" means licensed plumbers, electricians, HVAC contractors, building and construction contractors, demolition contractors, construction and demolition debris contractors, public utilities, transportation companies, industrial and manufacturing companies, marine, automobile, and aircraft salvage and wrecking companies, and government entities. 
"Broker" means any person or his authorized agent who negotiates, purchases, sells, or offers for sale any scrap metal either directly or through an authorized agent without obtaining title to or ownership of the scrap metal. 
"Ferrous scrap" means any scrap metal consisting primarily of iron, steel, or both, but excluding any scrap metal consisting primarily of stainless steel. Ferrous scrap includes large manufactured articles such as automobile bodies that may contain other substances to be removed and sorted during normal operations of scrap metal processors. 
"Metal article" means any manufactured item, consisting of metal, that is usable for its originally intended purpose without processing, repairs, or alteration and that is not otherwise excluded by the definitions in this section. Examples include, without limitation, railings, copper or aluminum wire, copper pipe and tubing, plumbing fixtures, copper and aluminum gutters, copper and aluminum downspouts, and cast-iron radiators. 
"Nonferrous scrap" means any scrap metal consisting primarily of (i) stainless steel or (ii) any metal other than iron or steel. Nonferrous scrap does not include aluminum beverage cans; postconsumer household items such as pots, pans, barbecue grills, and lawn chairs; used flashing removed during building renovation or demolition; or small quantities of nonferrous metals contained in large manufactured articles, such as automobile bodies and appliances. 
"Proprietary article" means (i) any metal article stamped, engraved, stenciled, or otherwise marked so as to identify it as being or having been the property of a governmental entity or public utility or transportation, shipbuilding, ship repair, mining, or manufacturing company; (ii) any hard drawn copper electrical conductor, cable, or wire that is three-eighths of one inch or greater in diameter, stranded or solid; (iii) any aluminum conductor, cable, or wire three quarters of one inch or greater in diameter, stranded or solid; (iv) stainless steel beer kegs; (v) any catalytic converter from a motor vehicle exhaust system that has been detached from a motor vehicle; (vi) any telecommunications cable that is one-half of one inch or greater in diameter and that contains 50 or more individual strands of solid, insulated, color-coded copper wire, including such telecommunication cable that has been unsheathed or burned; (vii) any manhole cover; (viii) any bronze or copper cemetery plaque, urn, or marker; (ix) aluminum bleacher seats or guardrails; or (x) any mining cable that is one-half inch or greater in diameter and is composed of one or more stranded copper conductors and stamped, engraved, stenciled, or otherwise marked with "Mine Safety and Health Administration" or "MSHA." 
"Scrap metal" means any manufactured item or article consisting of or containing metal; any metal removed from or obtained by cutting, demolishing, or disassembling any building, structure, manufactured item, or article; and any other metal that is no longer used for its original purpose and that can be processed for reuse in mills, foundries, and other manufacturing facilities. 
"Scrap metal processor" means a business entity in good standing authorized to conduct business in the Commonwealth that regularly utilizes machinery and equipment at one or more established locations in the normal course of business for processing and manufacturing scrap metal into prepared grades for sale as raw material to mills, foundries, and other manufacturing facilities. 
"Scrap metal purchaser" means any person or business, other than an authorized scrap seller or a broker buying or selling processed scrap metal, who purchases scrap metal either directly or through an authorized agent in excess of $20,000 during any 12-month period. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-12. - Purchases of ferrous scrap. 
Except as provided in section 27.1-17, scrap metal processors may purchase ferrous scrap directly from any person. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-13. - Purchases of nonferrous scrap, metal articles, and proprietary articles. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 27.1-17, scrap metal purchasers may purchase nonferrous scrap, metal articles, and proprietary articles from any person who is not an authorized scrap seller or the authorized agent and employee of an authorized scrap seller only in accordance with the following requirements and procedures: 
(1)  At the time of sale, the scrap metal purchaser shall verify the identity of the seller of any nonferrous scrap, metal article, or proprietary article by requiring a driver's license or other identifying credential, as defined in subsection (d), and at least one other corroborating means of identification; and 
(2)  The scrap metal purchaser shall record the transaction in accordance with the requirements of section 27.1-14. 
(b)  Upon compliance with the other requirements of this section and section 27.1-14 and 27.1-17, a scrap metal purchaser may purchase proprietary articles from a person who is not an authorized scrap seller or the authorized agent and employee of an authorized scrap seller if the scrap metal purchaser complies with one of the following: 
(1)  The scrap metal purchaser receives from the person seeking to sell the proprietary articles documentation, such as a bill of sale, receipt, letter of authorization, or similar evidence, establishing that the person lawfully possesses the proprietary articles to be sold; or 
(2)  The scrap metal purchaser shall document a diligent inquiry into whether the person selling or delivering the same has a legal right to do so, and, after purchasing a proprietary article from a person without obtaining the documentation described in subdivision (1), shall submit a report to the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee in accordance with section 27.1-15, and hold the proprietary article for not less than fifteen (15) days following purchase. 
(c)  The scrap metal purchaser may purchase nonferrous scrap, metal articles, and proprietary articles directly from an authorized scrap seller and from the authorized agent or employee of an authorized scrap seller. 
(d)  An "identifying credential" shall be any valid operator's license, any valid chauffeur's license, or any valid identification card issued by a governmental agency. The photograph, date of birth, and signature of the person attempting to sell an article under this section must be affixed on the operator's license, chauffeur's license, or identification card in order for it to qualify as an identifying credential. No operator's license, chauffeur's license, or identification card shall be considered valid for the purpose of qualifying as an identifying credential if presented to a scrap metal purchaser or employee after its date of expiration. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-14. - Record of purchases. 
(a)  Every scrap metal purchaser shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of every transaction where nonferrous scrap, metal articles, or proprietary articles are purchased or acquired by the scrap metal purchaser from any person who is not an authorized scrap seller or the authorized agent and employee of an authorized scrap seller. The account shall be recorded at the time of the transaction, on a form approved by the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee, and shall include: 
(1)  A complete and accurate description of every article that is the subject of the transaction; 
(2)  A digital image of the article that is the subject of the transaction; 
(3)  The date, and time, and place of receiving the article; 
(4)  The full name, residence address, telephone number, and driver's license number or other identifying credential, as defined in section 27.1-13, of the person selling the article, together with a particular description, including the height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair and eye color, and any other identifying marks, of such person; 
(5)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of an identifying credential, as defined in section 27.1-13. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon; 
(6)  A digital image of the identifying credential used by the person involved in the transaction; 
(7)  The license plate number of the automobile or other vehicle in which the article was delivered; 
(8)  For all proprietary articles, a digital image that is of sufficient quality to reasonably identify the subject of the image; and 
(9)  All other facts and circumstances respecting such transaction. 
(b)  All records required by this section shall be retained by the scrap metal purchaser for not less than twenty-four (24) months. Such records may be maintained by the scrap metal purchaser in an electronic format at his place of business. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0018, 6-10-15 )  
Sec. 27.1-15. - Daily reports. 
(a)  Every scrap metal purchaser shall furnish each business day, by 1:00 p.m., to the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee, a true and correct report of all nonferrous scrap, metal articles, or proprietary articles purchased or acquired by the scrap metal purchaser from any person who is not an authorized scrap seller or the authorized agent and employee of an authorized scrap seller during the preceding business day. The report shall include: 
(1)  The seller's full name, residential address, and driver's license number or other identifying credential as defined in section 27.1-13; 
(2)  A digital image of the identifying credential used by the seller; 
(3)  A complete and accurate description of the articles purchased; and 
(4)  A digital image of the identifying credential used by the seller; and 
(5)  For all proprietary articles, a digital image that is of sufficient quality to reasonably identify the subject of the image. 
(b)  The report shall be submitted in an electronic format as provided by the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee. 
(c)  If the purchase or acquisition occurs during a weekend or holiday, then the submittal of the electronic report required in subsection (a) shall be made no later than 1:00 p.m. the next regular business day. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0018, 6-10-15 )  
Sec. 27.1-16. - Records and places of business open to inspection. 
The records required by this article to be kept, and the places of business of all scrap metal purchasers, shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of duly authorized law-enforcement office of the City of Hampton, Virginia, or any law-enforcement official of the state or federal government. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-17. - Purchases of materials from minors. 
Scrap metal purchasers shall not purchase ferrous scrap, nonferrous scrap, metal articles, proprietary articles, or other scrap metal from any person under the age of 18 years. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-18. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any scrap metal purchaser who violates any provisions of this article may be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed $7,500 for each violation. Any attorney for the City of Hampton, Virginia may bring a civil action to recover such a civil penalty. The civil penalty shall be paid into the local treasury. 
(b)  Any scrap metal purchaser who knowingly violates any provisions of this article is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
ARTICLE III. - PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS 
 
Sec. 27.1-19. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
"Coin" means any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape, weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money. 
"Dealer" means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of (i) purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems; (ii) removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by the person, firm, partnership, or corporation; or (iii) buying, acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from manufactured articles. "Dealer" includes all employers and principals on whose behalf a purchase is made, and any employee or agent who makes any purchase for or on behalf of his employer or principal. 
The definition of "dealer" shall not include persons engaged in the following: 
(1)  Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories, provided that the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Purchases of precious metals or gems from a qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of an estate being administered by the fiduciary. 
(3)  Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by the retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in. 
(4)  Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such activities are within his normal course of business. 
(5)  Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers, or by mail originating outside the Commonwealth. 
(6)  Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a by-product. 
"Gems" means any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry. 
"Precious metals" means any item except coins composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or platinum alloys. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-20. - Permit required; method of obtaining permit; no convictions of certain crimes; approval of weighing devices; renewal; permanent location required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the activities of a dealer as defined in section 27.1-19 without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee. 
(b)  To obtain a permit, the dealer shall file with the chief of police an application form which includes the dealer's full name, any aliases, residential address, age, date of birth, sex, and fingerprints; the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's employer(s), if any; and the location of the dealer's place of business. Upon filing this application and the payment of a two hundred dollar ($200) application fee, the dealer shall be issued a permit by the chief of police, provided that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven (7) years prior to the date of application. The permit shall be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under any ordinance similar in substance to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Before a permit may be issued, the dealer must have all weighing devices used in his business inspected and approved by local or state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee. 
(d)  This permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date issued and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained with an annual permit fee of two hundred dollar ($200). No permit shall be transferable. 
(e)  Every dealer at the time of obtaining such permit shall obtain and provide to the City of Hampton, Virginia a bond secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this Commonwealth, in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon strict compliance with the terms of this article. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the Commonwealth a letter of credit in favor of the City of Hampton, Virginia for ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(f)  If the business of the dealer is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays, Sundays, and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his application for a permit. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-21. - Records to be kept; copy furnished to local authorities. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The account shall be recorded at the time of the transaction, on a form approved by the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee, and shall include: 
(1)  A complete description and statement of ownership of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers, or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or carat of any gem, and the price paid for each item; 
(2)  A digital image of each precious metal or gem purchased from a seller; 
(3)  The date, time, and place of receiving the items purchased; 
(4)  The full name, residence address, telephone number, and driver's license number or other identifying credential, as defined in subsection (d), of the person selling or pledging the article, together with a particular description, including height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair and eye color, and any other identifying marks, of such person; 
(5)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of an identifying credential, as defined in subsection (d). The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon; 
(6)  A digital image of the form of identification used by the person involved in the transaction; and 
(7)  All other facts and circumstances respecting such transaction. 
(b)  All records required by this section shall be retained by the dealer for not less than twenty-four (24) months. Such records may be maintained by the dealer in an electronic format at his place of business. 
(c)  The information required by subdivisions (a)(1) through (a)(3) shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer. 
(d)  An "identifying credential" shall be any valid operator's license, any valid chauffeur's license, or any valid identification card issued by a governmental agency. The photograph, date of birth, and signature of the person attempting to sell an article under this section must be affixed on the operator's license, chauffeur's license, or identification card in order for it to qualify as an identifying credential. No operator's license, chauffeur's license, or identification card shall be considered valid for the purpose of qualifying as an identifying credential if presented to dealer or employee after its date of expiration. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0018, 6-10-15 )  
Sec. 27.1-22. - Daily reports. 
(a)  Every dealer shall furnish each business day, by 1:00 p.m., to the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee, a true and correct report of all precious metal or gems items purchased or acquired by the dealer during the preceding business day. The report shall include: 
(1)  The seller's full name, residential address, and driver's license number or other identifying credential as defined in section 27.1-21; 
(2)  A digital image of the identifying credential used by the seller; and 
(3)  A description of the article purchased. The description shall describe each article as accurately as possible and shall include any names, initials, serial numbers, or other identifying marks or monograms on each article purchased, and the true weight or carat of any gem. 
(b)  The report shall be submitted in an electronic format as provided by the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee. 
(c)  If the purchase or acquisition occurs during a weekend or holiday, then the submittal of the electronic report required in subsection (a) shall be made no later than 1:00 p.m. the next regular business day. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-23. - Officers may examine records or property; warrantless search and seizure authorized. 
Every dealer or his employee shall admit to his place of business, during regular business hours, any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the City of Hampton, Virginia, or any law enforcement officer of the state or federal government. The dealer or his employee shall permit the officer to (i) examine all records required by this article and any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen and (ii) search for and take into possession any article known to him to be missing, or known or believed by him to have been stolen. However, the officer shall not take possession of any article without providing to the dealer a receipt. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-24. - Prohibited purchases. 
(a)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of eighteen. 
(b)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
(c)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first (i) ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identifying credential as defined in section 27.1-20, and at least one other corroborating means of identification, and (ii) obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-25. - Dealer to retain purchases. 
(a)  The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of twenty (20) calendar days from the date on which a copy of the daily report required by section 27.1-21 is received by the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter, or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the City of Hampton, Virginia. 
(b)  If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of twenty (20) calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-26. - Record of disposition. 
Each dealer shall maintain for at least twenty-four (24) months an accurate and legible record of the full name and address of the person, firm, or corporation to which he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required by section 27.1-25. This record shall also show the full name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased the item. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-27. - Exemptions from chapter. 
(a)  The chief of police of Hampton, Virginia or his designee, may waive by written notice implementation of any one or more of the provisions of this article, except section 27.1-24, for particular numismatic, gem, or antique exhibitions or craft shows sponsored by nonprofit organizations, provided that the purpose of the exhibitions is nonprofit in nature, notwithstanding the fact that there may be casual purchases and trades made at such exhibitions. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale or purchase of coins. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any bank, branch thereof, trust company or bank holding company, or any wholly owned subsidiary thereof, engaged in buying or selling gold and silver bullion. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 27.1-28. - Penalties; first and subsequent offenses. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction of a dealer for violation of any provision of this chapter, the chief of police of Hampton, Virginia may revoke the dealer's permit for one (1) full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory for two (2) full years from the date the conviction becomes final upon a second conviction. 
( Ord. No. 13-0024, 11-13-13 )  
Chapter 28 - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— City officers and employees generally, § 2-106 et seq.; payroll deductions for contributions to Virginia Supplemental Retirement System, § 2-110(4). 
State Law reference— Local retirement systems, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1510, 51.1-800 et seq.; pensions, benefits and retirement, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-124.2 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 28-1—28-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HAMPTON EMPLOYEE'S RETIREMENT SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Pension and retirement systems for city officers and employees, Code of Virginia, § 51.1-800 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 28-16. - Created; purpose; effective date. 
The Hampton Employee's Retirement System, hereinafter referred to as the "system," is hereby established for the purpose of providing retirement annuities, survivors' annuities, death benefits and other benefits for employees of the city and their dependents subject to offset and reduction by similar annuities and benefits provided under the state retirement system when the employees or their dependents become eligible therefor, but exclusive of the benefits provided under Title II of the Federal Social Security Act, pursuant to the provisions of this article. The effective date of the system shall be July 1, 1966, except that the effective date of the system for the employees of the school board of the city shall be June 1, 1967. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-1; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 207; Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07) 
State Law reference— Authority to create retirement system, Code of Virginia, § 51.1-801.  
Sec. 28-17. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Board: The board of trustees of the city employee's retirement system. 
City: The Government of the City of Hampton, Virginia, including the Department of Education. 
Credited service: For any member, the sum of his prior service and his membership service, provided that service rendered prior to a withdrawal from service shall not be considered to be credited service unless: 
(1)  The member at his withdrawal from service was entitled to a deferred annuity pursuant to section 28-23; or 
(2)  The member's withdrawal from service occurred after January 1, 1975, and when the member had more than one (1) but less than five (5) years of credited service, and the member returned to service within ten (10) years after the date of such withdrawal; or 
(3)  The member's withdrawal from service occurred after January 1, 1975, and when the member had less than one (1) year of credited service, and the member returned to service within ninety (90) days after the date of such withdrawal. 
In the computation of credited service, fifteen (15) days of service or more during any month shall constitute a month of service. In no case, except as to military service, shall credit be allowed for any period of absence without salary, nor shall less than fifteen (15) days of service during any month be considered for the computation of service, nor shall more than one (1) year of service be credited for service rendered in any one (1) calendar year. 
Employee: Any full-time employee of the city receiving an annual salary as compensation from the city. Part-time or temporary employees do not come within this meaning. An employee paid on an hourly basis, after two (2) years of consecutive employment, shall be deemed an employee for the purposes of this article. 
Final average salary: Effective from May 1, 1977, the average annual salary for the three (3) highest years of credited service as a member. 
Member: Any employee included in the membership of the system. 
Membership service: Service rendered by a member on or after the effective date of the system, as designated in section 28-16. 
Prior service: The most recent period of continuous service rendered prior to the effective date of the system, as designated in section 28-16, by an employee who became a member on the effective date. 
Retirement annuity: The retirement payments to which a member is entitled as provided in this chapter. 
Service: Service rendered as an employee of the city, the former Town of Phoebus or the former County of Elizabeth City. The service rendered by a member shall be deemed to include any service by the member in any branch of the armed forces of the United States of America during a time of war or during any national emergency recognized by the board, provided the member entered into such military service as an employee of the city and reentered the employment of the city within ninety (90) days after the date of termination of his military service. 
System: The employee's retirement system created by this article. 
Withdrawal from service: Complete severance of employment of any member as an employee of the city by resignation, discharge or dismissal. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-2; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 207; Ord. No. 304; Ord. No. 387; Ord. No. 418; Ord. No. 512; Ord. No. 553, 12-14-77; Ord. No. 572, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 869, 9-9-87; Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-18. - Membership generally. 
Membership of the system shall include any employee who: 
(1)  Is a member of the Virginia Retirement System; and 
(2)  Has rendered service prior to July 1, 1984, that is considered to be credited service, as defined in section 28-17. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-3; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 207; Ord. No. 279; Ord. No. 433; Ord. No. 769, 2-22-84; Ord. No. 869, 9-9-87; Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-19. - Optional membership; membership as condition of employment. 
(a)  Any person who is in the service of the city on the effective date of this chapter shall have the option of becoming a member of this system upon filing with the administrator prior to the effective date, a notice of election on a form provided by the system. Such notice of election, when filed, shall be irrevocable. Any such person electing to become a member of the system shall accept all the provisions of this article and shall conform therewith as though he were a new member and was subject to such provisions as a condition of employment. 
(b)  On and after the effective date of this section, any person first entering the service of the city shall become a member of the system as a condition of employment provided such person had entered service prior to July 1, 1984, and is otherwise qualified to be a member of the system pursuant to the provisions of section 28-18. 
(c)  Any person in service on the effective date specified in section 28-16, as the same may be applicable, who elects not to become a member shall be credited with only that service to the city from the date he elects to become a member, and shall receive no service credits prior to such date. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-22; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 207; Ord. No. 869, 9-9-87; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-20. - Designation of beneficiaries. 
The beneficiary or beneficiaries designated and named for the Virginia Retirement System shall be the same beneficiary or beneficiaries for this system. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-8; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-21. - Normal retirement generally. 
(a)  Any member who has at least five (5) years of credited service may retire at his option upon or after the attainment of age fifty-five (55). 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) above to the contrary notwithstanding, any member who is an employee of the police division having police powers, an employee of the fire division having firefighting responsibilities, or a jailer or a sworn employee of the city sheriff, who has attained his fiftieth birthday with five (5) or more years of creditable service, may retire upon written notification to the board stating forth the date the retirement is to become effective. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (a) and (b) above to the contrary notwithstanding, any member in service who is an employee of the police division having police powers, an employee of the fire division having firefighting responsibilities or a jailer or a sworn employee of the city sheriff shall be retired upon attainment of age seventy (70), unless subsequent to the member's normal retirement date, the city may provide for compulsory service retirement upon a determination that age is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to their normal operation or that the employee is incapable of performing his/her duties in a safe and efficient manner. 
The city may provide for compulsory service retirement for any member, except the city treasurer, the commissioner of revenue, the commonwealth's attorney, the city sheriff and the clerk of courts, upon a determination that age is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to their normal operation or that the employee is incapable of performing his/her duties in a safe and efficient manner. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-5; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 223; Ord. No. 304; Ord. No. 436; Ord. No. 536, 8-24-77; Ord. No. 632, 10-10-79; Ord. No. 869, 9-9-87; Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-22. - Normal retirement annuity. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, upon retirement in accordance with the provisions of section 28-21, a member shall receive an annuity, payable monthly for life, in an amount computed as the sum of: 
(1)  Two (2) percent of his final average salary, multiplied by the number of years of his credited service up to a maximum of twenty (20) such years, plus 
(2)  Two and one-fourth (2¼) percent of his final average salary, multiplied by the number of years of his credited service in excess of twenty (20) such years. The foregoing provisions of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, if a member retires under the provisions of subsection (a) of section 28-21, with less than twenty-five (25) years of credited service and prior to the attainment of age sixty (60), his retirement annuity, as computed in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section, shall be reduced by one-half (½) of one (1) percent for each complete month in the period between the member's retirement date and the earlier of his sixtieth birthday or the date on which he would have completed twenty-five (25) years of credited service had he remained an employee until such date. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 28-32, when a member becomes eligible for unreduced service retirement benefits, such benefits shall become nonforfeitable during his lifetime, unless he becomes disabled and is entitled to receive a disability annuity under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any individual who (1) retired under section 28-21 effective April 1, 1991, or (2) on April 1, 1991, is a member or would be a member except that such member is on leave without pay will be eligible for retirement as described below if such individual as of September 1, 1991, will have actually attained age fifty (50) and have actually earned at least five (5) years of credited service. Notwithstanding the above, anyone who is covered by section 28-26 is not also eligible under the provision. 
(d)  Any eligible individual must make the election to retire on or after April 1, 1991, and on or before June 30, 1991, and must actually retire on or before July 1, 1991, unless the individual is also eligible for similar benefits under the Virginia Supplemental Retirement System. In that event the individual must retire any time on or after July 1, 1991, and on or before September 1, 1991. 
(e)  Any individual who makes the election under the previous paragraph will have his retirement annuity computed under section 28-21 with the following exceptions: 
(1)  For an eligible individual who by July 1, 1991, has not attained age fifty (50), earned five (5) years of credited service or both then the actual age of such individual first will be treated as if on July 1, 1991, he was the later of age fifty (50) or his actual age and with the greater of five (5) years of credited service or his actual credit service. 
(2)  For purposes of determining the individual's age and service as of his retirement date, an additional five (5) years will be added to the individual's actual age as of his retirement date, not to exceed sixty (60) years, and the member will be deemed to have five (5) or more years of credited service than he actually has on such date. 
(3)  If an eligible individual commences receiving benefits before July 1, 1991, then such benefit will be recalculated as of July 1, 1991, in accordance with these provisions. 
(f)  Except as provided in section 28-22, when a member becomes eligible for unreduced service retirement benefits, such benefits shall become nonforfeitable during his lifetime, unless he becomes disabled and is entitled to receive a disability retirement annuity under the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Any individual who (1) is an active employee of the city; (2) retired under section 28-21 effective September 1, 1996; or (3) on June 1, 1996, is a member or would be a member except that such member is on leave without pay will be eligible for retirement as described below if such individual as of September 1, 1996, will have actually attained age fifty (50) and have actually earned at least twenty (20) years of credited service. Notwithstanding the above, anyone who is covered by section 28-26 is not eligible under this provision. 
(h)  Any eligible individual must make the election to retire on or after June 1, 1996, or on or before August 31, 1996, and must actually retire on September 1, 1996. 
(i)  Any individual who makes the election under the previous paragraph will have his retirement annuity computed under section 28-21 with the following exception: For purposes of determining the individual's age and service credit as of his retirement date, an additional five (5) years will be added to the individual's actual age as of his retirement date, not to exceed sixty (60) years, and the member will be deemed to have five (5) or more years of credited service than he actually has on such date. 
(Code 1964, 15A-6; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 304; Ord. No. 436; Ord. No. 604, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1004, 3-27-91; Ord. No. 1168, 6-12-96; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-23. - Deferred service retirement annuity. 
Any member who withdrew from service before July 1, 1970, prior to retirement with ten (10) years or more of credited service, and any member who withdrew from service on or after July 1, 1970, prior to retirement with five (5) years or more of credited service, shall be entitled to receive a deferred service retirement annuity beginning at age sixty (60) computed in accordance with section 28-22 and based on the final average salary and the number of years of credited service of the member as of the date of his withdrawal from service; provided, however, that any such member shall have the right to elect to have his annuity commence prior to age sixty (60) at any time after the later of age fifty (50), if he is subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of section 28-21, or at age fifty-five (55), if he is not subject to the provisions of said subsection, or the date of his withdrawal from service. The amount of his annuity as computed in accordance with this section shall be reduced by one-half (½) percent for each complete month in the period, if any, after the annuity commencement date and prior to the earlier of his sixtieth (60th) birthday or the date on which he would have completed twenty-five (25) years of credited service had he remained an employee until such date after resuming his status as an employee on his annuity commencement date. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-9; Ord. No. 513; Ord. No. 536, 8-24-77; Ord. No. 576, 6-28-78; Ord. No. 869, 9-9-87; Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-24. - Survivor's annuity upon member's death in service. 
In the event of the death of a member while in service, on or after July 1, 2000, the surviving spouse or, if none, a dependent parent of the member, shall be entitled to receive an annuity, commencing on the first of the month next following the date of death of the member and continuing for the lifetime of the survivor recipient. The amount of any such annuity shall be computed as the same amount that would have been payable to the member in accordance with section 28-22 had the member been eligible to retire and had retired on the date of his death, after having elected to have his annuity payable on the actuarially equivalent joint and last survivor option provided for in section 28-25, whereby the member's reduced annuity would be continued in the same amount after his death to the survivor recipient as the contingent annuitant. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-10; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 433; Ord. No. 536, 8-24-77; Ord. No. 1272, 4-26-00; Ord. No. 1293, 4-11-01; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-25. - Optional benefits. 
(a)  Each member shall have the right at any time, not later than the date of commencement of annuity benefits, to elect, by written request to the board, to have his retirement annuity payable under the joint and last survivor option described in subsection (b) of this section, in lieu of the annuity for the lifetime of the member that otherwise would have been payable. The amount of any such optional benefit shall be the actuarial equivalent, computed on bases approved by the board, of the amount of annuity that otherwise would have been payable to the member. Effective July 1, 1984, for purposes of this paragraph, actuarial equivalent will be determined in the same manner as it is by the Virginia Retirement System. 
(b)  Under the joint and last survivor option a member will receive a decreased retirement annuity during his lifetime with such decreased annuity (or one-half (½) thereof if so designated by the member) being continued after the death of the member to a designated contingent annuitant during the subsequent lifetime of such person; provided, however, that if the member's retirement is for disability, for purposes of determining actuarial equivalence, the age at retirement of the disabled member shall be assumed to be sixty-five (65). 
If the contingent annuitant is not the spouse of the member, no joint and last survivor option may be elected under which the actuarially computed present value of the annuity payments expected to be made to the member is less than one-half (½) of the actuarially computed combined present value of the total payments expected to be made to the member and the contingent annuitant. 
(c)  The election by a member of the joint and last survivor option shall be null and void, if either the member or the designated contingent annuitant dies before the member's date of retirement. At any time prior to the commencement of his annuity payments, a member, by written request to the board, may revoke any election previously made. 
(d)  If the designated contingent annuitant of any member, should die during the member's lifetime after the commencement of annuity benefits to the member under the joint and last survivor option, the monthly retirement annuity benefits payable thereafter to the member shall be increased to an amount equal to the monthly retirement annuity to which the member would have been entitled had the joint and last survivor option not been elected; however, the first month for which such an increased annuity benefit shall be payable shall be the month after the month in which written notification and proper documentation of the death of the contingent annuitant has been received by the board. 
(e)  A retired member who has elected a joint and last survivor option may, by written notification to the board, revoke such election and elect to receive the retirement allowance to which he would have been entitled had no option been elected initially, if (i) a final degree of divorce of the retired member from the original contingent annuitant has been entered, (ii) and the original contingent annuitant consents to the change. If such an election is made, the benefit payable to the retired member will begin the first of the month next following receipt of the contingent annuitant's written consent and a copy of the divorce decree which has incorporated the contingent annuitant's consent to forfeit the benefit. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-11; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 304; Ord. No. 522; Ord. No. 759, § 15A-11, 9-28-83; Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1091, 7-14-93; Ord. No. 1272, 4-26-00; Ord. No. 1293, 4-11-01; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-26. - Disability retirement annuity—Generally. 
A disability retirement annuity will be paid to any member having at least five (5) years of credited service. Any member in service or within ninety (90) days of withdrawal from service who has five (5) or more years of credited service may at any time before his sixty-fifth (65) birthday retire on account of disability by providing written notification to the board setting forth at what date the retirement is to become effective and that he has qualified for disability benefits under the Virginia Retirement System. Such effective date shall be after his last day of service, but shall not be more than ninety (90) days prior to the filing of such notification. Effective from January 1, 1972, the amount of annuity will be equal to two (2) percent of the final average salary for each completed year of service for the first twenty (20) years of credited service and two and one-fourth (2¼) percent of final average salary per year of credited service above twenty (20) years, except that, if such disability shall occur prior to age sixty (60), the length of credited service shall be the lessor of: 
(1)  Twice the actual period of credited service; or 
(2)  The period of credited service the member would have completed at age sixty (60) if he had remained in service to that age. 
The minimum disability allowance before and after age sixty-five (65), including social security, will be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year or twenty-five (25) percent of final average salary, whichever is the larger. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-12; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 304; Ord. No. 349; Ord. No. 407; Ord. No. 869, 9-9-87; Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-27. - Same—Periodic medical examination of recipient. 
Once each year during the first five (5) years following the retirement of a member on a disability retirement annuity, and once every three (3) years thereafter until the member's attainment of age sixty (60), the board may require any such member to undergo a medical examination by a physician designated by the board. Should such member refuse such examination, his retirement annuity shall be discontinued until withdrawal of such refusal and should the refusal continue for one (1) year, then his rights to any benefits shall cease. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-13; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 604, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 869, 9-9-87; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-28. - Offset of benefits payable under state retirement system. 
(a)  The annuities and benefits provided by this article with respect to any member shall be offset and reduced by similar annuities or benefits assumed to be provided by the Virginia Retirement System to the member or his dependents on and after the date the benefits under such latter system are assumed to be payable, and thereafter the member or his dependents shall receive only the excess thereof. 
(b)  The benefits assumed to be payable under the Virginia Retirement System shall be those provided for in article 9 of chapter 1 of title 51.1 (§ 51.1-152 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, as modified by the applicable provisions of article 5 of such chapter, except that: 
(1)  The normal retirement allowance formula referred to in § 51.1-403(B), 51.1-155(A) and 51.1-206(A) of the Code of Virginia shall be assumed to be defined as one and one-half (1½) percent of the member's average final compensation, multiplied by the number of years of his creditable service, and the provisions of the other subsections of §§ 51.1-403, 51.1-155 and 51.1-206 of such Code shall be disregarded. 
(2)  The disability retirement allowance formula referred to in § 51.1-157(A) of the Code of Virginia shall be assumed to be defined as one and one-half (1½) percent of the member's average final compensation, multiplied by the smaller of twice the number of years of his creditable service; or the number of years of creditable service the member would have completed at age sixty (60) if he had remained in service to that age, or in the case of a member who has already attained age sixty (60), the number of years of his creditable service at date of retirement, and the provisions of the other subsections of § 51.1-157 of such Code shall disregarded. 
(3)  The provisions of §§ 51.1-165, 51.1-166 and 51.1-207(C) of the Code of Virginia shall be disregarded. 
(4)  The "creditable service" to be used in the computation of the assumed benefits shall be taken as equal to the credited service of the member under this system, exclusive of any such service that is not creditable under the Virginia Retirement System because it was: 
a.  Rendered prior to the establishment of the Virginia Retirement System and the member either was not a member of the predecessor Virginia Supplemental Retirement System or withdrew his accumulated contributions under such predecessor system; or 
b.  Rendered while the member was in an employee classification which at the time was not such that he was eligible for membership in the Virginia Retirement System or the predecessor Virginia Supplemental Retirement System. 
(c)  The benefits assumed to be payable under the Virginia Retirement System with respect to any member shall be assumed to commence at the earliest date on which a member or his dependents may elect to receive them. Any adjustment to reflect an optional mode of payment shall be applied following the application of the offset. 
(d)  If the application of the offset provided for in the preceding provisions of this section would cause the monthly annuity payable under this section from July 1, 1970, to any member or his dependents to be in an amount of less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month, prior to any adjustment to reflect the election of an optional mode of payment, then and in such event, the amount of such monthly annuity shall be computed to be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month, any provisions in this section to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(e)  The benefits assumed to be payable under the Virginia Retirement System shall also include those provided for in Chapter 719 of the 1991 Acts of Assembly (now codified in various sections of Code of Virginia, title 51.1) for those members who meet the terms of such provisions. Anyone eligible under these provisions must apply for benefits no earlier than April 1, 1991, and no later than June 30, 1991. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-15; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 212; Ord. No. 304; Ord. No. 436; Ord. No. 446; Ord. No. 869, 9-9-87; Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1012, 6-12-91; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-29. - Monthly payment of benefits. 
Any service retirement annuity, disability annuity, death annuity or any other annuity provided for in this article shall be payable in equal monthly installments as a life annuity, except as otherwise provided. The first payment of any such annuity shall be made for the fraction of the month elapsing until the end of the first month; and the last payment shall be made as of the end of the month in which termination by death or other cause occurs. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-24; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-30. - Benefits not subject to transfer, execution, garnishment, etc. 
The right to a service retirement annuity, disability annuity, death annuity or any other annuity or benefit under the provisions of this article, by whatever name called, is personal with the recipient thereof, and the assignment or transfer of any such annuity or benefit or any part thereof shall be void, except as may be provided herein. Any such annuity or benefit shall not answer for debts contracted by the person receiving the same, and it is the intention of this article that they shall not be subject to execution, attachment or garnishment or affected by any judicial proceedings, except, however, payment shall be made in accordance with the provisions of any judgment, decree, or order which: 
(1)  Creates for, or assigns to, a spouse, former spouse, child or dependent of a member the right to receive all or a portion of the member's benefits under the system for the purpose of providing child support, alimony payments or marital property rights to that spouse, child or dependent; 
(2)  Is made pursuant to a state domestic relations law; 
(3)  Does not require the system to provide any type of benefit, or any option, not otherwise provided under the system; and 
(4)  Otherwise meets the requirements of section 206(d) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, (ERISA) as amended, as a "qualified domestic relations order," as determined by the system administrator. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-23; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 433; Ord. No. 1078, 3-24-93; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-31. - Termination of system not to affect funded interests and benefits. 
In the event that the system is terminated or partially terminated as of any date, the interest of each member as of such date and of each beneficiary who is in receipt of payment as of such date shall be nonforfeitable to the extent then funded. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-26; Ord. No. 604, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-32. - Defrauding system. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement or falsifies, or knowingly permits to be falsified, any record or records of the system, in an attempt to defraud the system, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. The system and the city shall have the right to recover, by setoff or otherwise, any payments made as a result of such false representation. If any such person is a member of the system or the beneficiary of a member, he shall forfeit all rights to further participation in any of the benefits hereunder. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-25; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-33. - Maximum benefits; mandatory payment of allowance. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, earned compensation for any fiscal year after 1993 in which employee or employer contributions are made and for which annual compensation is used for computing any benefit shall not exceed the higher of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) or the amount determined by the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service as the limitation for calendar years after 1989; provided the imposition of the limitation shall not reduce a member's benefit below the amount determined as of June 30, 1993. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the annual benefit payable on behalf of a member shall, if necessary, be reduced to the extent required by section 415(b) and 415(e) of the Internal Revenue Code, as adjusted by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(c)  On and after July 1, 1989, the retirement allowance of a member who has terminated employment shall begin no later than the later of (1) April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year that the member attains seventy and one-half (70½) years of age or (2) April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the member terminated employment. Effective July 1, 1989, all distributions from this plan shall conform to the regulations issued under section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, ("Code") including the incidental death benefit provisions of section 401(a)(9)(G) of the Code. Further, such regulations shall override any plan provision that is inconsistent with section 401(a)(9) of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-34. - Early retirement annuity. 
(a)  Any member on or after July 1, 1999, who has at least ten (10) years of credited service may retire at his option upon or after the attainment of age fifty (50) upon written notification to the board setting forth the date the retirement is to become effective. 
(b)  A member's early retirement annuity shall be computed in accordance with section 28-22 based on final average salary and the number of years of credited service of the member as of the date of his early retirement. 
(c)  The member may elect to have his early retirement annuity commence on or after his early retirement date, subject to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section 28-34. 
(d)  Any other provision of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, a member's early retirement annuity shall be the benefit the member would have received had he terminated service and deferred retirement to age fifty-five (55). 
(Ord. No. 1242, 3-24-99; Ord. No. 1249, 5-26-99; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-35. - Cost-of-living adjustment. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 28-35(b), retired members and beneficiaries who are receiving retirement benefits effective July 1, 1999, and who retired prior to July 2, 1998, shall have their gross monthly retirement benefits increased by three (3) percent for each full year of retirement. 
(b)  Retired members with gross monthly retirement benefits after the adjustment provided in section 28-35(a) of less than fifty dollars ($50.00) shall have their gross monthly benefits increased to fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 1244, 3-24-99; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-36. - Post-retirement supplements generally. 
(a)  Retired members and beneficiaries who are receiving retirement benefits effective July 1, 2001, and who retired prior to July 1, 1999, shall have their gross monthly retirement benefits increased by three and one-half (3.5) percent. 
(b)  In addition to the allowances payable under this chapter, future post-retirement supplements shall be payable to the recipients of such allowances in accordance with guidelines adopted by the board of trustees. Supplements shall be subject to the same conditions of payment as are allowances. 
(Ord. No. 1304, 5-23-01; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 28-37—28-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FINANCING AND ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 28-41. - City's contributions. 
(a)  On and after January 1, 1975, the entire cost of the benefits provided under the system shall be borne by the city and no contributions shall thereafter be made by members of the system. 
(b)  The city shall contribute annually an amount equal to the sum of the "normal contribution" and the "accrued liability contribution," if any. 
(c)  The normal contribution for the city for any period shall be determined as a percentage, equal to the normal contribution rate, of the total projected salaries of the members for such period. Similarly, the accrued liability contribution for the city for any year shall be determined as a percentage, equal to the accrued liability contribution rate, of such total salaries. In determining the amount of any city contribution, a reasonable approximation to the exactly computed amount may be used. All forfeitures of any kind shall be used to reduce future city contributions but not to increase system benefits. 
(d)  The normal contribution rate shall be determined as the percentage of the total annual salaries of the members that is represented by the sum of the cost of benefits expected to accrue during the ensuing year as computed under the entry age funding method and done so in accordance with recognized actuarial principles on the basis of methods and assumptions approved by the board. The normal contribution rate shall be determined from the results of the most recent actuarial valuation of the system, and shall continue in force until a new valuation is made. 
(e)  The accrued liability contribution rate shall be determined as the percentage of the total projected annual salaries of the members that is represented by the level annual contribution necessary to amortize any remaining unfunded accrued liability over a fixed period of forty (40) years that began in 1983. The unfunded accrued liability, as of any valuation date, shall be determined in accordance with recognized actuarial principles on the basis of methods and assumptions approved by the board, as the excess, if any, of: 
(1)  The then present value of future payments of retirement annuities then being paid and of retirement annuities to be paid in the future to or in respect of members not yet then retired, over 
(2)  The sum of the value of the assets then held in the retirement account, plus the then-present value of the normal contributions expected to be made in the future by the city. 
The accrued liability contribution rate shall be determined from the results of the most recent actuarial valuation of the system and shall continue in force until a new valuation is made. 
(f)  The board shall certify the normal contribution rate and the accrued contribution rate, and every change made from time to time in either of such rates. 
(g)  The amount of each city contribution provided for in this section shall be established by: (1) taking the sum of the normal contribution and the accrued liability contribution dollar amounts from the actuarial valuation and one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of such amount shall be remitted by the city to the system on a monthly basis; or (2) applying the normal and accrued liability contribution rate percentages to the salaries being paid to the members during each payroll period, and the resulting amounts shall be remitted by the city to the system on a monthly basis concurrently with the payment of salaries to the members. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-16; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 207; Ord. No. 433; Ord. No. 604, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 869, 9-9-87; Ord. No. 987, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 10-0024, 10-13-10)  
Sec. 28-42. - Refund of member's contributions. 
As of January 1, 1975, each member shall be paid in a lump sum the amount standing to the credit of his individual account in the member's contribution account as of December 31, 1974. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-14; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 410; Ord. No. 433; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-43. - System constitutes separate trust; board of trustees, generally. 
(a)  The system created by this article shall be construed to be a trust, separate and distinct from all other entities. The responsibility for the direction and operation of the system, and for making effective the provisions of this article, is hereby vested in a board of trustees. The board shall consist of nine (9) members, at least two (2) of which shall be financial professionals. The board's composition shall be as follows: 
(1)  The city manager, or his designee, ex officio. 
(2)  The director of risk management, or his designee, ex officio. 
(3)  The superintendent of schools, or his designee, ex officio. 
(4)  Three (3) members appointed by the city council, who need not be an employee or retiree of the city. Each of these members shall serve for terms of two (2) years or until successors are appointed. They shall be eligible to succeed themselves for only one (1) additional term. The provisions of Hampton City Code 2-2 shall not apply to the membership of this board. Members may reside outside of the city. Recommendations for each of these members shall be made by the board of trustees to the city council according to a procedure adopted by the board and approved by the city council. City council may designate their appointment authority under this provision to the city manager. 
(5)  Three (3) members appointed by the school board, who need not be an employee or retiree of the school board. Each of these members shall serve for terms of two (2) years or until successors are appointed. They shall be eligible to succeed themselves for only one (1) additional term. Members may reside outside of the city. Recommendations for each of these members shall be made by the board of trustees to the school board according to a procedure adopted by the board and approved by the school board. The school board may designate their appointment authority under this provision to the superintendent of schools. 
(b)  Each trustee shall take an oath that, so far as it devolves upon him, he will diligently and honestly administer the affairs of the board and that he will not knowingly or willfully permit to be violated any of the provisions of this article applicable to the system. Such oath shall be subscribed by the member taking it, certified by the officer before whom it is taken and immediately filed with the clerk of the council. A trustee shall be deemed to have qualified for membership on the board when such oath has been filed. 
(c)  Subject to the limitations prescribed herein, the board shall, from time to time, establish such rules and regulations for the administration of the system and to implement the provisions of this article as may be required. It shall hold regular meetings at least quarterly in each year and such special meetings as may be deemed necessary. The annual meeting shall be held in the month of January of each year. Except as otherwise provided by law, all meetings shall be open to the public. A record of proceedings of all meetings shall be kept by the board. 
(d)  Each trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on the board and the concurrence of five (5) trustees shall be necessary for a decision at any regular or special meeting. 
(e)  For purposes of this section the term financial professional, shall be defined as one who does any of the following: 
(1)  Engages in the buying, selling, handling, managing, or investing of securities; 
(2)  Provides advice regarding money, credit, securities, financial planning, or other investments; 
(3)  Teaches college or graduate level courses in the subjects of finance, business management or investments. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-18; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 207; Ord. No. 434; Ord. No. 616, 4-11-79; Ord. No. 706, 12-16-81; Ord. No. 753, 6-8-83; Ord. No. 802, 7-10-85; Ord. No. 1239, 2-24-99; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 14-0026, 11-12-14 ; Ord. No. 19-0002 , 3-27-19)  
Sec. 28-44. - Officers generally. 
The board shall have the following officers whose duties shall be prescribed by bylaws to be adopted by the board: 
(1)  A chairperson and a vice-chairperson shall be elected from among its members. 
(2)  The administrator of the system shall be the director of finance. 
(3)  The director of finance shall be treasurer of the system and shall have custody of its monies and securities. All disbursements by the system shall be made by the treasurer upon authorization of the board. 
(4)  The city attorney shall be legal counsel to the board and shall represent the board in all litigation affecting the system. 
(5)  An actuary shall be appointed to serve as technical advisor in the administration of the system on matters pertaining to the technical and actuarial aspects thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-19; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-45. - General duties of administrator. 
Subject to the orders and resolutions of the board, the administrator of the system shall: 
(1)  Employ such clerical and professional services as may be required for the proper operation of the system whose compensation shall be fixed by the board. 
(2)  Establish and maintain records, files and accounts in such form and scope as will give full effect to the requirements of the system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Accumulate actuarial data concerning the operation experience of the system in such form as is necessary for the biennial actuarial valuations and periodic actuarial studies in accordance with recommendations of the actuary. 
(4)  Prepare such periodic reports as may be required for the effective administration of the system. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-20; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 569, 9-9-87; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-46. - Retirement account; actuarial valuations and investigations. 
(a)  All of the funds and assets of the system shall be credited to a single retirement account held and maintained by the board for the express purposes set forth in the provisions of this article. All the funds and assets of the system are held for the exclusive benefit of the members and their beneficiaries and no part thereof may revert to the city unless and until all benefits and obligations due such members and beneficiaries in accordance with the provisions of this article have been fully satisfied. All contributions made by the city and all income received on the invested assets of the system shall be credited to the retirement account. From the retirement account shall be paid the retirement annuities and other benefits provided for in this article. 
(b)  A biennial actuarial valuation of the system shall be made as of the close of the appropriate fiscal year for the purpose of determining the applicable contribution rates to be made in the future by the city, pursuant to the provisions of section 28-41. 
(c)  At least once in every four-year period, the board shall cause an actuarial investigation to be made of all of the experience under the system. Pursuant to such investigations, the board shall, from time to time, revise the actuarial basis under which the rates of contributions prescribed under this article are determined. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-17; Ord. No. 118; Ord. No. 304; Ord. No. 410; Ord. No. 433; Ord. No. 604, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 632, 10-10-79; Ord. No. 673, 11-12-80; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 28-47. - Investments. 
(a)  The board may keep as an available fund an amount not to exceed the requirements for current disbursements by the system for a period of ninety (90) days. Any amounts in excess of such current disbursement fund shall be invested with the care, skill, prudence and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of like character and with the same aims. Such investments shall be diversified so as to minimize the risk of large losses unless under the circumstances it is clearly prudent not to do so. 
(b)  The investment manager authorized to act for the board may purchase bonds, notes or other general obligations of the city before or after the same are offered to the public, whether or not bids have been solicited by the city for such securities. 
(c)  The investment manager authorized to act for the board shall have the power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer and dispose of any of the securities in which the monies of the system are to be or have been invested, as well as the proceeds from such investments, and any other property belonging to the system. 
(d)  All investments shall be clearly marked to indicate ownership by the system and, to the extent possible, shall be registered in its name or in the name of nominees selected by the investment manager. 
(e)  Any limitations affecting the purchase of securities shall be applicable only at the time of purchase and shall not require the liquidation of any investment at any time. 
(f)  No member or employee of the board shall have any direct interest in the income or gains from any investment made by the board, nor shall any such person receive any pay or emolument from services in connection with any investment. No member or employee of the board shall become an endorser or surety, or in any manner an obligor, for money loaned or borrowed from the system. Proof that any such person has violated any of these restrictions shall make him guilty of a misdemeanor or larceny, as the case may be, and such person shall be punishable therefore as provided by law. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-21; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 527; Ord. No. 673, 11-12-80; Ord. No. 695, 6-24-81; Ord. No. 748, 4-13-83; Ord. No. 569, 9-9-87; Ord. No. 1048, 6-10-92; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 14-0026, 11-12-14 ) 
State Law reference— Investments of retirement systems, Code of Virginia, § 51.1-803.  
Sec. 28-48. - Annual report. 
The administrator of the system shall prepare each year the annual report of the board, to be submitted to the board, embodying, among other things, a statement of assets, liabilities and reserves certified by the actuary, an accountant's balance sheet supported by a statement of income and expenditures, a listing of investments owned by the system, a detailed statement of investments acquired and disposed of during the year covered by the report and such other financial and statistical data as may be deemed necessary for a proper interpretation of the condition of the system and the results of its operations. The board shall cause to be distributed among the members of the system a synopsis of such annual report. 
(Code 1964, § 15A-20; Ord. No. 188; Ord. No. 1453, 1-24-07)  
Chapter 29 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Division of police of department of public safety, §§ 9.01, 9.02; city sheriff, § 13.01. 
Cross reference— Criminal history investigation of applicants for position of policeman, § 2-108; authority of city to attach its police alarms circuits and signal wires on power and telephone poles, § 9-69; requirement of site plan ordinance that buildings and structures be accessible to police vehicles, § 9-166(3); police powers of fire marshal as to investigations and prosecutions involving certain offenses, § 14-3; resisting or obstructing by threats or force, § 24-6; obstructing justice, § 24-7. 
State Law reference— General powers and duties of local police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1704. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Impersonating officer. 
Any person who shall falsely assume or exercise the functions, powers, duties and privileges incident to the office of sheriff, police officer, marshal or other peace officer, or who shall falsely assume or pretend to be any such officer, shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-21; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174.  
Sec. 29-2. - Report of certain injuries to police. 
It shall be the duty of every hospital, physician or nurse (other than when assisting a licensed physician) called to the aid of, or aiding any person who has been knifed, stabbed, shot, poisoned or wounded, either by himself or by any other person, to report such matter to the division of police of the city. Such report shall be made immediately upon receipt of notice of such matter and, in any event, within one hour after being called to or after aiding any such person. Any hospital, physician or nurse wilfully refusing to notify the division of police department as required by this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-30; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-2967.  
Sec. 29-3. - False reports to police. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly (1) to give a false report as to the commission of any crime to any police officer or any other law-enforcement official, with intent to mislead, or (2) without just cause and with intent to interfere with the operations of any law-enforcement official, to call or summon any law-enforcement official by telephone or other means, including engagement or activation of an automatic emergency alarm. Violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-23; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-461.  
Sec. 29-4. - Provision of certain records and services; fees. 
(a)  Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the police division is authorized to: furnish copies of accident reports; furnish photocopies of offense reports (first page, front only); furnish photographs of motor vehicle accidents (after disposition by the court of any related criminal charges); make criminal record checks and reports (local records only); take finger prints of individuals on request; and allow viewing of offense reports. 
(b)  Reports of motor vehicle accidents and related photographs shall be furnished only to persons involved or injured in the accident or by such person's attorney and to any authorized representative of an insurance carrier reasonably anticipating exposure to civil liability as a consequence of the accident. Copies of offense reports and inspection thereof shall be furnished or permitted only to persons having a legitimate interest therein as determined by the chief of police or his designee. 
(c)  For the above services, fees shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  Photocopy of accident report ..... $10.00 
(2)  Photocopy of offense report ..... 10.00 
(3)  Criminal history check by name with copy (local record only) ..... 15.00 
(4)  Finger printing of individuals on request (per card) ..... 10.00 
(5)  Photographs: 
Digital photographs ..... 12.00 
(Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07; Ord. No. 10-0014, 5-12-10; Ord. No. 14-0002, 3-12-14 ) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 10-0014, adopted May 12, 2010, shall be effective and the charges applied to billings made by the city on and after July 1, 2010. 
State Law reference— Public record exemptions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3705.1 et seq.  
Secs. 29-5—29-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY IN CUSTODY OF POLICE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 29-21. - Exceptions from article. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall apply to the acquisition or disposition of abandoned motor vehicles, trailers, semitrailers or parts thereof which are governed by article XVI of chapter 21 of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be held to require the chief of police to take possession of or to make disposition of any lost or stolen property, the disposition or possession of which is otherwise provided for by law. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to weapons seized pursuant to section 40-1 of this Code and all such weapons shall be disposed of as required by such section. 
(Code 1964, § 2-56; Ord. No. 641, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 29-22. - Delivery to chief. 
It shall be the duty of all officers and members of the police division into whose possession any property seized or taken shall come to deliver the same at once to the chief of police or his designated officer, unless it is wanted for immediate use as evidence in any case and, in that event, a report and inventory of the same shall be forwarded at once to the chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 2-54; Ord. No. 104, § 4; Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 29-23. - Record to be kept. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep, or cause to be kept, a record of all property which may be seized or otherwise taken possession of by the police division of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2-55; Ord. No. 104, § 1; Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07)  
Secs. 29-24—29-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Disposal of unclaimed property in possession of police, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1719. 
 
Sec. 29-36. - Sale or retention of unclaimed personal property authorized; requirements. 
(a)  Any unclaimed personal property which has been in the possession of the police division for more than sixty (60) days may be sold at public auction or retained for use by the police division in accordance with the provisions of this section. Unclaimed bicycles may be disposed of in accordance with section 29-37. 
(b)  As used in this section, "unclaimed personal property" shall mean any personal property belonging to another which: 
(1)  Has been acquired by a law enforcement officer pursuant to his or her duties; 
(2)  Is not needed in any criminal prosecution; 
(3)  Has not been claimed by its rightful owner; and 
(4)  The state treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act (Virginia Code § 55-210.1 et seq.). 
(c)  Prior to the sale or retention of any unclaimed item the chief of police or his/her duly authorized agents shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property and obtain from the commonwealth's attorney in writing a statement advising that the item is not needed in any criminal prosecution, and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once a week for two (2) successive weeks, notice that there will be a public display and sale of unclaimed personal property. Such property, including property selected for retention by the police division, shall be described generally in the notice, together with the date, time and place of the sale and shall be made available for public viewing at the sale. The chief of police or his/her duly authorized agents shall pay from the proceeds of sale the costs of advertisement, removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens, and notice of sale. The balance of the funds shall be held by such officer for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. 
(d)  Any unclaimed item retained for use by the police division shall become the property of the city and shall be retained only if, in the written opinion of the chief of police, there is a legitimate use for the property by the police division and that retention of the item is a more economical alternative than purchase of a similar or equivalent item. 
(Ord. No. 1234, 1-27-99; Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 29-37. - Unclaimed bicycles and mopeds. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 29-36 above, any bicycle or moped which has been in the possession of the police division, unclaimed, for more than thirty (30) days may be sold at public auction or donated to a charitable organization. The police division shall comply with the notice provisions of section 29-36 prior to any such sale or donation. 
(b)  Any bicycle or moped found and delivered to the police by a private person which thereafter remains unclaimed for more than thirty (30) days after the final date of publication required herein may be given to the finder, provided the location and description of the bicycle or moped shall have been published at least once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(c)  A "charitable organization" as used in this section means any charitable institution or association located within the city limits; provided, such institution or association is not controlled in whole or in part by a church or sectarian society. The words "sectarian society" shall not be construed to mean a nondenominational Young Men's Christian Association or a nondenominational Young Women's Christian Association. 
(Ord. No. 1234, 1-27-99; Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Disposition of unclaimed bicycles, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1720.  
Sec. 29-38. - Sale of perishable, bulky, etc., items. 
If any property seized or taken possession of by the police division shall be of a perishable nature or so bulky or of such nature as to make it dangerous or inadvisable to retain possession thereof for the length of time specified in section 29-36, upon a certificate of such fact by the chief of police setting forth the reasons why such property should not be retained for the period fixed in section 29-36 before selling the same, the purchasing agent shall cause such property to be advertised forthwith one (1) time in a newspaper published or having general circulation in the city and shall sell such property at public auction at any time after three (3) days shall have elapsed from the date of such publication. 
(Ord. No. 1234, 1-27-99; Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 29-39. - Disposition of proceeds of sale. 
The chief of police or his or her duly authorized agents shall pay from the proceeds of sales of unclaimed personal property the cost of advertisement, removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens and notice of sale. The balance of the funds shall be held by such officer for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. If no claim has been made by the owner for the proceeds of such sale within sixty (60) days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the city's general fund. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the city within three (3) years from the date of the sale and, if timely application is made therefor, the city shall pay the remaining proceeds of the sale to the owner without interest or other charges or compensation. No claim shall be made nor any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three (3) years from the date of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 1234, 1-27-99; Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1719.  
Sec. 29-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AUXILIARY POLICE 
 
Sec. 29-41. - Auxiliary police. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized to appoint, and to call into service, auxiliary police officers in those circumstances permitted by state law, not to exceed fifty (50) in number. The chief of police, with approval of the city manager, shall establish rules, regulations, standards, and qualifications concerning the operation of the auxiliary police officers, including their uniforms, arms, equipment, and training. 
(Ord. No. 1035, 1-22-92; Ord. No. 1463, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Provisions authorizing the establishment, and the powers, authority, etc., of auxiliary police forces, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1731 et seq.  
Chapter 30 - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city as to sewer improvements, § 2.01a; responsibility of department of public works as to construction of sewers, § 10.02. 
Cross reference— Building and development regulations, Ch. 9; requirements of site plan ordinance as to installation of sewers, § 9-169; land disturbing activity and erosion and sediment control generally, § 13.1-1 et seq.; disposal of liquid and sanitary wastes from food establishments, § 15-33; sewers and sewage disposal in mobile home parks, §§ 20-44, 20-48; sewage disposal at campsite areas, § 26-24.5; stormwater management, Ch. 33.1; sewage disposal system required for subdivisions, § 35-79; water supply, Ch. 39. 
State Law reference— Sewage disposal generally, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq.; authority of city to establish, maintain and operate sewage disposal systems, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122; septic tanks and sewage disposal when sewers not available, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2157. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 30-2. - Jurisdiction and control of sewers by city. 
All sewers, storm water, sanitary or combined, except house connections on curb lines or lot lines, that have heretofore been or may hereafter be constructed by any person under any street, lot, alley or parking space, or under any private court or alley, and have been or may hereafter be connected into any sewer constructed by or belonging to the city, shall be under the jurisdiction and control of the city, as long as any such sewer shall remain connected with any such sewer constructed by or belonging to the city. 
(Code 1956, § 17-40; Code 1964, § 30-3; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-3. - Sewers in streets or other areas open or dedicated to public use to be installed by city or its contractors. 
All sewers, except those installed in subdivisions by the developer in accordance with section 35-79 of this Code, that may be constructed by any person in any street, lot, alley or parking space now open to public use or in any street, lot, parking space or easement duly dedicated for public use in the city shall be installed by, or under contract with, the city. 
(Code 1956, § 17-42; Code 1964, § 30-5; Ord. No. 589, 10-25-78; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-83; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-4. - Sewer specifications. 
All sewers constructed by, or under a contract with, the city as provided in the preceding section 30-3 shall be of such size and established with such grade and constructed in accord with such other specifications as may be prescribed by the director of the department of public works in accordance with uniform city standards. 
(Code 1956, § 17-43; Code 1964, § 30-6; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-5. - Deposit, etc., required for construction of sewer system. 
The city shall require a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) deposit for advertising for construction bids for sewer systems. Such deposit shall be refunded upon award of the construction contract. In the event no contract is awarded, such deposit is forfeited to the city. Prior to the contract award, the developer shall either submit to the city a cash payment or submit to the city an executed escrow agreement approved by the city attorney in an amount certified by the director of public works equal to the greater of: 
(1)  The cumulative total of the tap connection fees for each lot or each unit in an apartment development, or 
(2)  The cost of construction plus ten (10) percent for bidding, stakeout and as-built drawings. 
Such sum shall be adjusted by the final actual construction costs. 
(Code 1956, § 17-42; Code 1964, § 30-5; Ord. No. 589, 10-25-78; Ord. No. 749, 4-13-83; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-6. - Disposition of funds collected under this article, Article II, Article III and section 35-79. 
(a)  All funds collected under the provisions of this article, article II and article III of this chapter and section 35-79 of this Code shall be collected by the city departments designated to administer this article or section 35-79 of this Code and credited to a special revenue waste water management fund within the general fund. Funds from this account collected pursuant to article III of this chapter shall be used to provide for the operation and maintenance, including the cost of materials and equipment replacement for the sewerage system. Funds from this account collected pursuant to this article and article II of the chapter and section 35-79 of this Code shall be used to provide for the extension of sewer lines, except as provided for in section 35-79 of this Code, and to provide for participation by the city in the construction of sanitary sewerage pumping stations, force mains and off-site gravity sewers in new developments, if the same services other properties. The city would, to the amount available in the revolving reserve account, pay the lesser of: 
(1)  One-half (½) the difference between the pumping station and force main construction or off-site gravity line cost and the anticipated tap fees from the proposed development; or 
(2)  The amount of tap connection fees anticipated from other properties served by the system. 
(b)  The subdivider's participation in the construction of pumping stations, force mains and off-site gravity sewers shall be in lieu of tap fees until his cumulative amount of tap fees for properties using that system exceeds the amount of his participation. Any subdivider denied the cost sharing privilege because there are no funds available may elect to be put on a chronological waiting list for approval when funding again becomes available. 
(c)  If, at some future time, development is complete within the city and the special revenue waste water management fund is not needed, then an amount not to exceed the two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) originally appropriated to the account, plus compound interest, at the then-current legal rate, from January 1, 1953, and any additional appropriations, plus compound interest at such rate from the date of each such appropriation, shall be returned to the general fund. The balance, if any, in the account may be used to repair existing sewer facilities. 
(Code 1956, § 17-56; Code 1964, § 30-12; Ord. No. 589, 10-25-78; Ord. No. 749, 4-14-83; Ord. No. 1247, 5-12-99; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-7. - Obstructing, damaging, etc., sewers generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, break or injure, in any manner, any public sewer, or to obstruct, break or injure, in any manner, any catch basin or manhole, or to place any garbage, earth, trash or any other material of any kind in any catch basin or manhole. 
(Code 1956, § 17-53; Code 1964, § 30-9; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07) 
Cross reference— Damaging property generally, § 24-31.  
Sec. 30-8. - Buildings or structures interfering with, or impeding access to, sewers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any building or structure of any kind around or upon any alley or easement beneath which a sewer is laid, when such building or structure interferes with or impedes free access to such sewer. Any person having constructed a building or structure upon such alley or easement, or any owner of such property which interferes with or impedes free access to such sewer shall, upon forty-eight (48) hours' written notice given by the director of public works, cause to be removed such building or structure to be removed at his own expense, when it shall be necessary for the city to have access to such sewer for repairs or construction. Upon refusal to do so, the city shall remove such building or structure for the purpose aforesaid, and the owner thereof shall be charged with the expense of removal. 
(Code 1956, § 17-41; Code 1964, § 30-4; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-9. - Drainage of rainwater into sanitary sewer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any roof, downspout, yard or walkway drain or any other drain carrying rainwater into any house service sewer or other sewer connected with any public sewer designed and constructed as a sanitary sewer only, or into any sewer leading into any public sewer designed and constructed as a sanitary sewer only. 
(Code 1956, § 17-54; Code 1964, § 30-10; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 30-10—30-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWERS 
 
Sec. 30-21. - When required. 
(a)  The owner of any dwelling or other building in which human beings live or congregate shall, whenever a trunk line or lateral sewer line is available, connect such dwelling or building with such trunk or lateral line sewer. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to empty any sewage or sewerage system into any well, septic tank or open stream or waterway in the city, when a public trunk or lateral line sewer is reasonably available for connecting to the same. 
(b)  Properly functioning septic tank systems may continue in use to serve properties where a trunk line or lateral line sewer is available, until such time as such septic tank system becomes in need of repair or until a period of three (3) years shall have elapsed from the time the public trunk or lateral line sewer is constructed to serve such property, whichever occurs first; provided, however, that if the connection fee prescribed by section 30-23 is voluntarily paid, a properly functioning septic tank system may continue to be used beyond such three (3) year period, until such time as it becomes in need of repair. 
(c)  Buildings or dwellings located where public sewer lines are available on May 11, 1960, and having their building line more than one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way wherein the public sewer line is available, shall not be required to be connected thereto until the septic tank system serving the building or dwelling becomes in need of repair. 
(d)  The director of public health may grant extensions of time, not exceeding six (6) months, to individuals falling within the terms of this section, when the same would not be detrimental to the health and safety of the community; provided, that such an extension of time shall only be granted when not to do so would constitute an undue hardship. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy, lease or rent any premises not connected to a public sewer, as required by this section, and each day of such occupancy shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Code 1956, § 17-45; Code 1964, §§ 30-13—30-14.1; Ord. No. 55; Ord. No. 113; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to require sewer connections, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122.  
Sec. 30-22. - Permit generally. 
No person shall connect, for sewer service from his premises, through any sewer constructed by or belonging to the city, or through any private sewer connected with any sewer constructed by or belonging to the city, without first obtaining, from the director of public works, a permit to make the connection. Application for such permit shall be filed with the director of public works and the permit shall be issued in the name of the owner of the property to be served by the connection. 
(Code 1956, §§ 17-46, 17-47; Code 1964, §§ 30-17—30-19; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-23. - Fees—Generally. 
(a)  The director of public works shall issue a permit for a sewer connection, as provided for in section 30-22, when and after the applicant therefor has paid into the city treasury a tap connection fee based on average construction costs as follows: 
(1)  Lots having a frontage of not more than thirty (30) feet: Four hundred dollars ($400.00). 
(2)  Lots having over thirty (30) feet of frontage, but not more than forty (40) feet: Five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(3)  Lots having over forty (40) feet of frontage, but not more than fifty (50) feet: Six hundred dollars ($600.00). 
(4)  Lots having over fifty (50) feet of frontage, but not more than sixty (60) feet: Seven hundred dollars ($700.00). 
(5)  Lots in excess of sixty (60) feet of frontage: Seven hundred dollars ($700.00) for the first sixty (60) feet and ten dollars ($10.00) per foot for each additional foot of frontage. 
The frontage of lots shall be calculated on the shorter frontage, when the property has more than one frontage line, except for connections to serve buildings used or to be used for industrial purposes. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, the amount to be paid for a sewer connection in the following cases shall not be less than the amount indicated below: 
(1)  For a two-family duplex: Six hundred eighty dollars ($680.00). 
(2)  For an apartment house: Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each apartment therein. 
(3)  For a lot embracing more than one building, mobile home or housekeeping trailer requiring sewer service, served by a single connection: Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each unit served or to be served. 
(4)  For a building used or to be used for commercial purposes: Seven hundred dollars ($700.00). 
(c)  The amount to be paid in for sewer connections to serve buildings used or to be used for industrial purposes shall be eight cents ($0.08) per square foot of building space, but in no case less than seven hundred dollars ($700.00). 
(d)  In the event a single family residence is located on acreage and there is no enclosure separating the residence from the remaining acreage, the sewer connection fee shall be based upon the minimum frontage required for a lot in the particular zone in which the residence is located, or to be located, and meeting all side yard setback requirements. 
(e)  The connection, through an existing sewer connection, of any separate residential, commercial or industrial unit shall be deemed a "sewer connection" within the meaning of this section. 
(f)  In the event that any person required by this article to have his property connected to a public sewer shall fail, after ten (10) days' notice in writing from the city manager, to have such connection made, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to compute the sewer connection fee applicable in each instance under the provisions of this section and certify the same to the city treasurer. The amount so certified shall be a lien against the real estate as a part of and the same as taxes duly assessed against the real estate by the city. 
(Code 1956, § 17-48; Code 1964, § 30-20; Ord. No. 267; Ord. No. 383; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07) 
Cross reference— Plumbing permit fees, § 9-45.  
Sec. 30-24. - Same—Installment payment. 
(a)  Persons desiring a connection of a single-family residence to the public sewer system may, in lieu of the prepayment required in section 30-23, enter into an agreement with the council, acting through the city manager, which agreement shall contain the following: 
(1)  That the payment required by section 30-23 shall be paid by payment of a minimum of one-third ( 1/3 ) at the time of the agreement, and the balance of the same due shall be paid either in two (2) equal installments to be paid one (1) year and two (2) years, respectively, from the date of the agreement, or upon sale of the property described in the agreement, whichever shall occur first, which balance shall carry an interest rate of eight (8) percent per annum on the unpaid balance until paid. 
(2)  That such person shall agree that, upon nonpayment of any amount due and not paid, at the option of the city manager, the sewer connection may be broken and any amount already paid shall not be refunded. 
(3)  That any amount due and unpaid, in lieu of subparagraph (2) above, shall be a lien against the real estate the same as taxes duly assessed. 
(b)  In the event that any person affected by any of the provisions of an agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a) above should fail, after ten (10) days' notice in writing from the city manager, to do that which may be required under the provisions of the agreement, it shall be the duty of the city manager to compute the amount due to the city that may be applicable in each instance under the provisions of such agreement and certify the same to the city treasurer. The amount so certified shall be a lien against the real estate as a part of and the same as taxes duly assessed against the real estate by the city. 
(Code 1956, § 17-49; Code 1964, § 30-21; Ord. No. 386; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-25. - Same—Payment prerequisite to issuance of permit for installation of building sewer. 
No permit shall be issued under the building code for the installation or construction of a building sewer until the fees prescribed by section 30-23 have been paid or an agreement has been entered into pursuant to section 30-24. 
(Code 1964, § 8.1-31; Ord. No. 428, § 8.1-31; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-26. - Extension of system for connection. 
Subject to the availability of funds in the revolving reserved account, the city may extend public sewer to developed areas provided a majority of the property owners to be served by the sewer commit in writing to paying their pro-rata share of the cost of construction of the public sewer line. Such pro-rata share shall be determined by allocating the cost of the construction to each property, according to each lot front footage. In the case of a developed residential property with an existing septic system, such pro-rata share may be reduced by fifty (50) percent, as an inducement for the elimination of the septic system, provided the property owner connects to sewer within one (1) year of availability, and pays the sewer connection fee in full or by the installment method as prescribed in section 30-24. 
(Code 1956, § 17-44; Code 1964, § 30-7; Ord. No. 1203, 1-14-98; Ord. No. 1247, 5-12-99; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-27. - Supervision. 
It shall be the duty of the plumber or other person making any service connection to a public sewer, directly or indirectly through any other sewer, to notify the director of public works when the trench is open and ready for the connection. No connection shall be made by any person with the public sewer system, directly or indirectly through any other sewer, except under the supervision of the director of public works or his authorized inspector. 
(Code 1956, § 17-51; Code 1964, § 30-16; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-28. - Additional connection to same property. 
Any person desiring an additional sewer service connection to any one (1) separate piece of property shall make application to the director of public works for the construction of such additional service connection to the curb line or alley lot line and, when and after the estimated cost made by the director of public works for such additional connection shall have been paid into the city treasury by the owner of the property desiring such additional connection, the director of public works shall construct such connection. 
(Code 1956, § 17-50; Code 1964, § 30-15; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-29. - Connection of replaced sewer. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the council, any sewer or sewer system heretofore constructed by any private person, and which is now or may hereafter be connected with any sewer constructed by or belonging to the city, shall become inadequate or damaged, so that such sewer or sewer system fails to render reasonably satisfactory service, the city shall, in its discretion, install a new sewer to replace such inadequate or damaged sewer or sewer system and the person connected with such replaced sewer shall make the connection with such new sewer installed by the city, after the payment of the fee required under the provisions of this article, less, however, such amount as may have been previously paid as a connection fee. 
(Code 1956, § 17-52; Code 1964, § 30-8; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-30. - Discontinuance of storm water connections. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to cause storm water connections to sanitary sewers to be disconnected, after ten (10) days' written notice to the property owner. 
(Code 1956, § 17-55; Code 1964, § 30-11; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 30-31—30-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE CHARGES 
 
Sec. 30-46. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Sewage: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. The admixture of sewage with industrial wastes or other wastes shall also be considered sewage within the meaning of this definition. 
Sewer: Pipe or conduit carrying sewage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
Sewerage system: All facilities for collection and pumping of sewage. 
User charge: The charge made to those persons who discharge sewage into the city's sewerage system. 
(Code 1964, § 30-112; Ord. No. 675, 11-12-80; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-47. - Imposed; purpose; basis. 
All users of the city's sewerage system shall be required to pay a user charge in order for the city to recover its operation and maintenance expenses, including the cost of materials and equipment replacement, for the sewerage system. The user charge shall be based entirely on metered water consumption at a flat rate for each one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
(Code 1964, § 30-113; Ord. No. 675, 11-12-80; Ord. No. 701, 9-9-81; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to impose sewerage rates, § 2.02a. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to charge and collect compensation for sewerage services, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122.  
Sec. 30-48. - Amount. 
The user charge for all persons shall be one dollar and forty-eight cents ($1.48) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet, or fraction thereof, of water consumption. 
In addition, a surcharge of sixty-six cents ($0.66) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet, or fraction thereof, of water consumption shall be imposed to pay for extraordinary engineering fees, operating costs and infrastructure costs to minimize sanitary sewer overflows in compliance with regulatory orders. 
This ordinance shall be effective and the charges applied to billings made by the City of Newport News (Waterworks) on and after July 1, 2012. 
(Code 1964, § 30-114; Ord. No. 675, 11-12-80; Ord. No. 701, 9-9-81; Ord. No. 823, 5-14-86; Ord. No. 931, 5-11-88; Ord. No. 967, 5-9-90; Ord. No. 1084, 5-12-93; Ord. No. 1248, 5-12-99; Ord. No. 1277, 5-10-00; Ord. No. 1297, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 1350, 5-14-03; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 09-0007, 5-13-09; Ord. No. 09-0012, 5-14-08; Ord. No. 12-0027, 5-9-12)  
Sec. 30-49. - Determination of billing. 
The method of determining the quantity of water consumption for billing the charges prescribed by this article shall be through use of the individual water meter. In cases where it can be positively demonstrated that a certain amount of the metered water is not discharged to the sewerage system, the billing shall be based on the amount of metered water which actually enters the sewerage system. 
(Code 1964, § 30-115; Ord. No. 675, 11-12-80; Ord. No. 701, 9-9-81; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-50. - Discontinuance of water service for failure to pay. 
When any bill for charges prescribed by this article remains unpaid twenty-one (21) days after the billing date, such bill shall be deemed delinquent and water service may be discontinued, unless such bill is paid prior to the commencement of any action by an employee or agent of the City of Newport News in connection with cutting off or discontinuing such service. After water service has been discontinued, it shall not be restored until all bills and a service charge of eight dollars ($8.00) have been paid. 
(Code 1964, § 30-116; Ord. No. 675, 11-12-80; Ord. No. 701, 9-9-81; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-51. - Previous balance to be paid prior to new service or transfer of service. 
In the event that any person applies for sewer service while owing a balance for sewer service previously furnished, regardless of the length of time the same has been owing, sewer service shall not be furnished until all accounts in connection with past sewer services furnished, as provided for in this article, have been paid in full. In the event that a customer moves from one location to another and desires sewer service at the new location, all amounts owed in connection with sewer service at the old location must be paid in full before sewer service shall be furnished at the new location. 
(Code 1964, § 30-117; Ord. No. 675, 11-12-80; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 30-52—30-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 30-66. - Compliance with state regulations. 
All individual sewage disposal systems in the city shall be installed, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable regulations of the state board of health. In the case where there is a conflict between the state regulations and any local regulations regarding such systems, the more stringent requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 993, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07) 
State Law reference— Sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq.  
Sec. 30-67. - Registration, license and bond of installers, repairers or cleaners. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing, repairing or cleaning any individual sewage disposal system until such person has registered with the director of public health, obtained a license in accordance with chapter 18.1 of this Code and given a bond acceptable to the city, in the penalty of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), issued by a bonding company licensed to do business in the state, and payable to the city. The conditions of such bond shall be to indemnify and save harmless the city from all loss, damage expense or cost by reason of any claim, suit or action made or instituted against the city, or against any agent or employee thereof, on account of any injury, loss or damage sustained in consequence of any defect in the installation, repair or cleaning of an individual sewage disposal system, done by the principal obligor in such bond or in consequence of any neglect on the part of the principal obligor to guard any such work sufficiently and properly or in consequence of the use of any improper material or appliances or in consequence of any act or neglect of the principal obligor, his agent or employees, in or about any such work. Such bond shall be further conditioned that all such work performed by the principal obligor or under his supervision shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this article and all other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 30-110; Ord. No. 64, § 33; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-68. - Misuse or neglect. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant or lessee of any premises properly supplied with an individual sewage disposal system or other approved device for the disposal of sewage to misuse or neglect the same, so as to allow or cause it to cease to be sanitary. 
(Code 1964, § 30-107; Ord. No. 64, § 30; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-69. - Maintenance and repair of on-site sewage treatment systems. 
(a)  All septic systems located within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Districts shall be pumped out at least every five (5) years, by a person qualified under section 30-67 and holding a valid sewage handling permit from the state board of health. Such person shall certify completion of the pump-out to the health department. 
(b)  All septic systems located outside the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Districts shall be examined at least every five (5) years by a person qualified under section 30-67 and holding a valid sewage handling permit from the state board of health. Such person shall determine if pump-out is necessary and notify the property owner and the health department of such determination. All required pumping shall be certified to the health department upon completion. 
(c)  For all new construction any on-site sewage disposal systems not requiring a Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit shall provide a reserve sewage disposal site with capacity equal to or greater than that of the primary disposal site. Any lot or parcel recorded prior to October 1, 1989 shall not be required to provide such reserve disposal site if the size of the lot or parcel, as determined by the health department, is insufficient to accommodate such a reserve disposal site. 
(d)  Construction of any impervious cover shall be prohibited on the area of all sewage disposal sites or over an on-site sewage treatment system which operates under a permit issued by the state water control board, until such time as the property is served by public sewer, and the site is no longer needed for this purpose. 
(e)  Any application for an on-site sewage treatment system serving a single-family residence or an individual lot shall include a surveyed plat. Such plat shall clearly delineate the following: property lines; existing and proposed buildings; bodies of water; ditches; resource protection area components; streets; existing on-site sewage treatment systems within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed sewage disposal system site; and wells within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed sewage disposal system site. 
(Ord. No. 993, 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1098, 8-11-93; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30-70. - Abandonment of septic tanks, cesspools, etc. 
All septic tanks, cesspools and open wells, whether in use or not, shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary manner. Subsequent to the enactment of this section, when a building is disconnected from an existing septic system or other on-site sewage disposal system and connected to a sanitary sewer system or said building is razed or demolished, it shall be the building owner's responsibility to properly abandon the existing septic tank/sewage disposal system, unless the existing septic tank is incorporated as part of the sewer connection. Such abandonment shall include, at a minimum, the removal of all liquid waste and sludge from the septic tank by a licensed septic tank contractor and the subsequent crushing and backfilling of said tank with clean fill material. 
(Ord. No. 1334, 6-26-02; Ord. No. 1457, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 30-71—30-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-0037, adopted Oct. 10, 2012, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 30-76—30-82, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 10-0001, adopted Jan. 13, 2010. 
 
Sec. 30-76. - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to aid in preventing the introduction and accumulation of fats, oils, and grease, into the city's public sewer system that may contribute to sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply to all food service establishments defined herein, within the city that are required under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, City Code, or applicable regulations of the Hampton Roads Sanitation District (HRSD) to have grease control devices and to all grease haulers providing service to any such food service establishment. 
(Ord. No. 12-0037, 10-10-12)  
Sec. 30-77. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Building code administrator means the city's building code administrator or his or her authorized designee. The building code administrator is referred to in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code as the building official. 
Director means the city's director of public works or his or her authorized designee. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) means material, either liquid or solid, composed of fats, oils or grease from animal or vegetable sources. Examples of FOG include, but are not limited to, kitchen cooking grease, vegetable oil, bacon grease and organic polar compounds derived from animal or plant sources that contain multiple carbon triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in Title 40, Part 135 of the Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR 136), as may be amended from time to time. 
Food service establishment means any commercial, institutional, or food processing facility that discharges kitchen or food preparation wastewaters and that is required to have a grease control device under the Virginia Uniform Building Code or applicable regulations of HRSD. 
Grease control device means a device used to collect, contain, and remove food waste and grease from the wastewater while allowing the remaining wastewater to be discharged to the city's wastewater collection system by gravity. Devices include grease interceptors, grease traps, automatic grease removal devices or other devices approved by the director. 
Grease hauler means a contractor who collects the contents of a grease interceptor or trap and transports it to a recycling or disposal facility. A grease hauler may also provide other services related to grease interceptor maintenance for a food service establishment. 
Grease interceptor means a structure or device, usually located underground and outside of a food service establishment, designed to collect, contain and remove food waste and grease from the wastewater while allowing the remaining wastewater to be discharged to the city's wastewater collection system by gravity. 
Grease removal device means an active, automatic device that separates and removes FOG from effluent discharge and that cleans itself of accumulated FOG at least once every twenty-four (24) hours utilizing electromechanical apparatus. 
Grease trap means a device typically located indoors and under the sink, designed for separating and retaining grease prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the wastewater collection system. Such devices are typically passive (gravity fed) and compact with removable baffles. 
Public sewer system includes the pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and all other construction, devices, and appliances appurtenant thereto, located within the City of Hampton and used for the conveyance of residential, commercial or industrial sewage or wastewater or other wastes to (HRSD). 
Renderable FOG container means a closed, leak-proof container for the collection and storage of yellow grease. 
Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code includes the model codes incorporated by reference therein, including, specifically, the International Plumbing Code. 
Yellow grease means FOG used in food preparation that have not been in contact or contaminated with other sources such as water, wastewater or solid waste. An example of yellow grease is fryer oil, which can be recycled into products such as animal feed, cosmetics and alternative fuel. Yellow grease is also referred to as renderable FOG. 
(Ord. No. 12-0037, 10-10-12)  
Sec. 30-78. - Grease control devices. 
(a)  Requirements. All food service establishments shall have a grease control device or devices which have been approved by the director, and which meet all applicable requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as determined by the building code administrator. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any grease control device sized in accordance with the "Hampton Roads Regional Technical Standards, Sizing of Grease Control Devices" shall be deemed to meet the requirements of the section. 
(1)  New establishments. Except as provided in subsection (a)(2), new food service establishments, including those operated by a new owner or for a different use, shall be required to install, operate, and maintain a grease control device in compliance with the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Grease control devices shall be installed and registered in accordance with section 30-78 prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Existing establishments. Food services establishments in operation as of the effective date of this article may continue to operate and maintain their existing grease control devices, provided such grease control devices are in proper operating condition and are not found to be contributing FOG in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or to necessitate increased maintenance of the sanitary sewer system. An existing food service establishment shall install a new grease control device that complies with the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code if its grease control device is determined by the director not to be in proper operating condition or if the food service establishment is found to be contributing FOG in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or to necessitate increased maintenance of the sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  Renovations or expansions. Food service establishments that are renovated or expanded shall, if required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, install new grease control devices meeting the requirements of such Code. 
(4)  Retrofitting. Existing food service establishments lacking approved grease control devices by reason of having been grandfathered from such requirement under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall, if required by HRSD, install grease control devices in accordance with HRSD's regulations. Such grease control devices shall be registered within thirty (30) days of installation. 
(b)  Installation. Grease control devices shall be installed by a plumber licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Every grease control device shall be installed and connected so that it may be readily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted food waste and grease at any time. 
(c)  Maintenance. Grease control devices shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  Grease control devices shall be properly maintained at all times. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating material, wastewater and settled solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the grease interceptor or private sewer line or into any portion of the city's or HRSD's wastewater collection system is prohibited. 
(2)  Grease interceptors shall be pumped out completely when the total accumulation of surface FOG, including floating solids and settled solids, reaches twenty-five (25) percent of the overall liquid volume. At no time shall a grease control device be cleaned less frequently than once every three (3) months unless allowed by the director for good cause shown. Such approval will be granted on a case-by-case basis upon submittal of a request by the food service establishment documenting reasons for the proposed frequency variance. The director shall not approve any request unless the applicant demonstrates that the frequency variance will not result in the introduction of any greater quantities of FOG into the public sewer system than would otherwise be introduced. 
(3)  Grease traps and grease removal devices shall be opened, inspected and completely cleaned of food solids and fats, oils and grease a minimum of once per week, unless allowed by the director for good cause shown. Such approval will be granted on a case-by-case basis upon submittal of a request by the food service establishment documenting reasons for the proposed frequency variance. The director shall not approve any request unless the applicant demonstrates that the frequency variance will not result in the introduction of any greater quantities of FOG into the public sewer system than would otherwise be introduced, and in no event shall the content of food solids and FOG exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the overall liquid depth of the device. 
(4)  The director may establish a more frequent cleaning schedule if the food service establishment is found to be contributing FOG in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or to necessitate increased maintenance of the wastewater collection system. 
(5)  Unless authorized by the director, the use of additives including, but not limited to, products that contain solvents, emulsifiers, surfactants, caustics, acids, enzymes or bacteria are prohibited for use as grease management control; provided, however, that additives may be used to clean the food service establishment drain lines so long as the usage of such additives will not cause FOG to be discharged from the grease control device to the sanitary sewer system. The use of additives shall not be substituted for the maintenance procedures required by this section. The director shall not approve the use of any additives unless he is satisfied that such use will have no adverse effects upon the public sewer system. 
(d)  Waste disposal. Waste material from grease control devices shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  Waste removed from a grease trap shall be disposed of in the solid waste disposal system or by a grease hauler certified by the Hampton Roads Planning District Commission. 
(2)  Waste removed from a grease interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such wastes. No materials removed from interceptors shall be returned to any grease interceptor, private sewer line or into any portion of the city's or HRSD's wastewater collection system. 
(3)  Yellow grease shall be disposed of in a renderable FOG container in which contents will not be discharged to the environment. Yellow grease shall not be poured or discharged into the city's or HRSD's wastewater collection system. 
(e)  Inspection, modification and repair. The director shall have the authority to make such inspections as are authorized by law during reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting, observing, taking measurement, sampling, testing or reviewing the records of the wastewater collection system and grease control devices installed in a food service establishment to ensure that such food service establishment is in compliance with this article. Operational changes, maintenance and repairs required by the director shall be implemented as noted in the written notice issued to the food service establishment by the director. The owner or occupant of such food service establishment, or his or her designee, shall be entitled to accompany the director during such inspection. The director may require existing food service establishments to modify or repair any noncompliant grease control device and appurtenances within thirty (30) calendar days of written notification by the director. The director may grant extensions for good cause shown. 
(f)  Recordkeeping. Food service establishments shall maintain records meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Food service establishments shall retain and make available for inspection and copying records of all cleaning and maintenance for the previous three (3) years for all grease control devices. Cleaning and maintenance records shall include, at a minimum, the dates of cleaning/maintenance, the names and business addresses of the company or person performing each cleaning/maintenance and the volume of waste, including the percentage of grease and settled solids, removed in each cleaning. Such records shall be kept on site and shall be made available to the director upon request. 
(2)  Food service establishments shall retain and make available for inspection and copying records of yellow grease disposal for the previous three (3) years. Yellow grease disposal logs shall include, at a minimum, the dates of disposal, name and business address of the company or person performing the disposal and the volume of yellow grease removed in each cleaning. Such records shall be kept on site and shall be made available to the director upon request. 
(3)  Food service establishments shall retain and make available for inspection and copying records of weekly inspections and cleaning pursuant to (c)(3) of this section for the previous three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 12-0037, 10-10-12)  
Sec. 30-79. - Registration requirements. 
All food service establishments shall be required to register their grease control devices. Registrations shall be on forms provided by the director to ensure that such devices are properly sized and maintained and to facilitate inspection in accordance with the requirements established by the director. 
(a)  Food service establishments existing on October 10, 2012, shall register all grease control devices on or before January 9, 2013. New establishments shall register such devices when requesting their water and sewer service, applying for a business license, or prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy, whichever is later. 
(b)  All grease haulers servicing grease control devices for food service establishments within the city on October 10, 2012, shall be required to obtain a certification to service grease control devices from the city or the Hampton Roads Planning District Commission no later than January 9, 2013, and shall comply with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(c)  All grease haulers, including any person collecting, pumping, or hauling waste from grease control devices within the city, shall obtain the required permits, certifications or approvals from the facility in which waste will be disposed. Grease haulers discharging to a HRSD treatment plant shall be approved through a HRSD Indirect Wastewater Discharge Permit. 
(d)  At least one (1) current employee of a food service establishment existing on October 10, 2012, shall have successfully completed a training program concerning the operation and maintenance of grease control devices, provided by the city, no later than January 9, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 12-0037, 10-10-12)  
Sec. 30-80. - Discharge limits. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any food service establishment any wastewater with FOG or other substances harmful or hazardous to the public sewer system, the regional sanitary sewer system, or sewage treatment plant or processes, as determined by Section 301(d) of HRSD's Industrial Wastewater Discharge Regulations or any successor regulation. 
(Ord. No. 12-0037, 10-10-12)  
Sec. 30-81. - Grease haulers. 
(a)  Any person collecting, pumping or hauling waste from grease interceptors within the city shall be certified under the Regional Grease Hauler Program of the Hampton Roads Planning District Commission and shall be approved through a HRSD Indirect Wastewater Discharge Permit. 
(b)  Grease haulers shall notify the director within twenty-four (24) hours of any incident required to be reported to the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
(c)  Grease haulers shall retain and make available for inspection and copying by the director, for a period of at least three (3) years, all records related to grease interceptor pumping and waste disposal from businesses located in the city's wastewater service area. The director may require additional record keeping and reporting, as necessary, to ensure compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-0037, 10-10-12)  
Sec. 30-82. - Civil penalties; scheduled violations. 
(a)  Enforcement will be implemented in accordance with the city's FOG Enforcement Response Plan, a copy of which will be provided to all registered food service establishments. 
(b)  Except for the violations specified in the Schedule of Civil Penalties set forth in subsection (c), and without otherwise limiting the remedies which may be obtained under this article, the director may issue an order assessing a civil penalty or other monetary assessment in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  No order assessing a civil penalty for a violation shall be issued until after the alleged violator has been provided an opportunity for a hearing before the director, except with the consent of the alleged violator. The notice of hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, on the alleged violator or his authorized representative at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall specify the time and place for the hearing, facts and legal requirements related to the alleged violation, and the amount of any proposed civil penalty. At the hearing, the alleged violator may present evidence, including witnesses, regarding the occurrence of the alleged violation and the amount of the penalty, and may examine any witnesses for the city. A verbatim record of the hearing shall be made. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the director shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and issue the order. 
(2)  No order issued by the locality shall assess civil penalties in excess of thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) per violation, not to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per order, or such other amount as may be allowed under Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15 or any successor statute, except with the consent of the violator. 
(3)  The actual amount of any civil penalty assessed shall be based upon the severity of the violation, the extent of any potential or actual environmental harm or facility damage, the compliance history of the violator, any economic benefit realized from the noncompliance, and the ability of the violator to pay the penalty. In addition to civil penalties, the order may include a monetary assessment for actual damages to sewers, treatment works and appurtenances and for costs, attorney fees and other expenses resulting from the violation. 
(4)  Any civil penalty or other monetary assessment included in any such order shall be payable as set forth in the order. Any unpaid balance at the time payment of the civil penalty or other monetary assessment is due may be collected in an action at law against the violator or included in the violator's bill for sewer services and collected in accordance with sections 30-50 and 30-51. 
(5)  Any order issued by the director, regardless of whether such order assesses a civil penalty, shall inform the alleged violator of his right to judicial review of any final order by appeal to the circuit court on the record of proceedings before the director. To commence an appeal, the alleged violator shall file a petition in circuit court within thirty (30) days of the date of the final order, and failure to do so shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal. With respect to matters of law, the burden shall be on the party seeking review to designate and demonstrate an error of law subject to review by the court. With respect to issues of fact, the duty of the court shall be limited to ascertaining whether there was substantial evidence in the record to reasonably support such findings. 
(c)  Any violation listed in the following schedule shall subject the violator to a civil penalty of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial summons, not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each additional summons, and not more than a total amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts, as follows: 
(1)  The city may issue a civil summons ticket for a scheduled violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a scheduled violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the city treasurer prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability and pay the civil penalty established for the violation. 
(2)  If a person charged with a scheduled violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. In any such trial, the city shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the liability of the alleged violator. 
(3)  An admission of liability or finding of liability under this section shall not be deemed an admission at a criminal proceeding, and no civil action authorized by this section shall proceed while a criminal action is pending. 
(4)  Any civil penalties imposed pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
SCHEDULE OF CIVIL PENALTIES 
Civil penalties will be assessed pursuant to the following tier system: 
Tier 1 Violations—Violations Not Critical to Function of Grease Control Device: 
• Failure to maintain cleaning, maintenance, and disposal logs (§§ 30-78(f)(1) and (2)) 
• Failure to maintain certified employee with completed grease control device training (§ 30-79(d)) 
• Failure to register grease control device (§ 30-79) 
Tier 2 Violations—Violations Critical to Proper FOG Abatement Plan: 
• Grease control device opening obstructed (§ 30-78(c)) 
• Failure to engage a registered grease hauler (§ 30-81) 
• Failure to repair equipment (§ 30-78(c)) 
• Failure to clean grease control device as required (§ 30-78(c)) 
Tier 3 Violations—Violations Posing Immediate Threat to Sewer System or Environment: 
• Failure to ensure grease control device is not more than 25% full of grease and solids (§ 30-78(c)(2)) 
• Failure to contain, clean up, abate, remove, or dispose of unlawfully discharged substances (§ 30-80) 
• Failure to permit inspection of grease control device (§ 30-78(e)) 
(Ord. No. 12-0037, 10-10-12)  
Sec. 30-82.1. - Other violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any intentional or willful act or omission to act in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each day that a continuing violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and any fines imposed under this article shall be applied to the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
(b)  Any person who, intentionally or otherwise, commits any of the acts prohibited by this article or who fails to perform any of the acts required by this article shall be liable to the city in an action at law for all costs of containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the wastewater collection system, as well as the costs of any damages or regulatory fines imposed upon the city, that are proximately caused by such violations. Such costs shall be collectible by the city in accordance with the provisions of § 15.2-2119 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedy for the violation of this article, the city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this article, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or in equity, shall be no defense to any such action. 
(d)  The remedies set forth in this section are cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. 
(Ord. No. 12-0037, 10-10-12)  
Sec. 30-83. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article shall be severable, it being the intention of the city council that in the event one (1) or more of the provisions of this article are adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the validity and enforceability of the remaining provisions shall be unaffected by such adjudication. 
(Ord. No. 12-0037, 10-10-12)  
Chapter 30.5 - SMOKING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 14; food and food establishments, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Virginia Indoor Clean Air Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2820 et seq.; ordinances regulating smoking, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2828 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30.5-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The Surgeon General of the United States has concluded that smoke from cigarettes, cigars, and pipes kills three hundred fifty thousand (350,000) people in the U.S., including nonsmokers, every year. His report indicates that involuntary or passive smoking is the cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers and has estimated that involuntary smoking causes more deaths, approximately five thousand (5,000) per year, than all other airborne pollutants combined, excluding asbestos. The city council recognizes that exposure to environmental tobacco smoke is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, peace and safety and the quality of life to its citizens. The purpose and intent of this chapter are to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places, except in designated areas, and to strike a reasonable balance between the needs of persons who smoke and the needs of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air. 
(Ord. No. 929, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 1454, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30.5-2. - Definitions. 
The words and phrases set forth in this section shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Bar or lounge area. The term "bar" or "lounge area" means an area or a room utilized primarily for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the sale of food is merely incidental to the sale of alcoholic beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term "bar" shall not encompass an entire restaurant or any dining area. 
Private function. The term "private function" means a gathering secluded from and not accessible to the general public. 
Public place. The word "public place" means an enclosed area available for use by or accessible to the general public during the normal course of business conducted by either private or public entities. 
Restaurant. The term "restaurant" means any building, structure, or area used as, maintained as, or advertised as, or held out to the public to be an establishment where food is made available to be consumed on the premises. 
Retail and service establishment. The term "retail and service establishment" means any establishment which offers goods or services for sale to the general public. 
Smoke or smoking. The words "smoke" or "smoking" means the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting, inhaling or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 929, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 1454, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30.5-3. - Smoking prohibited; public places. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in the following public places: 
(1)  Indoor service lines, cashier areas, and counter service areas; 
(2)  Waiting rooms, lobbies, wards, hallways, and other public areas of health care facilities including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics and physicians' and dentists' offices; 
(3)  All rooms in which meetings and/or hearings are open to the public; 
(4)  Museums, libraries, and galleries; 
(5)  Places of entertainment, such as theatres, concert halls, gymnasiums, auditoriums, and enclosed arenas; provided, however, that smoking may be permitted in those areas commonly known as lobbies; 
(6)  Public restrooms, unless separate facilities are provided for smokers and nonsmokers; 
(7)  Elevators in buildings generally used by and open to the public. 
(b)  Smoking shall also be prohibited in the following public places; provided, however, that permitted designated smoking areas may be established in accordance with the provisions below: 
(1)  Retail and service establishments and financial institutions serving the general public, including, but not limited to, any department store, grocery store, drug store, clothing store, shoe store, hardware store, bank, savings and loan, and hair salon or barbershop; 
(2)  Bowling alleys; 
(3)  Bingo halls; 
(4)  Public transportation waiting rooms including, but not limited to, waiting rooms of bus, train, airport and other transit terminals and stations; 
(5)  In City Hall and any other public building that is wholly or partially owned or leased by the city and is located within and is a part of the corporate limits of the city. 
Designated smoking rooms or areas shall be reasonably separate from rooms or areas entered by the public in the normal course of business or use of the facility. In designated smoking areas, existing physical barriers and ventilation systems shall be used when possible to minimize the toxic effect of smoke in adjacent nonsmoking areas. 
Where designated smoking areas are established, signs, conspicuous to ordinary public view, shall be posted at such entrance to the smoking area stating "DESIGNATED SMOKING AREAS." 
(Ord. No. 929, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 1454, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30.5-4. - Regulation of smoking; restaurants. 
(a)  Any restaurant having a seating capacity of fifty (50) or more persons shall have a designated no-smoking area sufficient to meet customer demand. Restaurants may not determine that no such demand exists. Restaurants with a seating capacity of fifty (50) or fewer persons are encouraged, but not required, to designate no-smoking areas. 
(b)  In determining whether a restaurant is subject to the requirements of paragraph (a), the following shall not be included: 
(1)  Seats in the bar or lounge area of a restaurant; 
(2)  Seats in any separate room of a restaurant which is used exclusively for private functions; 
(3)  Seats in any room of a restaurant which is closed and not available for seating. 
(c)  Any restaurant required to have a designated no-smoking area shall post signs, conspicuous to ordinary public view, at each entrance to the establishment indicating that a no-smoking area is available. 
(Ord. No. 929, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 1454, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30.5-5. - Where smoking not regulated. 
This chapter is not intended to regulate smoking in the following places and under the following conditions: 
(1)  Bars and lounge areas; 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores; 
(3)  Restaurants, conference/meeting rooms, and public and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions; 
(4)  Offices or work areas not entered by the public in the normal course of business or use of the premises; employers are nevertheless encouraged to adopt and implement smoking policies to protect and accommodate employees from the hazard and discomfort of passive smoke in the workplace; 
(5)  Private and semi-private hospital rooms; 
(6)  Areas of enclosed shopping centers or malls that are external to the retail stores and are used by customers as a route of travel from one store to another, and that consist primarily of walkways and seating arrangements; 
(7)  Lobby areas of theatres, auditoriums, concert halls, and similar places of entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 929, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 1454, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30.5-6. - Posting requirements. 
Any person who owns, manages or otherwise controls any building, facility, room, area or place in which smoking is prohibited, shall post or cause to be posted conspicuously signs stating "NO SMOKING by City Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 929, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 1454, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30.5-7. - Public education. 
The city manager or his designated representative shall engage in a program to inform and clarify the purposes of this chapter to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance. 
(Ord. No. 929, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 1454, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30.5-8. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
The city manager or his designated representative shall request other governmental and educational agencies having offices within the city to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this chapter. In federal, state and special governmental offices within the city, the city manager or his designated representative shall urge the enforcement of their existing smoking prohibitions and request voluntary compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 929, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 1454, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30.5-9. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the prohibitions or restrictions of this chapter to fail to comply with its provisions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area prohibited or restricted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 929, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 1454, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30.5-10. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Hampton Health Department or any other department or person duly designated. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the health department. 
(c)  The health department or other duly designated department shall perform an evaluation for compliance with all requirements of this chapter while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections. 
(Ord. No. 929, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 1454, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 30.5-11. - Other applicable laws. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited or restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 929, 4-12-89; Ord. No. 1454, 1-24-07)  
Chapter 31 - SOLICITORS AND SOLICITATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Dropping solicitation material from aircraft, § 24-42; solicitations in parks, § 26-30. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 31-1—31-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NONRESIDENT COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate door-to-door vendors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-913; authority to regulate peddlers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1114. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 31-16. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Solicitor: The word "solicitor" shall mean any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the city, selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares or merchandise, or any article for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future or for the making, manufacturing or repairing of any article or thing for future delivery; provided, however, that the word "solicitor" shall not apply to a person governed by the provisions of article III of this chapter, and that this chapter shall apply only to solicitors who demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(Code 1964, § 36-1; Ord. No. 17, § 1; Ord. No. 568, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-17. - Application of article. 
This article shall apply only to solicitors who demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(Code 1964, § 36-1; Ord. No. 17, § 1; Ord. No. 568, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-18. - Violation of article. 
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 36-2; Ord. No. 17, § 12; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 31-19. - False statements; conduct generally. 
The holder of a solicitor's permit issued under this article shall make no false statements or misrepresentations of facts in the course of carrying on the activity for which the permit is granted and shall conduct himself at all times in an orderly and lawful manner. 
(Code 1964, § 36-14; Ord. No. 17, § 10; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-20. - Orders to be in writing, etc. 
All orders taken by the holder of a solicitor's permit issued under this article shall be in writing, in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance, and one (1) copy shall be given to the purchaser. 
(Code 1964, § 36-15; Ord. No. 17, § 10; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-21. - Interference with use of streets. 
No holder of a solicitor's permit issued under this article shall sell, distribute or circulate literary material or canvass or solicit orders therefor or for goods or merchandise from pedestrian or vehicular traffic on or adjacent to any street within the limits of the city in such manner as will interfere with the normal and usual use of such street. 
(Code 1964, § 36-16; Ord. No. 17, § 10; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-22. - Prior consent required for entry upon certain property. 
No holder of a solicitor's permit issued under this article shall enter in or upon any house, building or other structure or any land or property, without the prior consent of the owner or occupant thereof, where there is placed or posted on the premises, in a conspicuous position at or near the usual means of ingress, a sign or other form of notice stating or indicating that the owner or occupant thereof forbids or otherwise does not desire persons engaged in such or similar activity to enter upon the premises. 
(Code 1964, § 36-17; Ord. No. 17, § 10; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
Cross reference— Trespass after having been forbidden so to do, § 24-33.  
Secs. 31-23—31-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 31-36. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor, without first securing a solicitor's permit from the director of public safety so to do. 
(Code 1964, § 36-3; Ord. No. 17, § 2; Ord. No. 568, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-37. - Application. 
Any person desiring a permit required by this division shall make application therefor to the director of public safety on a form to be provided, stating the name and exact address of the applicant, the name of the person whom he represents and the kind of goods offered for sale or the kind of services to be performed. At the time of executing such application form, the applicant shall also submit, for the inspection of the director of public safety, written proof of his identity, which may be in the form of an automobile operator's or owner's license or an identification card issued to the applicant by the person for or through whom or under whose auspices the applicant is authorized to conduct such activity. Such applicant shall state whether he has ever been convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 1964, § 36-4; Ord. No. 17, § 3; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-38. - Applicant to be photographed and fingerprinted. 
The applicant for a solicitor's permit under this division shall be photographed and fingerprinted. 
(Code 1964, § 36-5; Ord. No. 17, § 4; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-39. - Fee. 
Every person securing a solicitor's permit under this division shall pay to the director of public safety a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) therefor. 
(Code 1964, § 36-6; Ord. No. 17, § 5; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07; Ord. No. 10-0015, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 31-40. - Issuance. 
Upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of this division, the director of public safety shall, after such investigation as reasonably appears necessary, issue to an applicant a solicitor's permit which shall be dated and signed by the director of public safety. The director of public safety shall not be required to issue a solicitor's permit to any person who has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or to any person whose permit has been previously revoked. 
(Code 1964, § 36-7; Ord. No. 17, § 6; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07; Ord. No. 10-0015, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 31-41. - Conditions. 
A solicitor's permit issued under this article shall be issued subject to the conditions set forth in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 36-12; Ord. No. 17, § 10; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07; Ord. No. 10-0015, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 31-42. - Term. 
A solicitor's permit issued under this division shall be good for a period of thirty (30) days and no longer. 
(Code 1964, § 36-8; Ord. No. 17, § 7; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07; Ord. No. 10-0015, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 31-43. - Renewal. 
A solicitor's permit issued under this division may be renewed on its expiration date for an additional like period, upon the execution of a renewal application setting forth that the statements made in the original application are true and accurate statements at the time the renewal application is filed, or a renewal application setting forth all changes in the original application required by a change in facts since the date of filing the original application. For each renewal permit, the applicant shall pay the director of public safety a fee of four dollars and fifty cents ($4.50). 
(Code 1964, § 36-9; Ord. No. 17, § 8; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07; Ord. No. 10-0015, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-913.  
Sec. 31-44. - Possession and exhibition. 
The holder of a solicitor's permit issued under this division shall have his solicitor's permit in his possession at all times and shall exhibit such permit at any time upon request by any police officer of the city, or by any purchaser, or by any person being solicited. 
(Code 1964, § 36-13; Ord. No. 17, § 10; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-45. - Not transferable. 
A solicitor's permit issued under this division shall be nontransferable. 
(Code 1964, § 36-10; Ord. No. 17, § 9; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-46. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any solicitor's permit issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked by the director of public safety, after notice and hearing, for any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application; for failure to observe the conditions of the permit or any provision of this article; or upon any conviction, after issuance of the permit, of the permittee of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a solicitor's permit shall be in writing, setting forth the specific reason or reasons for the hearing and the time and place thereof. Such notice shall be given to the holder of the permit at least two (2) days, if by personal service, and at least three (3) days, if by local mail, addressed to the holder's last known local address, prior to the stated hearing. 
(Code 1964, § 36-11; Ord. No. 17, § 11; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Secs. 31-47—31-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Solicitation of contributions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48 et seq.; ordinances regulating charitable organizations soliciting within city, § 57-63. 
 
Sec. 31-61. - Definitions. 
Unless a different meaning is required by the context, the following terms, as used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Charitable organization: Any person that is or holds itself out to be organized or operated for any charitable purpose or any person that solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public. This definition shall not be deemed to include any church or convention or association of churches, primarily operated for nonsecular purposes and no part of the net income of which inures to the direct benefit of any individual; nor shall it include any political party, as defined in § 24.2-101 of the Code of Virginia, or any political campaign committee or political action committee or other political committee required by state or federal law to file a report or statement of contributions and expenditures; nor shall it include any authorized individual who solicits, by authority of such organization, solely on behalf of a registered or exempt charitable organization or on behalf of an organization excluded from the definition of charitable organization. 
Charitable purpose: Any charitable, benevolent, humane, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary purpose and the purpose of influencing legislation or influencing the actions of any public official or instigating, prosecuting or intervening in litigation. 
Civic organization: Any local service club, veterans' post, fraternal society or association, volunteer fire or rescue group, or local civic league or association of ten (10) or more persons not organized for profit but operated exclusively for educational or charitable purposes, including the promotion of community welfare, and the net earnings of which are devoted exclusively to charitable, educational, recreational or social welfare purposes. 
Commissioner of revenue: The commissioner of revenue or a member of his staff to whom he may delegate his duties under this article. 
Contribution: Any gift, bequest, devise or other grant of money, credit, financial assistance or property of any kind or value, including the promise to contribute, except payments by the membership of an organization for membership fees, dues, fines or assessments, or for services rendered to individual members, and except money, credit, financial assistance or property received from any governmental authority. The term "contribution" shall not include any donation of blood or any gift made pursuant to the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act. 
State Law reference— Anatomical gifts, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-289 et seq. 
Federated fund-raising organization: Any federation of independent charitable organizations which have voluntarily joined together, including, but not limited to, a United Fund or Community Chest, for purposes of raising and distributing money for and among themselves and where membership does not confer operating authority and control of the individual agencies upon the federated group organization. 
Fund-raising expenses: The expenses of all activities that constitute or are an integral and inseparable part of a solicitation. 
Membership: Those persons to whom, for payment of fees, dues, assessments, etc., an organization provides services and confers a bona fide right, privilege, professional standing, honor or other direct benefit, in addition to the right to vote, elect officers or hold offices. The term "membership" shall not include those persons who are granted a membership upon making a contribution as the result of solicitation. 
Parent organization: That part of a charitable organization which coordinates, supervises or exercises control over policy, fund-raising and expenditures, or assists or advises one (1) or more chapters, branches or affiliates. 
Person: Any individual, organization, trust, foundation, association, partnership, corporation, society or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Professional fund-raising counsel: Any person who, for a flat fixed fee under a written agreement, plans, conducts, manages, carries on, advises or acts as a consultant, whether directly or indirectly, in connection with soliciting contributions for, or on behalf of, any charitable or civic organization, but who actually solicits no contributions as part of such services. A bona fide salaried officer or employee of a registered or exempt charitable organization or a bona fide salaried officer or employee of a registered parent organization shall not be deemed to be a professional fund-raising counsel. 
Professional solicitor: Any person who, for a financial or other consideration, solicits contributions for, or on behalf of, a charitable or civic organization, whether such solicitation is performed personally or through his agents, servants or employees or through agents, servants or employees specially employed by or for a charitable or civic organization, who are engaged in the solicitation of contributions under the direction of such person, or any person who, for a financial or other consideration, plans, conducts, manages, carries on, advises or acts as a consultant to a charitable or civic organization in connection with the solicitation of contributions, but does not qualify as a professional fund-raising counsel. A bona fide salaried officer or employee of a registered or exempt charitable organization or a bona fide salaried officer or employee of a registered parent organization shall not be deemed to be a professional solicitor. 
Sale, sell; sold: The transfer of any property or the rendition of any service to any person in exchange for consideration, including any purported contribution without which such property would not have been transferred or such services would not have been rendered. 
Solicit; solicitation: The request or appeal, directly or indirectly, for any contribution on the plea or representation that such contribution will be used for a charitable purpose, including without limitation, the following methods of requesting such contributions: 
(1)  Any oral or written request. 
(2)  Any announcement to the press, over the radio or television, or by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal or campaign to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable purpose connected therewith. 
(3)  The distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or other publication which, directly or by implication, seeks to obtain public support. 
(4)  The sale of, or any offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, subscription, ticket or any service or tangible item in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable purpose or where the name of any charitable or civic organization is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where, in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will be donated to any charitable purpose. 
"Solicitation," as defined herein, shall be deemed to occur when the request is made, at the place the request is received, whether or not the person making the same actually receives any contribution. 
Terrorists and terrorist organizations means any person, organization, group or conspiracy who assists or has assisted terrorist organizations, as provided in 18 U.S.C. § 2339 B or who commits or attempts to commit acts of terrorism, as defined in Virginia Code § 18.2-46.4. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-1; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48.  
Sec. 31-62. - Exemptions from article generally. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as being applicable to the American Red Cross or any of its local chapters. 
(b)  No charitable organization shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article, if such organization has registered with the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services or if such organization is a chapter, branch or affiliate included in the consolidated report of an organization or federated organization registered with such commissioner except that such charitable organization shall not be exempted from any portion of this article that requires such organization to register its name, the names of its solicitors and the dates and times that they will be soliciting in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 57-60(D), 57-63(D).  
Sec. 31-63. - Exemptions from certain provisions of article. 
(a)  The following shall be exempt from the registration requirements of section 31-70 and the requirements of section 31-73, but shall otherwise by subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Educational institutions that are accredited by the state board of education, by a regional accrediting association or by an organization affiliated with the National Commission on Accrediting, the Association Montessori Internationale or the American Montessori Society, the Virginia Independent Schools Association, or the Virginia Association of Independent Schools, any foundation having an established identity with any of the aforementioned educational institutions, and any other educational institution confining its solicitation of contributions to its student body, alumni, faculty and trustees, and their families. 
(2)  Persons requesting contributions for the relief of any individual specified by name at the time of the solicitation, when all of the contributions collected, without any deductions whatsoever, are turned over to the named beneficiary for his use. 
(3)  Charitable organizations which do not intend to solicit and receive, during a calendar year, and have not actually raised or received, during any of the three (3) next preceding calendar years, contributions from the public in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), if all of their functions, including fund-raising activities, are carried on by persons who are unpaid for their services and if no part of their assets or income inures to the benefit of or is paid to any officer or member. Nevertheless, if the contributions raised from the public, whether all of such are or are not received by any charitable organization during any calendar year, shall be in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), it shall, within thirty (30) days after the date it shall have received total contributions in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), register with and report to the commissioner of revenue as required by this chapter. 
(4)  Organizations which have no office within the city and which solicit in the city from without the commonwealth solely by means of telephone or telegraph, direct mail or advertising in national media, and that have a chapter, branch, or affiliate within the commonwealth that has registered with the commissioner. 
(5)  Organizations which solicit only within the membership of the organization by the members thereof. 
(6)  Health care institutions defined herein as any facilities that have been granted tax-exempt status under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that are (i) licensed by the Department of Health or the Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services; (ii) designated by the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) as federally qualified health centers; (iii) certified by the HCFA as rural health clinics; or (iv) wholly organized for the delivery of health care services without charge; and any supporting organization that exists solely to support any such health care institutions. For the purposes of clause (iv), "delivery of health care services without charge" includes the delivery of dental, medical or other health services where a reasonable minimum fee is charged to cover administrative costs. 
(7)  Civic organizations. 
(8)  Organizations that have been granted tax-exempt status under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that are organized wholly as Area Health Education Centers in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 32.1-122.7. 
(9)  Nonprofit debt counseling agencies licensed pursuant to Chapter 10.2 (§ 6.1-363.2 et seq. of Title 6.1). 
(10)  Agencies designated by the Virginia Department of Aging pursuant to subdivision A 6 of § 2.2-703 as area agencies on aging. 
(11)  Labor unions, labor associations and labor organizations that have been granted tax exempt status under § 501(c)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(12)  Trade Associations that have been granted tax-exempt status under § 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(13)  Organizations that have been granted tax-exempt status under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that are organized wholly as regional emergency medical services councils in accordance with § 32.1-111.11 of the Code of Virginia. 
(14)  Nonprofit organizations that have been granted tax-exempt status under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that solicit contributions only through (i) grant proposals submitted to for-profit corporations, (ii) grant proposals submitted to other nonprofit organizations that have been granted tax-exempt status under § 501 (c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, or (iii) grant proposals submitted to organizations determined to be private foundations under § 509 (a) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  No charitable organization shall be exempt under this section unless it shall submit, before any solicitation in any calendar year, to the commissioner of revenue, on forms to be prescribed by him, the name, address and purpose of the organization and a statement setting forth the reason for the claim for exemption. Parent organizations may file consolidated applications for exemptions for any chapters, branches or affiliates which they believe to be exempt from the registration provisions of this article. If exempted, the commissioner of revenue shall issue a letter of exemption which may be exhibited to the public. No registration fee shall be required of any exempt organization. The letter of exemption shall remain in effect as long as the organization continues to solicit in accordance with its claim for exemption. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-12; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-60.  
Sec. 31-64. - Reciprocal agreements with other municipalities. 
The commissioner of revenue may enter into a reciprocal agreement with the appropriate authority of any other municipality within the commonwealth, for the purpose of exchanging information with respect to charitable organizations, professional fund-raising counsel and professional solicitors. Pursuant to such agreements, the commissioner of revenue may accept information filed by charitable organizations, professional fund-raising counsel and professional solicitors with the appropriate authority of another locality within this commonwealth, in lieu of the information required to be filed by this article. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-3; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-65. - Article does not authorize unlawful acts or omissions or decrease liability imposed by law. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as making lawful any act or omission which is now unlawful, or as decreasing the liability, civil or criminal, of any person, imposed by existing laws. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-13; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-62.  
Sec. 31-66. - Appeals from orders under article. 
Any person aggrieved by any final order of the commissioner of revenue under this article, denying such person any right to which he is entitled under law, may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of such order, apply for relief to the circuit court of the city. Either party may appeal any final order of such court in the same manner as provided by law in cases of appeals of right. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-14; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-67.  
Sec. 31-67. - Investigations to enforce article. 
Whenever the commissioner of the revenue has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this article may have occurred, the commissioner, upon his own motion or upon complaint of any person, may investigate any charitable or civic organization, commercial co-venturer, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor to determine whether such charitable or civic organization, commercial co-venturer, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor has violated the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-11; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-59.  
Sec. 31-68. - Penalty for violations of article. 
Any person who wilfully and knowingly violates or causes to be violated any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced, for the first offense, to pay a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or undergo imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both, and for the second and any subsequent offense, to pay a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or to undergo imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-11; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-59.  
Sec. 31-69. - Actions to enjoin violations of article. 
Whenever the city attorney or the commonwealth's attorney shall have reason to believe that any charitable or civic organization, commercial co-venturer, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor has operated, is operating or is about to operate in violation of the provisions of this article, or has knowingly and wilfully made any false statement in any registration application or statement, report or other information required by this article, or that a charitable organization, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor has failed to file a registration statement required by this article, or that there is employed or is about to be employed in any solicitation or collection of contributions for a charitable organization any device, scheme or artifice to defraud or to obtain money or property by means of any false pretense, representation or promise, or that the officers or representatives of any charitable organization, professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor have refused or failed, after notice, to produce any records of such organization, or that the funds raised by solicitation activities are not devoted or will not be devoted to the charitable purposes of the charitable organization, in addition to all other actions authorized by law, the city attorney or commonwealth's attorney may bring an action against such charitable organization and its officers, directors, or other agents, such professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor to enjoin such charitable organization or professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor from continuing such violation, solicitation or collection, or engaging therein, or doing any acts in furtherance thereof and for such other relief as the court deems appropriate. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-11; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-59.  
Sec. 31-70. - Registration of organizations. 
(a)  Every charitable organization, except as otherwise provided herein, which intends to solicit contributions within the city, or have funds solicited on its behalf, shall, prior to any solicitation, file an initial registration statement with the commissioner of revenue, upon forms acceptable to him. Each registration statement shall thereafter be refiled on or before the fifteenth day of the fifth calendar month of the next and each following fiscal year in which such charitable organization is engaged in solicitation activities within the city. It shall be the duty of the president, chairperson or principal officer of such charitable organization to file the statements required herein. Such statements shall contain the following information; however, no charitable organization that has registered with the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services for the current and next preceding three (3) years, or exempt for such years under Code of Virginia, § 57-50, shall be required to provide any financial information: 
(1)  The name of the organization and the purpose for which it was organized. 
(2)  The principal address of the organization, the address of any offices in the city and its designated agent for process within the commonwealth. If no such agent is designated, the organization shall be deemed to have designated the secretary of the commonwealth. If the organization does not maintain an office, the statement shall include the name and address of the person having custody of its financial records. 
(3)  The names and addresses of any chapters, branches or affiliates in this city. 
(4)  The place where and the date when the organization was legally established, the form of the organization, and a reference to any determination of its tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(5)  The names and addresses of the officers, directors, trustees and the principal salaried executive staff officer. 
(6)  A copy of a balance sheet and income and expense statement with the opinion of an independent public accountant for the organization's immediately preceding fiscal year; a copy of a financial statement certified by an independent public accountant covering, in a consolidated report, complete information as to all the preceding year's fund-raising activities of the charitable organization, showing the kind and amount of funds raised, fund-raising expenses and allocation of disbursement of funds raised; or a copy of Internal Revenue Service Form 990. The report required by this subparagraph shall comply with the accounting standards prescribed in section 31-73. Any organization with gross revenue of less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) may submit a balance sheet and income and expense statement verified under oath or affirmation by the treasurer of the organization. 
(7)  A statement showing the computation of the percentages provided for in subsection (b) of this section and section 31-78. 
(8)  A statement indicating whether the organization intends to solicit contributions from the public directly or have such done on its behalf by others. 
(9)  A statement indicating whether the organization is authorized by any other governmental agency within the commonwealth to solicit contributions and whether it, or any officer, professional fund-raiser or professional solicitor thereof, is or has ever been enjoined by any court or otherwise prohibited from soliciting contributions in any jurisdiction. 
(10)  The general purpose or purposes for which the contributions to be solicited shall be used. 
(11)  The name or names under which it intends to solicit contributions. 
(12)  The names of the individuals or officers of the organization who will have the final responsibility for the custody of the contributions. 
(13)  The names of the individuals or officers of the organization responsible for the final distribution of the contributions. 
(14)  A statement indicating whether the organization, or any officer, professional solicitor or professional fund-raiser thereof, has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, a description of the pertinent facts. 
(15)  A copy of the current articles of incorporation, bylaws, or other governing documents. If current copies are already on file with the commissioner, only amendments, if any, shall be filed in years after the initial registration. 
(16)  A description of the types of solicitation to be undertaken. 
(b)  Each charitable organization shall, as a part of its registration statement, compute the percentage which its fund-raising expenses for its preceding fiscal year bore to its support received directly from the public during such year. Each federated fund-raising organization shall clearly disclose on any registration the percentage that is withheld from a donation designated for a member agency. 
(c)  Each chapter, branch or affiliate located in the city, except an independent member agency of a federated fund-raising organization, shall separately report the information required by this section or report the information to its parent organization, which shall then furnish such information as to itself and all local affiliates, chapters and branches in a consolidated form. All affiliated organizations included in a consolidated registration statement shall be considered as one (1) charitable organization for all purposes of this article. If a consolidated registration statement is filed, all statements thereafter filed shall be upon the same basis unless permission to change is granted by the commissioner of revenue. 
(d)  Each federated fund-raising organization located in the city shall report the information required by this section in a consolidated form. Any federated fund-raising organization may elect to exclude from its consolidated report information relating to the separate fundraising activities of all of its independent member agencies. No member agency of a federated fund-raising organization shall be required to report separately any information contained in such a consolidated report; provided, however, that any separate solicitation campaign conducted by, or on behalf of, any such member agency in the city shall nevertheless be subject to all other provisions of this article. 
(e)  The registration forms shall be verified under oath or affirmation by the chief fiscal officer and by another authorized officer of the charitable organization. 
(f)  Every charitable organization which submits an independent registration to the commissioner of the revenue shall pay an annual registration fee of ten dollars ($10.00). A parent organization filing on behalf of one (1) or more chapters, branches or affiliates or a federated fund-raising organization filing on behalf of its member agencies shall pay a single annual registration fee for itself and such chapters, branches, affiliates or member agencies included in the registration statement. Any organization which allows its registration to lapse, without requesting an extension of time to file, shall be required to resubmit an initial registration. An extension may be granted upon receipt of a written request. All fees paid hereunder shall be credited to the office of the commissioner of revenue, for reimbursement of administrative expense. 
(g)  Every registration statement shall include the following language: "No funds have been or will knowingly be used, directly or indirectly, to benefit or provide support, in cash or in kind, to terrorists, terrorist organizations, terrorist activities, or the family members of any terrorist." 
(h)  No person shall be registered by the city to solicit funds that are intended to benefit or support terrorists, terrorist organizations or terrorist activities. No person shall be registered by the city to solicit funds that are intended to benefit or support a family member of any terrorist, unless a court of competent jurisdiction within the city, upon petition of an interested person, finds by clear and convincing evidence that, for a period of at least three years next preceding any act of terrorism committed by such terrorist or terrorist organization, the family members to whom the benefit of the contributions shall inure have been living separate and apart from the terrorist or terrorist organization, and the family members have not provided any financial support, in cash or in kind, to the terrorist or terrorist organization for the same period of time. 
(Code 1964, §§ 36.1-2, 36.1-10; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 57-49, 57-58.  
Sec. 31-71. - Reports by organizations with no local office and which solicit solely by telephone, mail, etc. 
Any charitable organization, having no office or place of business within the city and soliciting in the city from without the city solely by telephone or telegraph, direct mail or advertising in national media, and any professional fund-raising counsel or professional solicitor engaged by such an organization, shall file with the commissioner of revenue any report which would otherwise be required of it, provided such charitable organization maintains an office or place of business within the commonwealth. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-2; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-51.  
Sec. 31-72. - Publication of warning as to unregistered organizations. 
If the commissioner of revenue shall determine that any charitable organization, not registered with his office and not exempt from registration, irrespective of whether such organization is subject to the jurisdiction of the city, is soliciting in this city, directly or indirectly, by any means, including, without limitation, by telephone or telegraph, by direct mail or by advertising in national media, he may, after ten (10) days' written notice mailed to the charitable organization, cause to be printed, in one (1) or more newspapers published or distributed in the city, a notice in substantially the following form: 
WARNING—UNREGISTERED CHARITABLE SOLICITATION 
The organization named below has solicited contributions from area residents for allegedly charitable purposes. It has not registered with the Commissioner of Revenue of Hampton as required by law. Contributors are cautioned that their contributions to such organization may be used for noncharitable purposes. 
A copy of such warning shall immediately thereupon be forwarded to the administrator of consumer affairs for the commonwealth. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-4; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-52.  
Sec. 31-73. - Records to be kept by organizations. 
Every charitable organization shall keep true fiscal records for all fiscal years beginning on and continuing after the effective date of Ordinance No. 570, from which this article is derived. Such records shall be kept in accordance with the standards and practices set out in Standards of Accounting and Financial Reporting for Voluntary Health and Welfare Organizations adopted and approved in December, 1964, by the National Health Council and National Social Welfare Assembly, and as may be modified from time to time by the National Health Council and the National Assembly for Policy and Development, or in accordance with the standards and practices set out in Uniform Chart of Accounts and Definitions for Hospitals, as approved by, and as may be modified by, the American Hospital Association, or in accordance with such other uniform standards of accounting as the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services may find to be as appropriate. A copy of such standards shall be maintained on file in the office of the commissioner of revenue. Such records shall be retained for a period of at least three (3) years after the end of the period to which they relate. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-5; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-53.  
Sec. 31-74. - Contracts between organizations and fund-raising counsel and professional solicitors. 
(a)  Every contract or agreement between professional fund-raising counsel and a charitable organization must be in writing and shall be filed with the commissioner of revenue within ten (10) days after such contract or written agreement is entered into. 
(b)  Every contract, or a written statement of the nature of the arrangement to prevail in the absence of a contract, between a professional solicitor and a charitable organization shall be filed with the commissioner of revenue at least ten (10) days prior to commencement of the contract. 
(c)  All agreements and arrangements between professional fund-raising counsel and charitable organizations must be reduced to writing before executed or acted upon. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-6; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-54.  
Sec. 31-75. - Statements, reports, contracts, etc., filed under article constitute public records; charge for copies thereof. 
Registration statements, reports, professional fund-raising counsel contracts, professional solicitor contracts and all other documents and information required to be filed under this article shall become public records in the office of the commissioner of revenue and shall be open to the general public for inspection at such time and under such conditions as the commissioner of revenue may prescribe. A charge not exceeding one dollar ($1.00) per page may be made for any copy of such documents and information as may be furnished any person by the commissioner of revenue. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-8; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-56.  
Sec. 31-76. - False or incorrect information in statements or reports required by article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and knowingly give any false or incorrect information to the commissioner of revenue in filing statements or reports required by this article, whether such report or statement is verified or not. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-11; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 59-59.  
Sec. 31-77. - Receipts for contributions. 
No charitable organization shall accept any contribution exceeding five dollars ($5.00) in cash or tangible property, without providing, on request of the donor, a written receipt acknowledging such contribution on behalf of the organization. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-9[7]; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 607, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(G).  
Sec. 31-78. - Disclosure by solicitor as to percentage of contribution that organization will receive. 
Every charitable organization, required to be registered pursuant to §31-70 of this article, and every professional solicitor, required to submit contracts, statements and reports pursuant to §§31-74 and 31-75 of this article, soliciting contributions from prospective contributors, shall disclose to the potential donor contemporaneously at the point of a written request or on a written receipt for donations made in response to an oral request, that a financial statement is available from the Virginia Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07)  
Sec. 31-79. - Soliciting without authority from organization. 
(a)  No person shall make any representation that he is soliciting contributions for or on behalf of a charitable or civic organization or shall use or display any emblem, device or printed matter belonging to or associated with a charitable or civic organization, for the purpose of soliciting or inducing contributions from the public, without first being authorized to do so by the charitable or civic organization. 
(b)  No professional solicitor shall solicit in the name of or on behalf of any charitable organization, unless such solicitor has written authorization of two (2) officers of such organization, a copy of which shall be filed with the commissioner of revenue. Such written authorization shall bear the signature of the solicitor and shall expressly state on its face the period for which it is valid, which shall not exceed one (1) year from the date issued. Such authorization shall be carried by such solicitor, when making solicitations, and shall be exhibited, on request, to persons solicited or police officers or agents of the commissioner of revenue. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-9[6]; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 607, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(E), (F).  
Sec. 31-80. - Soliciting by certain persons prohibited. 
No person, and no organization of which such person is an officer, professional fundraising counsel or professional solicitor, shall solicit within the city, if: 
(1)  Such person has been convicted in any jurisdiction of embezzlement, larceny or other crime involving the obtaining of money or property by false pretenses or the misapplication of funds impressed with a trust, unless such person has received a pardon for such offense or the public is informed of such conviction in a manner approved in writing by the commissioner of revenue before any solicitation occurs; or 
(2)  Such person has ever been enjoined by any court or otherwise prohibited from soliciting in any jurisdiction, unless the commissioner of revenue shall first determine in writing that such person is entitled to solicit in such jurisdiction at the time of soliciting within the city of Hampton, or that the reason for such injunction or prohibition does not involve moral turpitude. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-9[8]; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 607, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(H).  
Sec. 31-81. - Soliciting for benefit of nonresident who fails to supply information to commissioner of revenue. 
No person shall solicit within the city for the benefit of any other person located without the city, if such other person refuses to supply any information which the commissioner of revenue deems necessary to assure himself that the provisions of this article are complied with. A solicitation shall be deemed to be on behalf of every person who receives, directly or indirectly, more than ten (10) percent of the gross amount collected. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-9[9]; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 607, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(I).  
Sec. 31-82. - Misleading solicitations generally. 
(a)  No charitable organization shall use or exploit the fact of registration under this article so as to lead the public to believe that such registration in any manner constitutes an endorsement or approval by the city; provided, however, that the use of the following statement shall not be deemed a prohibited exploitation: "Registered with the Commissioner of Revenue as required by law. Registration does not imply endorsement of a public solicitation for contributions." 
(b)  No person shall, in connection with the solicitation of contributions or sale of tangible personal property or services, represent, or lead anyone by any manner, means, practice or device whatsoever to believe, that the person on whose behalf such solicitation or sale is being conducted is a bona fide charitable organization or that the proceeds of such solicitation or sale will be used for charitable purposes, if he has reason to believe such not to be the fact. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-9[1,2]; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 607, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(A), (B).  
Sec. 31-83. - Misrepresentations as to sponsors, endorsers, etc. 
(a)  No person shall, in connection with the solicitation of contributions or the sale of tangible personal property or services for charitable purposes represent, or lead anyone, by any manner, means, practice or device whatsoever to believe, that any other person sponsors or endorses such solicitation of contributions or sale of tangible personal property or services for charitable purposes, or approves of such charitable purposes or a charitable organization connected therewith, when such other person has not given written consent to the use of his name for these purposes. 
(b)  Any member of the board of directors or trustees of a charitable organization or any other person who has agreed either to serve or to participate in any voluntary capacity in the campaign shall be deemed thereby to have given his consent to the use of his name in such campaign. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the publication of names of contributors without their written consent, in an annual or other periodic report issued by a charitable organization, for the purpose of reporting on its operations and affairs to its membership or for the purpose of reporting contributions to contributors. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-9[3]; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 607, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(C).  
Sec. 31-84. - Misrepresentations as to income tax deductions. 
No person shall denominate any membership fee or purchase price of goods or services sold as a contribution or as a donation or in any other manner represent or imply that the member or the purchaser of such goods or services will be entitled to an income tax deduction for his cost or any portion thereof unless: 
(1)  There shall have been first obtained a signed opinion of counsel or an internal revenue service ruling or determination letter holding such cost to be deductible, or 
(2)  The member or purchaser is informed, in writing, that such cost may not be deductible; nor 
(3)  Shall any person represent or imply that a contributor will be entitled to an income tax deduction for his contribution, unless there shall have been first obtained a signed opinion of counsel or an internal revenue service ruling or determination letter holding gifts to such organization to be so deductible. 
(Code 1964, § 36.1-9[4]; Ord. No. 570, 4-26-78; Ord. No. 607, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 1464, 3-1-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(D).  
Chapter 32.1 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1415, adopted Jan. 25, 2006, repealed Ch. 32, in its entirety, which pertained to solid waste. Said ordinance also enacted new provisions pertaining to similar subject matter now codified as Ch. 32.1. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Disposal of dead animals and fowl, §§ 5-12, 5-13; garbage and refuse containers in itinerant restaurants, § 15-114; containers for garbage and refuse at mobile food service facilities, § 15-148; garbage containers in mobile home parks, § 20-51; vehicles not to cause deposit or accumulation of mud, dirt, etc., on streets, § 21-15; unlawful accumulations of refuse generally, § 24-36; accumulations of refuse or weeds near residential or commercial structures, § 24-37; open storage of inoperative vehicles, § 24-39; deposit of garbage or trash in sewers, § 30-7. 
State Law reference— Waste management, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400 et seq.; general authority relative to garbed and refuse pickup and disposal, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-927 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32.1-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Bulk waste shall mean individual items that are not suitable because of size or weight to be placed in approved refuse containers, to include but not limited to appliances, sofas, mattresses, and furniture. 
Business or commercial establishment shall mean any person, association, partnership, or corporation engaged in manufacturing or in any business, profession or occupation subject to a license tax as set forth in Chapter 18.1 of the City Code. 
CFC's shall mean chlorofluorocarbons used as coolants for commercial and home refrigeration. 
Construction demolition waste shall mean solid waste which is produced or generated during construction, remodeling or repair of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Construction demolition wastes include but are not limited to lumber, wire, sheetrock, broken brick, shingles, glass, pipes, concrete, paving materials, metals and plastics if the metal and plastics are a part of the materials of construction or empty containers for such materials. Paints, coatings, solvents, asbestos, any liquid, compressed gases or semi-liquids and refuse are not construction demolition wastes. 
Contractor shall mean an individual or firm that contracts to perform work. 
Department shall mean the department of public works, the director of public works, the superintendent of public works or their designee. 
Disposable containers shall mean ordinary plastic bags suitable for the reception of trash due to their waterproof nature. 
Dumpster shall mean a metal container of not less than four (4) cubic yards, made of watertight construction, designed and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specially equipped trucks. 
Excess refuse or bulk waste shall mean any refuse that will not fit into the approved refuse container or bulk waste in excess of ten (10) cubic yards per a single scheduled collection. 
Household  hazardous waste shall mean any residentially produced hazardous chemicals and products that are volatile, reactive, explosive or corrosive to include, but not limited to, paints, stains, sealers, thinners, solvents, charcoal fluids, any automotive fluids, pesticides, lawn and garden chemicals, fertilizers, swimming pool chemicals, oven cleaners, polishes, photo finishing chemicals and chemistry sets. Commercially produced hazardous wastes are not considered household hazardous wastes. 
Leased shall mean any residential living unit that is leased or rented for occupation by a tenant other than the property owner. 
Multiple residential unit shall mean any duplex, apartment, group of apartments or condominium used for dwelling places of more than one (1) family. 
Private property shall mean any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential, business or other purposes. 
Recyclable shall mean any material that could be reprocessed for reuse in the same or another form. 
Recycling shall mean the process of separating a given waste material from the waste stream and processing it so that it is used again as a raw material for a product which may or may not be similar to the original product. 
Recycling container shall mean a container approved by the city for use in its system of street side collection of recycling. 
Refuse means all solid waste products having the character of solids rather than liquids and which are composed wholly or partially of materials such as garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, residues from spills, contaminations or other discarded materials. 
Refuse container shall mean a container approved by the city for use in its system of street side collection of refuse. 
Residential living unit shall mean any single-family or multifamily living unit which is considered safe and inhabitable under the health regulations set forth under the Code of Virginia. 
Rubbish means combustible or slowly putrescible discarded materials which include but are not limited to printed matter, plastic and paper products, rags and other combustible or slowly putrescible materials not included under the term "garbage." 
Scavenge means the unauthorized or uncontrolled removal of waste materials from a solid waste management facility or from material set out for collection. 
Single residential unit shall mean a dwelling place commonly referred to as a house, occupied by one (1) family. 
Solid waste means any discarded material as defined in the Virginia Solid Waste Management Regulations (9 VAC 20-80-140 et seq.) 
Special collection and disposal fee shall mean an additional collection and disposal fee paid by the property owner, tenant, homeowner, or contractor in advance per truck load for collections not included in the basic collection services provided by solid waste. This fee authorizes a special collection of construction demolition waste, tree debris, or bulk trash in excess of ten (10) cubic yards per week at an individual property by solid waste. 
Street side shall mean a location adjacent to, and no more than eight (8) feet from, the curb line or edge of the pavement. 
Tree debris shall mean decomposable materials to include, but not limited to, limbs, wood cuttings, branches, logs, vines, roots, wood chips, bark, shrubs, and tree trunks. Tree debris does not include stumps. 
Waste tire means a tire that has been discarded because it is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Yard waste means that fraction of municipal solid waste that consists of grass clippings, leaves, brush and tree prunings arising from general landscape maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-2. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  Until otherwise directed by the city manager and except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the department shall be responsible for collections provided for in this article and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. The police and codes compliance departments shall assist in the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the right to shift the responsibility of departments under this article, by written directive, when the interests of good administration so demand. 
(Code 1964, § 20-22; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 586, 9-13-78; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09) 
Charter reference— Responsibility of department of public works as to garbage and refuse collection and disposal, § 10.02.  
Sec. 32.1-3. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person who violates provisions of this article shall be subject to the following fines: 
(1)  For the first offense, violators shall receive a written warning. 
(2)  For the second offense, violators shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(3)  For the third offense, violators shall be fined seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(4)  For the fourth offense and subsequent offense, violators shall be fined one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(5)  Each violation shall be counted as a separate violation at the location at which the violation occurs. 
(b)  The city, or its designee, shall serve the written warning or assessment of fine by either: 
(1)  Hand delivering the document to the violator or other adult occupying or employed by a business on the property where the violation occurred; or 
(2)  Posting the document on the front door of the primary structure and mailing, by first class U.S. mail, a copy of the document to the owner/occupant of record at the current mailing address for the property where the violation occurred. 
(c)  Persons who have been assessed a fine shall have the right to challenge the assessment by providing a written notice to the city manager within ten (10) days of the date of the assessment of the penalty. The city manager or his designee shall determine whether the fine was properly assessed and notify the complaining person in writing of his determination. Should the city manager or his designee determine that the fine was properly assessed, the person may challenge that determination within ten (10) calendar days of receiving the notice of determination by filing an action in court. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee may waive the penalty if he determines that the violation occurred due to no fault of the person. 
(e)  The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation of this article shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. When not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained or allowed to be maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-4. - Disposal generally. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to safeguard life, limb, property and public health and the safety and welfare by regulating and controlling the disposal of solid waste and hazardous materials. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit solid waste or hazardous materials within the city, without first complying with the zoning ordinance and obtaining a permit from the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
(Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-5. - Littering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or otherwise dispose of refuse, litter, or other unsightly matter on a public highway, right-of-way, property adjacent to such highway or right-of-way, or any other public property, or on private property without the written consent of the owner thereof or his agent. 
(b)  When any person is arrested for a violation of this section, and the matter alleged to have been illegally dumped or disposed of has been ejected from a motor vehicle or transported to the disposal site in a motor vehicle, the arresting officer may comply with the provisions of Code of Virginia § 46.2-936 in making an arrest. 
When a violation of the provisions of this section has been observed by any person, and the matter dumped or disposed of has been ejected from a motor vehicle, the owner or operator of such motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the person ejecting such matter; provided, however, that such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months and a fine of not less than $250.00 or more than $2,500.00, either or both. In lieu of the imposition of confinement in jail, the court may order the defendant to perform a mandatory minimum of ten (10) hours of community service in litter abatement activities. 
(Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09; Ord. No. 17-0003 , 3-22-17) 
Cross reference— Littering, § 7-50. 
State Law reference— Improper disposal of solid waste; civil penalties, Code of Virginia § 10.1-1418.1; locality may provide for removal or disposal of trash, cutting of grass and weeds; penalty in certain counties; penalty, Code of Virginia § 15.2-901; dumping trash, penalty, Code of Virginia § 33.2-802; arrest for misdemeanor; release on summons and promise to appear; right to demand hearing immediately or within twenty-four hours; issuance of warrant on request of officer for violations of §§ 46.2-301 and 46.2-302; refusal to promise to appear; violations, Code of Virginia § 46.2-936.  
Sec. 32.1-6. - Repealed. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-0011, adopted August 12, 2009, repealed § 32.1-6 which pertained to prohibited deposits at the designated city disposal site. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 32.1-7. - General responsibility of owner or occupant of premises to comply with article. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any premises within the city to comply with the applicable provisions of this article including payment of any required fees for service or capacity, except where otherwise specifically provided or except where the occupant or owner has, by deed, contract, lease, negotiation, or agreement determined otherwise. 
(Code 1964, § 20-2; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 531; Ord. No. 671, 9-24-80; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-8. - Storage of garbage and refuse on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for refuse to be placed, deposited or allowed to remain on any premises unless placed or kept in metal or plastic containers or dumpsters with tight-fitting covers; and such covers shall be kept on the containers at all times. Plastic or polyethylene bags, if used for on-premise storage of refuse, shall be used as liners in metal or plastic containers with tight-fitting covers; and such covers shall be kept on the containers at all times. This temporary storage of refuse shall be used only until the refuse can be transferred to the approved refuse container by the resident for street-side collection. 
(Ord. No. 1137, 5-10-95; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Secs. 32.1-9—32.1-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTIONS BY THE CITY 
 
Sec. 32.1-21. - Frequency and maximum amount of collections. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, and except in the case of emergency arising from an act of God or under circumstances over which the department has no control, the department shall collect, or have collected, remove and dispose of all household refuse from premises for which it provides service once weekly and recycling every other week with conditions as set forth below: 
(1)  In residential sections of the city, the collections shall not exceed the contents of any approved refuse container. No extra bags of refuse will be collected without the approval of the department. 
(2)  Collection of regular refuse from commercial establishments using approved refuse containers, multiple residential units of less than five (5) separate units, and trailer courts using approved refuse containers shall be made weekly and shall not exceed the contents of any approved refuse container. No extra bags of refuse will be collected without the approval of the department. 
(3)  A holiday collection schedule shall be announced by the department for those holidays that fall on a regularly scheduled collection day. 
(Ord. No. 1137, 5-10-95; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-22. - Refuse containers generally. 
(a)  Approved refuse containers issued by the city shall remain the property of the city and shall not be removed from the property they were assigned to without approval by the department. 
(b)  One (1) approved refuse container shall be provided by the city at no cost to a homeowner occupied residential living unit or a multiple residential unit or trailer court of less than five (5) separate units. For a leased residential unit the landlord or tenant shall purchase all approved refuse containers for the property. The maximum number of approved refuse containers allowed at any homeowner occupied residential living unit or a multiple residential unit or trailer court of less than five (5) separate units shall be two (2). All approved refuse containers for a business or commercial establishment that receives city collection service shall be purchased by the owner of the property. The maximum number of approved refuse collection containers allowed at a business or commercial establishment shall be four (4). 
(c)  Additional approved refuse containers, not to exceed the maximum number allowed, may be purchased from the city at the current replacement cost as established by the department. 
(Code of 1964, §§ 20-2, 20-3; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 531; Ord. No. 671, 9-24-80; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1137, 5-10-95; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-23. - Maintenance of refuse containers. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the premises to maintain all approved refuse containers in their possession in clean condition and good repair. Each approved refuse container shall be equipped with a proper fitting lid. All approved containers used for the deposit of refuse under the provisions of this article shall be cleaned or disinfected by the resident of the dwelling to whom the approved container is assigned as often as may be needed. 
(Code 1964, § 20-2; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 531; Ord. No. 671, 9-24-80; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1137, 5-10-95; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-24. - Replacement of lost, stolen or defective refuse containers. 
(a)  The department shall have the authority to require the replacement of any approved refuse container that is unserviceable or damaged as to hinder the effective street-side collection process. Failure to replace an unserviceable approved refuse container within ten (10) days after notification by the department will be justifiable cause to cease providing refuse collection service. 
(b)  Any approved refuse container that is damaged or destroyed through the negligence or misuse of the city or through normal wear and tear shall be replaced at the expense of the city. The department shall have the authority to determine, in each case of damage, whether the damage is sufficient to require replacement or repair. 
(c)  In cases of loss or damage of the approved refuse container due to the negligence of the resident or by a third party, replacement shall be the responsibility of the homeowner. In cases of hardship, the city manager or his designee shall have the authority to waive the fee for replacement. In determining hardship, the city manager shall be assisted by the department of Human Services. 
(Code 1964, § 20-24; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1137, 5-10-95; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-25. - Placement for collection generally. 
(a)  All refuse and recyclables shall be placed in an approved container for collection. The approved refuse and recycling container, yard waste, bulk waste and tree debris shall be placed at street-side for collection purposes. The collection schedule for the city shall be announced by the department If the approved refuse or recycling container, yard waste, bulk waste, or tree debris is not street-side at collection time, this will indicate no service is needed on that date. Yard waste prepared for collection, as prescribed in section 32.1-27, bulk waste, and tree debris shall be placed street-side on the same scheduled collection day as established for the collection of the approved refuse container. 
(b)  The approved refuse and recycling containers shall be placed no more than three (3) feet from the street for collection. They shall be placed no closer than ten (10) feet from parked vehicles and three (3) feet from all other objects with the arrows on the lid facing the street. 
(c)  The approved refuse container, recycling container, yard waste, and bulk waste and tree debris shall be placed street-side no earlier than 3:00 p.m. on the date before the scheduled collection day and any approved containers shall be removed from street-side no later than midnight on the day of collection. No approved refuse container, recycling container, yard waste, bulk waste, or tree debris shall be left on a lot or piece of property in front of a line parallel to the front of the structure on the property, except during the period provided for herein, when the approved refuse container, yard waste, bulk waste, tree debris, or recycling container is at street side for collection purposes. Bulk waste, tree debris, and yard waste (including bagged grass and leaves), as permitted by sections 32.1-26 and 32.1-27, shall be subject to the same regulations with regard to placement as the approved refuse container or recycling container. Violations of this subsection should be reported to the department or other office as may be designated by the city manager. Upon receiving a complaint, such office shall investigate such complaint, and, if a violation is determined, such office shall fine the violator in accordance with section 32.1-3. 
(Ord. No. 1137, 5-10-95; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-26. - Bulk waste collection. 
(a)  The city shall provide collection of bulk waste, as defined in section 32.1-1, to occupied dwellings receiving regular refuse collections service from the city and subject to the conditions established in this chapter of the city code and in accordance with a collection schedule established by the department. Bulk waste shall be placed street-side, free from low power lines, fences, poles, low branches, parked vehicles or other conditions which would hamper collection. If such bulk waste is not prepared for collection as herein required or is in excess of the ten (10) cubic yard bulk waste limit as defined in section 32.1-1, its disposal shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the premises themselves or by payment of the special collection and disposal fee. Placement and set out times shall be in accordance with section 32.1-25. 
(b)  The occupant of the premises shall be responsible to see that doors of refrigerators, freezers and iceboxes or other containers are removed in order to comply with section 24-38 of the City Code. 
(c)  Bulk waste collection shall be provided to residential living units, trailer courts, multiple residential units, and business or commercial establishments that receive city collection service, per a collection schedule established by the department and fee schedule established by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 20-13; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 535, 7-27-77; Ord. No. 565, 3-8-78; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-27. - Preparation and placement of yard waste, tree debris, cuttings, etc. 
Leaves, grass clippings and other yard waste as defined in section 32.1-1, shall be placed in clear plastic bags free of refuse and other waste. Bags shall not be overloaded beyond capacity. Tree debris too large to be placed in clear plastic bags must be placed street-side, free from low power lines, fences, poles, low branches or other conditions which would hamper collection. If such material is not prepared for collection as herein required, in an orderly pile free of refuse, bulk waste or bagged yard waste, its disposal shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the premises. Such tree debris shall be no longer than eight (8) feet and no more than six (6) inches in diameter subject to the placement and set out times prescribed in section 32.1-25. 
(Code 1964, § 20-8; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 586, 9-13-78; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-28. - Disposal of waste tires. 
(a)  Passenger vehicle waste tires shall be collected curbside from residential living units only. Residential living units are allowed to place up to five (5) passenger vehicle tires at the curb for disposal twice each calendar year. All other waste tires must be disposed of in accordance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(b)  Waste tires shall not be placed in approved refuse containers destined for disposal at the city-operated refuse burning facility or any other waste disposal facility. 
(Ord. No. 752, 5-11-83; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1137, 5-10-95; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-29. - Special preparation of certain materials. 
(a)  Hypodermic instruments shall not be placed in an approved refuse container or disposable container before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering the same inoperable and incapable of reuse. Such instruments or devices shall be further safeguarded by wrapping or securing the instrument so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(b)  All pressurized cans shall be released of all pressure before being deposited in an approved refuse container for collection by the city or any private collection agency. 
(c)  All broken glass or any type of glass that may cause injury to refuse collection personnel shall be separately wrapped to prevent injury and placed in the approved refuse collection container for collection. 
(d)  All pesticide containers and other poisonous containers shall be emptied and rinsed according to the manufacturer's label directions before being placed in the approved refuse collection container for collection. 
(Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-30. - Certain materials not to be collected. 
(a)  Poisons, acids, caustics, manure, human excreta, explosives, barrels, drums, compressed gas cylinders, tanks, and other dangerous materials or substances such as soil, loam, and other substances that may accumulate as a result of repairs to yards, will not be collected by the city. Nor shall any refuse from an overflowing approved refuse container, piles of mixed, refuse, bulk waste, yard waste, or tree debris or other materials or loose or dangerous refuse be collected by the city. 
(b)  Industrial waste shall not be collected by the city, but shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the operator of the factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing the same in accordance with regulations promulgated by the city manager. 
(c)  Construction demolition waste and tree debris generated under contract between the owner/occupant and another individual or party shall not be collected or disposed of by the city and shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the individual party with which contracted or, in the event of his failure, by the owner/occupant of the property; unless the contractor, property owner, or tenant pays the special collection and disposal fee per truck load in advance as established by the city council. The special collection and disposal fee authorizes collection of debris including, but not limited to, construction demolition waste and tree debris. 
(d)  Construction demolition waste shall not be collected, removed, or disposed of by the city but shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property unless; the property owner or tenant pays the special collection and disposal fee per truck load in advance as established by city council. The special collection and disposal fee authorizes collection of debris including, but not limited to, construction demolition waste and tree debris. 
(e)  Disposal of five (5) self hauled pick-up truck loads of construction demolition waste is permitted at the landfill at no charge to the property owner or tenant with the tipping fee being charged to the department at the current city tipping fee rate only if the property owner or tenant who is doing construction or remodeling meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The property owner or tenant must have a current, paid, and valid building permit issued by the City of Hampton for the construction or renovations being done; 
(2)  The permit must show the contractor doing the construction as "self" on the permit and all construction demolition waste must be self hauled; 
(3)  The property owner or tenant must provide current identification upon disposal of the construction demolition waste. The addresses on the building permit and the identification provided shall be the same or disposal shall be denied unless the property owner or tenant chooses to pay the current public tipping fee set by the landfill. 
(Code 1964, §§ 20-7, 20-15, 20-16; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-31. - Material not to be collected from certain premises. 
(a)  All collections of refuse material by the city shall be made from street side, except as otherwise provided in this article. Collections will not be made from premises situated on streets which are not passable for collection trucks, private streets and lanes nor shall any collection be made from basements, garages, enclosed porches or the interior of any building. 
(b)  City refuse collectors are not required to collect from premises where the provisions of this article are violated. The failure to collect any bulk waste, tree debris, or refuse from the premises because of a violation of the provisions of this article shall not relieve the person responsible for such violation from prosecution and penalty therefore. 
(Code 1964, §§ 20-10, 20-11; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-32. - Non-street side collection. 
Any user of the city provided refuse and recycling collection service, having an address on a public street, who is physically incapacitated so as to prevent such person from placing the approved refuse container or recycling container at street-side for collection purposes may obtain non-street side collection of refuse or recyclables by obtaining the approval of the department. Application for non street-side collection must be made annually and supported by medical documentation of the physical incapacitation and approved by the department. 
(Code 1964, § 20-5; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1137, 5-10-95; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-33. - Collection from private streets. 
(a)  In the case of private streets, the department shall review the street and determine whether or not city refuse collection vehicles can reasonably obtain access to approved refuse containers and that the infrastructure in place can accommodate city collection vehicle traffic. The department shall designate where and when the approved refuse containers are to be placed for collection. 
(b)  In the event it is determined by the department that reasonable access is not possible, the department shall designate a central location where all the approved refuse containers shall be placed for collection purposes. It shall be the responsibility of the residents, in such case, to place the approved refuse or recycling containers in the central location selected by the department. 
(c)  In the event the city collects refuse material along a private street or road, the city shall not be responsible for damage by collection vehicles or maintenance of such street or road. 
(Code 1964, § 20-10; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09) 
Cross reference— Streets, Ch. 34.  
Sec. 32.1-34. - Collection from trailer courts. 
In the case of trailer courts, the department shall review the trailer court and determine whether or not city refuse collection vehicles can reasonably obtain access to approved refuse and recycling containers. If access is possible, the city shall require of the trailer court owner a hold harmless agreement. The agreement shall protect the city from any claim or cause arising out of damage to property of the trailer court located in or on the private roadway used by the city's collection vehicle. The agreement shall also protect the city from any claim of damage to the private roadway resulting from the use thereof for collection purposes. The agreement shall be approved by the city attorney. The department shall designate where and when the approved refuse and recycling containers are to be placed for collection. 
In the event it is determined by the department that reasonable access is not possible, the department shall designate a central location where all the approved refuse or recycling containers shall be placed for collection purposes. It shall be the responsibility of the residents, in such case, to place the approved refuse or recycling containers in the central location selected by the department. 
(Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09) 
Cross reference— Mobile home parks, § 20-16 et seq.  
Sec. 32.1-35. - Dumpster service. 
(a)  Dumpster service may be rendered by the city to business or commercial establishments, multiple living units of five (5) or more separate units constructed for individual ownership, and such service can be provided from a public street or other location approved by the department. Fees for this service shall be set by city council. The minimum dumpster size shall be four (4) cubic yards. Collection and disposal of refuse not collected by the city shall be the responsibility of the property owners through the use of dumpsters or other means approved by the department. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any premises served by a dumpster box to maintain such box in clean condition and good repair. Each dumpster box shall be watertight and shall be equipped with a proper lid or top so that it may be fully closed. If dumpster service is provided, residents will be responsible for placing their refuse in the dumpster box. Such dumpster box shall be placed in a location approved by the department. 
(Code 1964, §§ 20-14, 20-17; Ord. No. 493; Ord. No. 535, 7-27-77; Ord. No. 545, 9-28-77; Ord. No. 564, 3-8-78; Ord. No. 565, 3-8-78; Ord. No. 579, 8-9-78; Ord. No. 614, 2-28-79; Ord. No. 671, 9-24-80; Ord. No. 874, 12-9-87; Ord. No. 1137, 5-10-95; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-36. - Collection of recyclable materials. 
All occupants of residential living units and business or commercial establishments receiving city collection services, shall separate and make available for collection and recycling such categories of solid waste which are designated by the department. 
(1)  Recycling containers generally. 
a.  Only recycling containers, approved for use by the department, shall be used for the collection of recyclables. 
b.  One (1) approved recycling container shall be provided by the city without charge. Ownership of the approved recycling container remains with the city, and it shall not be removed from the premises to which assigned. Subsequent replacement of approved recycling containers, due to loss or damage attributable to the owner or occupant of the property, shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the property to which the approved recycling container is assigned. 
c.  One (1) additional approved recycling container may be provided by the city upon request by the owner or occupant with proof of need due to regular volumes of recyclable materials exceeding capacity of single container and will be serviced according to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Placement of the approved recycling container; frequency of collection. 
a.  The approved recycling container shall be placed street side in accordance with the requirements for approved refuse containers in section 32.1-25, no closer than three (3) feet from the approved refuse container for collection. 
b.  The approved recycling container shall be placed out for collection and removed once the collection is completed, in accordance with section 32.1-25 of this chapter. 
c.  Non-street side collection of the approved recycling container for any person physically incapacitated so as to prevent such person from placing the approved recycling container street side for collection purposes shall be in accordance with section 32.1-32 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-37. - Recycling commercial reports. 
(a)  All business or commercial establishments, as defined in this chapter, shall be required to file an annual commercial recycling report with the department. Any business or commercial establishment that utilizes city collection service shall be exempt from this commercial reporting requirement, because the information can be gathered directly from service users. 
(b)  The annual report shall cover the twelve-month period beginning January 1 and ending December 31, and shall be submitted no later than forty-five (45) days from the end of such period. 
(c)  The annual report shall contain: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the commercial establishment on whose behalf this report is filed; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of an individual who may be contacted on behalf of such commercial establishment; and 
(3)  The total quantity, in tons, of solid waste recycled by such commercial establishment during the twelve-month reporting period. 
(d)  All quantities of solid waste required to be recycled shall be measured by weight, in tons. When a business or commercial establishment is unable to accurately determine quantity by weight, such quantities shall be reported based upon carefully estimated data. Each report shall identify all information which is based upon estimated data, and the basis of measurement used for such estimate. 
(e)  The reporting requirements of section 32.1-37 shall not include any information of a proprietary nature, defined as information, the disclosure of which would result in compromise of a trade secret or have a direct economic advantage to a competitor of such commercial establishment. Where any business or commercial establishment fails to report any information otherwise required hereunder based upon an assertion that the information is of a proprietary nature, the business or commercial establishment shall specify in the annual report the nature of the information withheld and the basis for the determination that such information is of a proprietary nature. The department may examine such assertion and reasons therefore, and, if the department determines there is no reasonable basis for such assertion shall advise such business or commercial establishment in writing, after which the penalties assessable under section 32.1-3 herein may be imposed. 
(f)  Failure to timely comply with the reporting requirements of section 32.1-37 of this chapter shall be punishable by a civil penalty in accordance with section 32.1-3. Each day of any violation under section 32.1-37 shall constitute a separate punishable occurrence. No criminal penalties shall be imposed for such violations. 
(Ord. No. 1137, 5-10-95; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-38. - Scavenging of refuse or recycling containers. 
It shall be unlawful to scavenge, remove, alter, or otherwise tamper with any item, material, or object either contained in or attached to the approved refuse or recycling container placed street side for collection without the approval of the of the department. 
(Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-39. - Establishment of fees for solid waste service. 
(a)  The city council shall establish solid waste user fees. All households within the city eligible for city collection service shall be subject to the solid waste user fees established by the city council. All solid waste user fees shall be approved by the city council prior to implementation and may include any or all of the following: 
• Special collection and disposal fees. 
• Residential collection and disposal fees. 
• Commercial refuse collection and disposal user fees. 
• Dumpster service rental, collection and disposal fee. 
• Landfill and steam plant tipping fees. 
• Bulk waste collection and disposal fees. 
• Excess refuse and bulk waste collection and disposal fees 
• Yard waste collection and disposal fees. 
• CFC collection fees. 
• Waste tire collection and disposal fees. 
• Household hazardous waste collection and disposal fees. 
(b)  The city council shall have the authority to establish and/or change user fees as required during the annual budget process. 
(c)  All solid waste user fees shall be billed by the department, or its designee. 
(d)  Any fee for solid waste service in addition to the solid waste user fee shall be set and approved by city council. In the event that any fee in addition to the solid waste user fee is not approved by city council, the department may either choose to make the collection at no cost or choose to not provide that collection service. 
(Ord. No. 1137, 5-10-95; Ord. No. 1415, 1-25-06; Ord. No. 09-0011, 8-12-09)  
Sec. 32.1-40. - Exemption for qualified elderly and disabled persons. 
Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the implementation of the amendment adopted by city council on May 14, 2014, ordinance number 14-007 pertaining to the repeal of relief from the payment of solid waste user fees for qualified applicants at least 65 years of age or anyone found to be permanently and totally disabled as defined in Virginia Code § 58.1-3217 and claiming a real estate tax exemption under city code § 37-123 as of July 1, 2013 which implementation was to be delayed until July 1, 2016, only for those persons qualifying and claiming a real estate tax exemption as of July 1, 2013 by ordinance number 14-00025 adopted by city council on November 12, 2014, will no longer be in effect. Effective March 9, 2016, all elderly and disabled persons qualifying and claiming a real estate tax exemption under city code § 37-123 as of July 1, 2013 are exempt from the payment of solid waste user fees subject to income limitations and financial worth limitations as set forth herein. All other elderly and disabled persons not eligible under the prior real estate tax exemption program pursuant to city code § 37-123 or claiming an exemption to real estate taxes as of July 1, 2013 are required to pay the solid waste user fee. Income limitations and financial worth limitations set forth in the prior tax exemption program pursuant to city code § 37-123, article II of the city code shall apply. For purposes of this section, qualified applicants are defined as those individuals who meet income limitations for each annual tax relief application. Administration and application for relief from the solid waste user fee shall be the responsibility of the department. The commissioner of revenue shall certify that a person is qualified for relief to the department providing the percentage of tax liability for each qualified person. The department shall reduce the solid waste user fee accordingly. 
( Ord. No. 14-0025, 11-12-14 ; Ord. No. 16-0005 , 3-9-16) 
State Law reference— Authority to grant exemption, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-936.  
Sec. 32.1-41. - Solid waste rate determination. 
(a)  All property owners or occupants who meet the criteria in paragraph (b) of this section are required to pay a solid waste user and recycling fee, which shall be charged pursuant to the following conditions. 
(1)  The fee of $13.00 per week for up to two refuse containers shall be charged to property owners or occupants who do not participate in the city's recycling program. Property owners or occupants having more than two refuse containers shall be charged an additional $13.00 per week for each additional refuse container. 
(2)  The reduced fee of $7.25 per week for up to two refuse containers shall be charged to property owners or occupants who participate in the city's recycling program. Property owners or occupants having more than two refuse containers shall be charged an additional $7.25 per week for each additional refuse container. Participation in the recycling program requires customers to recycle by placement of the approved recycling container curbside on the approved collection day at least one collection cycle in any 30-day period and be at least 25 percent full during any one collection cycle. 
(b)  Solid waste user and recycling fees will be imposed upon (i) single residential unit property owners or occupants and (ii) business or commercial establishment and multiple residential unit property owners or occupants opting to use the city collection service that meet all of the following criteria: 
(1)  A habitable dwelling unit or business or commercial establishment; 
(2)  An active water account; and 
(3)  Commencing July 1, 2018, active water consumption, which is defined as metered water service that uses at least ten (10) cubic feet (0.10 hcf) of water consumption during a single billing cycle. 
(c)  The solid waste user and recycling fee shall be billed regardless of whether property owners or occupants actually use the service, or regardless of whether the service is provided if prevented due to an emergency, because the service is provided and supported by the equitable contribution of all customers who meet the criteria set forth herein. 
( Ord. No. 15-0021, 8-12-15 ; Ord. No. 16-0007 , 4-3-16; Ord. No. 17-0005 , 5-10-17; Ord. No. 18-0005 , 6-13-18; Ord. No. 19-0006 , 5-8-19)  
Chapter 33 - SPECIAL SALES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 33-1—33-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Going out of business sales, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-223 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 33-16. - Violations of article. 
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-51; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1455, 1-24-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 33-17. - Advertisement or sale of uninventoried goods. 
It shall be unlawful for any person connected with a sale authorized by a permit issued under this article to advertise at a reduced price or to sell at a reduced price, during the period covered by such permit, any goods that are not specified in the inventory filed pursuant to section 33-32. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-51; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1455, 1-24-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Sec. 33-18. - Inspections. 
The commissioner of revenue shall inspect the advertisement and conduct of a sale authorized by a permit issued under this article to ensure that it is advertised and conducted in conformity with such permit. 
(Ord. No. 1455, 1-24-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Secs. 33-19—33-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 33-31. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct a sale for the purpose of discontinuing a retail business, or to modify the word "sale" in any advertisement with the words "going out of business" or any other words which tend to insinuate that the retail business is to be discontinued and the merchandise liquidated, unless such person has a valid permit to conduct such sale issued by the commissioner of revenue. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-51; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1455, 1-24-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-223.  
Sec. 33-32. - Application. 
Application for a permit required by this division shall be on a form supplied by the commissioner of revenue and filed with such commissioner. The application shall be accompanied by an inventory, including the kind and quantity of all goods which are to be offered for sale during the sale and by a sample copy of any advertisement of the sale intended to be published in any newspaper. Such application must be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the date the sale is to begin. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-51; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1455, 1-24-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Sec. 33-33. - Fee. 
A fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) shall be charged for each permit issued under this article. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-51; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1106, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1455, 1-24-07) 
State Law reference— Authority to charge above fee, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Sec. 33-34. - Issuance. 
The commissioner of revenue shall issue a permit required by this division to retail merchants upon the filing of a proper application and payment of the prescribed fee. 
(Ord. No. 1455, 1-24-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Sec. 33-35. - Term. 
A permit issued under this division shall be valid for a period of no longer than sixty (60) days, and any extension of that time shall constitute a new sale and shall require an additional permit and inventory list. A maximum of one (1) permit beyond the initial sixty-day permit shall be granted solely for the purpose of liquidating only those goods contained on the initial inventory list and which remain unsold. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-51; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1106, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1455, 1-24-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224.  
Chapter 33.2 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 33.2-1. - Title and authority. 
(a)  This chapter shall be known as the "Stormwater Management Ordinance." 
(b)  This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:24, et seq. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-2. - Findings of fact. 
The health of city, state, and federal waters are vital to the economy of the City of Hampton (the "city") and the Commonwealth of Virginia; degradation of these resources from both point and nonpoint source pollution must be curtailed. Uncontrolled drainage and development of land have significant adverse impacts upon the health, safety, and welfare of the community. The purpose of this chapter is (a) to implement the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act (Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, § 62.1-44.15:67, et seq.), the Virginia Stormwater Management Act (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:24, et seq.), and the federal Clean Water Act at the local level, and (b) to protect the quality of state waters as authorized under Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:67, et seq.; specifically: 
(1)  Stormwater runoff may carry pollutants into receiving water bodies, degrading water quality; 
(2)  The increase in nutrients, such as phosphorous and nitrogen, adversely affects flora and fauna; 
(3)  Improperly channeling water increases the velocity of runoff, thereby increasing erosion and sedimentation; 
(4)  Certain lands that are proximate to shorelines have intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform; 
(5)  Construction requiring the alteration of natural topography and removal of vegetation tends to increase erosion; 
(6)  Siltation of water bodies resulting from increased erosion decreases their capacity to hold and transport water, interferes with navigation, and harms flora and fauna; 
(7)  Impervious surfaces increase the volume, rate, and pollutant load of stormwater runoff and allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and increasing erosion and surface water pollution; 
(8)  Improperly managed stormwater runoff may increase the incidence of flooding and the level of floods which occur, thus endangering property and human life; 
(9)  Improperly managed stormwater runoff may interfere with the maintenance of optimum salinity in estuarine areas, thereby disrupting biological productivity; 
(10)  Substantial economic losses result from these adverse impacts on city and state waters; and 
(11)  Future water degradation may be avoided if land is developed in accordance with sound stormwater management practices. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-3. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city and protect the quality and quantity of state waters from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater, including protection from a land-disturbing activity causing unreasonable degradation of properties, water quality, stream channels, and other natural resources, and to establish procedures whereby stormwater requirements related to water quality and quantity shall be administered and enforced. 
(b)  In order to protect, maintain, and enhance both the immediate and long-term health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, this chapter has the following objectives: 
(1)  To balance development interests and natural resources of the city; 
(2)  To protect, restore, or maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of city and state waters in such conditions that will permit all reasonable public uses and will support the propagation and growth of all aquatic life, including game fish, which might reasonably be expected to inhabit them; 
(3)  To prevent activities which harm the city by adversely affecting water resources; 
(4)  To encourage the construction of drainage systems which maintain or functionally approximate existing natural systems; 
(5)  To encourage the protection of natural drainageways and the use of them in ways which do not impair their beneficial functioning; 
(6)  To prevent any increase in the transport of pollutants to city and state waters; 
(7)  To maintain or restore groundwater levels; 
(8)  To protect, maintain, or restore natural salinity levels in estuarine areas; 
(9)  To minimize erosion and sedimentation; 
(10)  To prevent damage to wetlands and resource protection areas as defined herein; 
(11)  To prevent damage from flooding, while recognizing that natural fluctuations in water levels are beneficial; 
(12)  To protect, restore, and maintain fish and wildlife habitat in the watersheds of the city; and 
(13)  To ensure attainment of these objectives by requiring the approval and implementation of stormwater management plans for all activities which may have an adverse impact upon city and state waters. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-4. - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions set forth in 9VAC25-870-10 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program ("VSMP") regulations, as amended, which expressly are adopted and incorporated herein by reference, the following words and terms used in this chapter have the following meanings unless otherwise specified herein. Where definitions differ, those incorporated herein shall have precedence. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most effective application. For purposes of this chapter, except as otherwise defined herein, the definitions set forth in chapter 2 (zoning definitions) and chapter 9, article II (Chesapeake Bay Preservation District) of the city zoning ordinance and chapter 35 (subdivisions) and chapter 35.1 (site plans) of the city code shall control the meaning of any terms or phrases used herein. 
Administrator. The VSMP authority, including the city's senior civil engineer-stormwater or his designee, or department responsible for administering the VSMP on behalf of the city. 
Adverse impacts. Any modifications, alterations, or effects on a feature or characteristic of community waters or wetlands, including their quality, quantity, hydrodynamics, surface area, species composition, living resources, aesthetics, or usefulness for human or natural uses which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety, or property, to biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. The term includes secondary, cumulative, and direct impacts. 
Agent. The community development department of the city. 
Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan. A contract between the city and the owner or permittee that specifies methods that shall be implemented to comply with the requirements of a VSMP for the construction of a single-family residence, which may be executed in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
Applicant. Any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit under this chapter. 
Best management practice or BMP. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land-disturbing activity. A land-disturbing activity including clearing, grading, or excavation that results in a land disturbance equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and less than one (1) acre in all areas of jurisdictions designated as subject to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Designation and Management Regulations (9VAC25-830) adopted pursuant to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act. 
Clean Water Act or CWA. The federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C § 1251, et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
Clearing. The removal of vegetative ground cover, including but not limited to the removal of root mat or topsoil. Clearing does not include the ordinary mowing of grass. 
Coastal Barrier Resources System. An area comprised of undeveloped barrier islands and associated wetlands as designated under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, 16 U.S.C.A. § 3501, et seq. 
Common plan of development or sale. A contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules. 
Control measure. Any best management practice, stormwater facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
Department. The department of public works of the city. 
DEQ. The Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
Detention. The collection and storage of surface water for subsequent gradual discharge. 
Developable area. Area that is not constrained by wetlands or other site limitations. However, the lack of availability of water or other utilities shall not be considered a site limitation for purposes of assessing a stormwater utility charge. 
Developed nonresidential property. Developed property which does not serve a primary purpose of providing permanent dwelling units. Such property shall include but not be limited to commercial, industrial, educational, civic, religious, cultural and recreational properties, parking lots, hotels, and offices. For purposes of this chapter, this definition also shall include developed property on which are located apartments or mobile home facilities containing more than four (4) residential or dwelling units. 
Developed property. A parcel of real property that has been altered in whole or in part from its natural state by the addition of improvements, such as buildings, structures, paving, and/or other impervious surfaces, if the total square footage of such impervious surface exceeds 500 square feet. 
Developed residential property. A developed lot or parcel containing at least one (1) but no more than four (4) residences or dwelling units, and accessory uses related to, but subordinate to, the purpose of providing permanent dwelling facilities. Such property shall include houses, duplexes, triplexes, quadriplexes, and mobile homes. For purposes of this chapter, each townhouse located on a separate lot shall be considered as a developed residential property; and each condominium, although it is not on a separate lot, also will be considered as a developed residential property. 
Developer. Any person who engages in development either as the owner or as the representative of an owner of property. 
Development. Land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures, or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
Development activity. 
a.  The construction, installation, alteration, demolition, or removal of a structure, impervious surface, or drainage facility, best management practices facilities, buffer areas, and the like; 
b.  Clearing, scraping, grubbing, or otherwise removing or killing the vegetation on a site; or 
c.  Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil, mud, or sand on a site. 
Director. The director of the department of public works or his designee. 
Drainage facility. Any manmade or man-altered component of the drainage system. 
Drainage system. The system through which water flows from the land, including all watercourses (both intermittent and perennial), water bodies, and wetlands. 
Dwelling unit. A single housing unit, mobile home, townhouse, or condominium providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
Equivalent residential unit or ERU. The equivalent impervious area of the developed residential property class per dwelling unit located within the city based on the statistical average horizontal impervious area of developed residential property in the city. One (1) ERU shall equal 2,429 square feet of impervious surface area. 
EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Erosion. The wearing or washing away of soil by the action of wind or water. 
Erosion and sediment control plan. A document providing for the conservation of soil and water resources as required by the land-disturbing operations ordinance. 
ERU rate. The service charge fee charged for one (1) ERU, as established in this chapter. 
Filling. Any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
Flood. A temporary rise in the level of any water body, watercourse, or wetlands which results in the inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
General permit. The state permit titled "General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities" found in Part XIV (9VAC25-880-1, et seq.) of the regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Act within a geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Grading. Any excavating, filling, leveling, or sloping of earth materials, or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated, filled, leveled, or sloped condition. 
Impervious surface. A surface compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to water infiltration. It includes semi-impervious surfaces, such as compacted clay, as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roads, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar surfaces. Other surfaces such as gravel, dirt, or a mixture thereof, that regularly are used for vehicular access, parking, or storage also shall be considered impervious if there is inadequate vegetative cover to affect the rate of stormwater infiltration. 
Land disturbance or land-disturbing activity. A man-made change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including clearing, grading, or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in section 33.2-8 of this chapter. 
Layout. A conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
Minor modification. An amendment to an existing general permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including but not limited to changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit modification or amendment does not substantially alter general permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
MS4. The municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Natural systems. Systems which predominantly consist of or use those communities of plants, animals, bacteria, and other flora and fauna which occur indigenously on the land, in the soil, or in the water. 
Non-point source pollution. Pollution whose sources cannot be pinpointed but rather is washed from the land surface in a diffused manner by stormwater runoff. 
Nontidal wetlands. Those wetlands other than tidal wetlands that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in 33 CFR § 328.3b pursuant to enforcement of Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Operator. The owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this chapter. 
Owner. The person vested with fee ownership, dominion, or title of property, i.e., the proprietor. This term also may include a tenant if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property and any representative of the owner or tenant including a developer. 
Permit or land-disturbing permit. An approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity in accordance with this chapter and which may be issued only after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided by DEQ. 
Permittee. The person to whom the land-disturbing permit is issued. 
Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including federal, state, or local entity as applicable, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Predevelopment conditions. The conditions that exist at the time that plans for the land development of a tract of land are approved by the plan approval authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads, utilities, and the like), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish predevelopment conditions. 
Receiving bodies of water. Any water bodies, watercourses, or wetlands into which surface waters flow either naturally, in man-made ditches, or in a closed conduit system. 
Regulations. The Virginia Stormwater Management Program regulations, 9VAC25-870, as amended. 
Resource management area or RMA. That component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation District that is not classified as resource protection areas. The RMA is comprised of land that is contiguous to the variable width RPA buffer for a distance of 100 feet in the landward direction. 
Resource protection area or RPA. That component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation District comprised of lands adjacent to water bodies with perennial flow that have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform or that are sensitive to impacts which may result in significant degradation to the quality of state waters. Resource protection areas include: (i) tidal wetlands; (ii) nontidal wetlands connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or water bodies with perennial flow; (iii) tidal shores; and (iv) a variable width buffer area not less than one hundred (100) feet in width. The variable width buffer area shall be located adjacent to and landward of the components listed in (i) through (iii) herein, and along both sides of any water body with perennial flow. The variable width buffer also shall include lands designated as part of the Coastal Barrier Resources System not otherwise listed as a resource protection area feature where present. The buffer area shall be designated as the landward component of the RPA notwithstanding the presence of permitted uses, encroachments, and permitted vegetation clearing in compliance with chapter 9, article II, of the Hampton City Zoning Ordinance. 
Review committee. That group of persons, as defined in the city zoning ordinance who convene to hear requests for relief from the Chesapeake Bay Preservation District regulations and to arbitrate Chesapeake Bay Preservation District boundary disputes. 
Retention. The collection and storage of runoff without subsequent discharge to surface waters. 
Sediment. Fine particulate material, whether mineral or organic, that is in suspension or has settled in a water body. 
Sedimentation facility. Any structure or area designed to hold runoff water until suspended sediments have settled. 
Sensitive land or sensitive sub-watershed. An urban stream classification for a sub-watershed with less than 10% impervious cover, which still is capable of supporting stable channels and good-to-excellent biodiversity. 
Service charge. The user fee based upon the ERU rate applied to the developed residential property, developed nonresidential property, and undeveloped property pursuant to section 33.2-34 herein. 
Site. The land or water area where any facility or land-disturbing activity physically is located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land-disturbing activity. Areas channelward of mean low water in tidal Virginia shall not be considered part of a site. 
State. The Commonwealth of Virginia. 
State Board. The State Water Control Board. 
State permit. An approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the State Board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the State Board for stormwater discharges from a MS4. Under these state permits, the state imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations and the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and regulations. 
State Water Control Law. The law as codified in Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.2, et seq. 
State waters. All water, on the surface and underground, wholly or partially within or bordering the state or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
Storm sewer system or stormwater system. All facilities, structures, and natural watercourses used for collecting and conveying stormwater to, through, and from drainage areas to the point of final outlet, including but not limited to streets, curbs and gutters, inlets, conduits and appurtenant features, canals, creeks, channels, catch basins, ditches, drains, sewers, streams, gulches, gullies, flumes, culverts, siphons, retention or detention basins, dams, floodwalls, levees, pumping stations, and wetlands. 
Stormwater. Precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management plan. Any document(s) containing material describing methods for complying with the requirements of section 33.2-11 of this chapter or Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:24, et seq. An agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan as defined herein shall be considered to meet the requirements of a stormwater management plan. 
Stormwater management revenues or revenues. All rates, service charges, fees, assessments, rentals, other charges, or other income received, including amounts received from the investment or deposits of money in any fund or account, and any amounts distributed by the city council from general revenues of the city. 
Stormwater management system or system. The stormwater management infrastructure and equipment of the city and all improvements thereto. Infrastructure and equipment shall include structural and natural stormwater control facilities of all types, including, without limitation, retention and detention basins, open ditches, canals, creeks, conduits, pumping stations, and other plants, structures, and real and personal property used to support the system. 
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan or SWPPP. A document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that reasonably may be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site and otherwise meets the requirements of this chapter. In addition, the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures and shall include but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
Structure. An edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Subdivide. To divide a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels of less than five (5) acres each for the purpose, whether immediate and/or future, of transfer of ownership or building development; or if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land. 
Subdivision. The same as defined in chapter 35 of the City Code, Subdivision chapter. 
Tidal wetlands. Vegetated land which lies between and contiguous to mean low water and an elevation above mean low water equal to the factor of one and one-half (1½) times the mean tide range, or nonvegetated land which lies contiguous to mean low water and is between mean low water and mean high water. 
Total maximum daily load or TMDL. The sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading, and a margin of safety. TMDLs may be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source trade-offs. 
Undeveloped property. Any parcel that has not been altered from its natural state in such a manner that the topography or soils on the property have been disturbed or altered to the extent that the rate of surface infiltrating or stormwater has been affected. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Act or Act. The law as codified in Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:24, et seq. 
Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website. A website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Program authority or VSMP authority. An authority approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program or, until such approval is given, the DEQ. An authority may include a locality as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:27; state entity, including DEQ; federal entity; or, for linear projects subject to annual standards and specifications in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:31(B), electric, natural gas, and telephone utility companies, interstate and intrastate natural gas pipeline companies, railroad companies, or authorities created pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-5102. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Program or VSMP. A program approved by the State Board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this chapter, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this chapter and associated regulations. 
Watershed. A drainage area or drainage basin contributing to the flow of water in a receiving body of water. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0009, 6-11-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0011, 7-9-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 33.2-5. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 33.2-6. - Stormwater management program established. 
Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:27, the city hereby establishes a Virginia stormwater management program for land-disturbing activities and adopts the applicable regulations that specify standards and specifications for VSMPs promulgated by the State Board for the purposes set out in section 33.2-3 of this chapter. The city hereby designates the Senior Civil Engineer-Stormwater as the administrator of the Virginia stormwater management program. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-7. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until a land-disturbing permit has been issued by the administrator in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and chapter 13.1 of the City Code. 
(b)  A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land-disturbing activity shall be subject to an erosion and sediment control plan consistent with the requirements of chapter 13.1, a stormwater management plan as outlined under section 33.2-11, the technical criteria and administrative requirements for land-disturbing activities outlined in section 33.2-13, and the requirements for long-term maintenance of control measures outlined under section 33.2-19. After June 30, 2014, such land-disturbing activities shall not require completion of a registration statement or require coverage under the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities but shall be subject to the following technical criteria and program and administrative requirements: 
(1)  An erosion and sediment control plan consistent with the requirements of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law and regulations must be designed and implemented during land disturbing activities. Prior to land disturbance, this plan must be approved by either the city or the department in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law and attendant regulations. 
(2)  A stormwater management plan consistent with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and regulations must be designed and implemented during the land-disturbing activity. The stormwater management plan shall be developed and submitted in accordance with 9VAC25-870-55. Prior to land disturbance, this plan must be approved by the city. 
(3)  Exceptions may be requested in accordance with 9VAC25-870-57. 
(4)  Long-term maintenance of stormwater management facilities shall be provided for and conducted in accordance with 9VAC25-870-58. 
(5)  Water quality design criteria in 9VAC25-870-63 shall be applied to the site. 
(6)  Water quality compliance shall be achieved in accordance with 9VAC25-870-65. 
(7)  Channel protection and flood protection shall be achieved in accordance with 9VAC25-870-66. 
(8)  Offsite compliance options in accordance with 9VAC25-870-69 shall be available to Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land-disturbing activities. 
(9)  Such land-disturbing activities shall be subject to the design storm and hydrologic methods set out in 9VAC25-870-72, linear development controls in 9VAC25-870-76, and criteria associated with stormwater impoundment structures or facilities in 9VAC25-870-85. 
(c)  No land-disturbing permit shall be issued by the administrator until the following items have been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed herein: 
(1)  A permit application that includes a general permit registration statement if such statement is required; however, neither a registration statement nor payment of the state's portion of the statewide permit fee shall be required for coverage under the General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities for construction activity involving a single-family detached residential structure, within or outside a common plan of development or sale, but such projects must adhere to the requirements of the general permit; 
(2)  An erosion and sediment control plan approved in accordance with the city's land-disturbing operations ordinance of chapter 13.1; and 
(3)  A stormwater management plan that meets the requirements of section 33.2-11 of this chapter or an executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
(d)  No land-disturbing permit shall be issued until evidence of general permit coverage is obtained. 
(e)  No land-disturbing permit shall be issued until the fees required to be paid pursuant to section 13.1-6(b) are received, and a reasonable performance bond required pursuant to section 33.2-18 of this chapter has been submitted. 
(f)  No land-disturbing permit shall be issued until the permit application and attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land clearing, construction, disturbance, land development, and drainage will be performed according to the approved permit. 
(g)  No grading, building, or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless a land-disturbing permit has been issued by the administrator. 
(h)  No construction general permit is required for single-family detached residential structures built under a 2009 general permit that disturb less than one (1) acre; however, such general permittees must update the SWPPP to comply with the requirements under 9VAC25-880-50. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0011, 7-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-8. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the following activities are exempt unless otherwise required by federal law: 
(1)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Code of Virginia, Title 45.1; 
(2)  Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the board in regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 10.1-1100, et seq.) or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1163(B); 
(3)  Single-family residences separately built, including additions or modifications to existing single family detached residential structures: a) disturbing less than one acre; b) not part of a larger common plan of development or sale; and c) not within a Chesapeake Bay preservation district; 
(4)  Single-family residences separately built within the Chesapeake Bay preservation district as set forth in the city zoning ordinance, including additions or modifications to existing single family detached residential structures: a) disturbing less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet; and b) not part of a larger common plan of development or sale; 
(5)  Land-disturbing activities that disturb less than one acre of land except for land-disturbing activity exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of land area within a Chesapeake Bay preservation district as set forth in the city zoning ordinance or activities that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one acre or greater of disturbance; 
(6)  Discharges to a sanitary sewer or a combined sewer system; 
(7)  Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use; 
(8)  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this subsection; and 
(9)  Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the VSMP authority shall be advised of the disturbance within seven (7) days of commencing the land-disturbing activity, and compliance with the administrative requirements of subsection (a) is required within thirty (30) days of commencing the land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  All exempted activities must meet the RPA buffer requirements of chapter 9, article II of the city zoning ordinance, if applicable, and all erosion and sediment control provisions of chapter 13.1. 
(c)  A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land-Disturbing Activity shall be subject to coverage under the Virginia Stormwater Management Program General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities until July 1, 2014, at which time it shall no longer be considered a small construction activity but then shall be regulated under the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0009, 6-11-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0011, 7-9-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0018, 9-10-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0004, 1-14-15 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Secs. 33.2-9, 33.2-10. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33.2-11. - Stormwater management plan; contents of plan. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan required by this chapter must consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to surface runoff. The applicant must include in the stormwater management plan sufficient information for the administrator to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the land disturbance area, the potential and predicted impacts of the proposed activity on city and state waters, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the control measures proposed by the applicant for reducing adverse impacts. 
(b)  The stormwater management plan shall be submitted as part of the preliminary site plan/subdivision plan and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Contact information including the name, address, and phone number of the owner and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected; 
(2)  A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions and final site conditions; 
(3)  A water quality impact assessment pursuant to section 33.2-12; 
(4)  Compliance with the water quality standards per 9VAC25-870-65; and 
(5)  Compliance with the water quantity standards per 9VAC25-870-66. 
(c)  If an operator intends to meet the water quality and/or quantity requirements set forth in section 33.2-13 of this chapter through the use of off-site compliance options, where applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the applicant's land-disturbing activity except as otherwise allowed by Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:35. 
(d)  Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated under Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400, et seq. shall be sealed and signed appropriately by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Virginia Code, § 54.1-400, et seq. 
(e)  A construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities shall be submitted to the administrator. The construction record drawing shall be sealed and signed appropriately by a professional registered in the state, certifying that the stormwater management facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(f)  The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) shall include but not be limited to the following as specified by section 9VAC25-870-54: 
(1)  An approved erosion and sediment control plan pursuant to chapter 13.1; 
(2)  An approved stormwater management plan pursuant to section 33.2-11; 
(3)  A pollution prevention plan for regulated land-disturbing activities pursuant to this section; and 
(4)  A description of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL to be implemented by the operator so that discharges from construction activities are consistent with the assumptions and requirements of the wasteload allocation for a pollutant. 
(g)  The SWPPP also must comply with the requirements and general information set forth in section 9VAC25-880-70, section II of the general permit. 
(h)  The operator shall amend the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP. 
(i)  The operator must maintain the SWPPP at a central location onsite. If an onsite location is unavailable, notice of the location of the SWPPP must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy. 
(j)  A Pollution Prevention Plan, required by 9VAC25-870-56, shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to: 
(1)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure to precipitation and to stormwater of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site; and 
(3)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
(k)  The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
(1)  Wastewater from washout of concrete unless managed by an appropriate control; 
(2)  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
(3)  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and 
(4)  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
(l)  Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-12. - Water quality impact assessment. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the water quality impact assessment is to: 
(1)  Identify the impacts of proposed development on water quality and other environmentally sensitive lands; 
(2)  Ensure that, where development does take place within sensitive lands, it will be located on those portions of a site in a manner that will be least disruptive to the natural functions of sensitive lands; 
(3)  Protect individuals from investing funds for improvements proposed for location on lands unsuited for such development because of high ground water, erosion, or vulnerability to flood and storm damage; and 
(4)  Specify mitigation which will address water quality protection. 
(b)  Water quality impact assessment required. A water quality impact assessment is required, including a review fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), for any proposed development disturbing over one acre of land area, or any land disturbance exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet within the Chesapeake Bay preservation district as set forth in the city zoning ordinance, except those uses exempt from the stormwater management requirements per section 33.2-8 of this chapter. An assessment must apply the stormwater management technical criteria set forth in section 33.2-13 of this chapter to the entire land-disturbing activity. A water quality impact assessment shall include the following elements, which shall be considered a minimum unless the administrator determines that some of the elements are unnecessary due to the scope and nature of the proposed uses and development of land. 
(1)  Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges, information on the features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters or karst features, if present, and the pre-development and post-development drainage areas; 
(2)  A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete; 
(3)  Information on the proposed stormwater management facilities, including: 
a.  The type of facilities; 
b.  Location, including geographic coordinates; 
c.  Acres treated; and 
d.  The surface waters or karst features, if present, into which the facility will discharge. 
(4)  Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics; 
(5)  Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the water quality and quantity requirements of section 33.2-13 of this chapter. 
(6)  A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes: 
a.  All contributing drainage areas; 
b.  Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies, and floodplains; 
c.  Soil types, geologic formations if karst features are present in the area, forest cover and other vegetative areas, and groundwater levels, including seasonal fluctuations; 
d.  Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of known utilities and easements; 
e.  Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels; 
f.  The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on the site; 
g.  Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater management facilities; and 
h.  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of utilities, roads, and easements. 
(7)  Information related to the following: 
a.  Disturbances or destruction of wetlands and RPA features and justification for such action; 
b.  Disruptions or reductions in the supply of water to wetlands, streams, lakes, rivers, or other water bodies, which may include but is not limited to changes in the incidence or duration of flooding on the site and upstream and downstream from it; 
c.  Disruptions to existing hydrology including wetland and stream circulation patterns; 
d.  Source location and description of proposed fill material; 
e.  Location of dredge material and location of dumping area for such material; and 
f.  Location of and impacts on shellfish beds, submerged aquatic vegetation, and fish spawning areas. 
(8)  Any other information which the developer or the administrator believes is reasonably necessary for an evaluation of the proposed development; 
(9)  Listing of all requisite permits from all applicable agencies necessary to develop the project; 
(10)  Proposed mitigation measures for the potential hydrogeological impacts. Potential mitigation measures include: 
a.  Proposed erosion and sediment control concepts, which may include minimizing the extent of the cleared area, perimeter controls, reduction of runoff velocities, and measures to stabilize disturbed areas; 
b.  Proposed stormwater management system; 
c.  Creation of wetlands to replace those lost; and 
d.  Minimizing cut and fill. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0018, 9-10-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0004, 1-14-15 )  
Sec. 33.2-13. - Technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities. 
(a)  To protect the quality and quantity of state waters from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities, the city hereby adopts the technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities set forth in Part II B of the regulations, as amended, expressly to include the following and which shall apply to all land-disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this chapter, except as expressly set forth in subsection (b): 
(1)  Water quality design criteria requirements of 9VAC25-870-63; 
(2)  Water quality compliance in 9VAC25-870-65; 
(3)  Water quantity requirements of 9VAC25-870-66; 
(4)  Offsite compliance options in 9VAC25-870-69; 
(5)  Design storms and hydrologic methods in 9VAC25-870-72; 
(6)  Stormwater harvesting in 9VAC25-870-74; 
(7)  Linear development project requirements in 9VAC25-870-76; and 
(8)  Stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities in 9VAC25-870-85. 
(b)  Any land-disturbing activity shall be considered grandfathered by the city and shall be subject to the Part II C (9VAC25-870-93, et seq.) technical criteria of this chapter provided: 
(1)  Any proffered or conditional zoning plan, zoning with a plan of development, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan, or any document determined by the city to be equivalent thereto (i) was approved by the city prior to July 1, 2012, (ii) provided a layout as defined in 9VAC25-870-10, (iii) will comply with the Part II C technical criteria of the regulations, and (iv) has not been subsequently modified or amended in a manner resulting in an increase in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge, and such that there is no increase in the volume or rate of runoff; 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
(3)  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(c)  City, state, and federal projects shall be considered grandfathered by the city and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the regulations provided: 
(1)  There has been an obligation of city, state, or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012; 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
(3)  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(d)  Land-disturbing activities grandfathered under subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall remain subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the regulations for one additional state permit cycle. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the State Water Control Board. 
(e)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C of the regulations. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at his discretion. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0009, 6-11-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-14. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The administrator may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of Part II B or Part II C of the regulations provided that: 
(1)  The exception is the minimum necessary to afford relief, 
(2)  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of the Act, the regulations, and this chapter are preserved, 
(3)  Granting the exception will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and 
(4)  Exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created. Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The administrator shall not grant exceptions to the requirement to obtain a land-disturbing permit for the land-disturbing activity, nor shall the administrator approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website, or any other control measure duly approved by the director. 
(c)  Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed unless offsite options otherwise permitted pursuant to 9VAC25-870-69 have been considered and found not available. At least 75% of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions must be achieved on-site. If at least 75% of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions cannot be met on-site, and the operator can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that (i) alternative site designs have been considered that may accommodate on-site best management practices, (ii) on-site best management practices have been considered in alternative site designs to the maximum extent practicable, (iii) appropriate on-site best management practices will be implemented, and (iv) full compliance with post-development nonpoint nutrient runoff compliance requirements cannot practicably be met on-site, then the required phosphorus nutrient reductions may be achieved, in whole or in part, through the use of off-site compliance options. 
(d)  A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) will be collected at the time the plan and exemption application are submitted for review, which reflect the cost of administration and management of the process. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0018, 9-10-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-15. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33.2-16. - Review of stormwater management plan. 
(a)  A permit application for land-disturbing activities and the appropriate fee shall be submitted to the agent pursuant to section 13.1-6 of the land-disturbing operations ordinance. Four (4) copies of the stormwater management plan shall be submitted with the application. 
(b)  The administrator shall review stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove a stormwater management plan according to the following criteria: 
(1)  The administrator shall determine the completeness of a plan in accordance with section 33.2-11 of this chapter, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such determination, within 15 calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the notification shall contain the reasons the plan is deemed incomplete. 
(2)  The administrator shall have an additional 60 calendar days from the date of the communication of completeness to review the plan, except that, if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subsection (1), then the plan shall be deemed complete; and the administrator shall have 60 calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan. 
(3)  The administrator shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved within 45 calendar days of the date of resubmission. 
(4)  During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision communicated in writing to the person responsible for the land-disturbing activity or his designated representative. If the plan is not approved, reasons for not approving it shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  If a plan meeting all requirements of this chapter is submitted and no action is taken within the time provided above in subsection (2) herein for review, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
(c)  Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows: 
(1)  Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the administrator. The administrator shall have 60 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. 
(2)  The administrator may require that an approved stormwater management plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the administrator, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection. 
(3)  The administrator shall require the submission of a construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities. The administrator may elect not to require construction record drawings for stormwater management facilities for which recorded maintenance agreements are not required pursuant to section 33.2-19(b). 
(d)  A stormwater management plan approved for residential, commercial, or industrial subdivision shall govern the development of the individual parcels, including those parcels developed under subsequent owners. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-17. - Structure encroachment permit. 
(a)  No building permit, zoning certificate, or land-disturbing permit shall be issued for a structure or an impervious improvement within the resource protection area (RPA) buffer or intensely developed area (IDA) until a structure encroachment permit has been issued. All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be placed into a special revenue account to be used solely as approved by the city manager for the creation, enhancement, or restoration of wetlands and/or vegetative buffers on public property within the Chesapeake Bay Preservation District. Failure to obtain a permit shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  In circumstances where structures or impervious cover have been determined by the zoning administrator to be allowed in the RPA buffer, any person desiring to build, construct, or place an accessory structure or impervious cover in single-family residential zoning districts, in the RPA buffer or IDA, first shall obtain a structure encroachment permit from the agent. The permit fee for an accessory structure or impervious cover with less than or equal to 150 square feet within the RPA buffer or IDA shall be $100.00. The permit fee for an accessory structure or impervious cover with more than 150 square feet within the RPA buffer or IDA shall be $1.00 per square foot of encroachment into the RPA buffer or IDA, not to exceed a $400.00 maximum fee. 
(c)  In circumstances where structures have been determined by the zoning administrator to be allowed in the RPA buffer, any person desiring to build, construct, or place any structure other than an accessory structure governed by paragraph (a) herein in the RPA buffer or IDA shall obtain a structure encroachment permit from the agent. The permit fee for a structure with less than or equal to 150 square feet within the RPA buffer or IDA shall be $100.00. The permit fee for a structure with more than 150 square feet within the RPA buffer or IDA shall be $1.00 per square foot of encroachment into the RPA buffer or IDA, not to exceed a $1,000.00 maximum fee. 
(d)  No permit shall be required for piers, pervious surfaces, or uses exempt pursuant to section 9-16 of the city's zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 33.2-18. - Performance bond. 
Prior to the approval of any stormwater management plan, the director shall require from the applicant a reasonable performance bond, cash, cash escrow, or letter of credit to ensure that measures may be taken by the city, at the applicant's expense, should he fail after proper notice and within the time specified, to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be required of him by the permit conditions as a result of his land-disturbing activity. If the city takes such remedial action based upon applicant's failure to comply, and the cost of remedial action exceeds the amount of the security held, if any, the city may collect the difference from the applicant. The bond amount shall cover 100 percent of the cost of the stormwater management facilities required for the project with said cost being added to and made a part of the bond required per section 13.1-16 of the city code. Within 60 days of final inspection and approval of the development activity, such bond, cash, cash escrow, or letter of credit, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated as the case may be. These requirements are in addition to all other provisions of law relating to the approval of such plans and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements of such plans. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-19. - Long-term maintenance of permanent stormwater management facilities. 
(a)  The administrator shall require the provision of long-term responsibility for and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other techniques specified to manage the quality and quantity of runoff. Such requirements shall be set forth in an instrument recorded in the local land records prior to termination of the general permit or earlier as required by the administrator and at a minimum shall: 
(1)  Be submitted to the administrator for review and approval prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan; 
(2)  Be stated to run with the land; 
(3)  Provide for all necessary access to the property for purposes of maintenance and regulatory inspections; 
(4)  Provide for inspections and maintenance and the submission of inspection and annual maintenance reports to the administrator without demand; and 
(5)  Be enforceable by all appropriate governmental parties. 
(b)  At the discretion of the administrator, such recorded instruments need not be required for stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot on which it is located, provided it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the administrator that future maintenance of such facilities will be addressed through an enforceable mechanism at the discretion of the administrator. 
(c)  If a recorded instrument is not required pursuant to subsection (b) herein, the administrator shall develop a strategy for addressing maintenance of stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot on which it is located. Such a strategy may include periodic inspections, homeowner outreach and education, or other methods targeted at promoting the long-term maintenance of such facilities. Such facilities shall not be subject to the requirement for an inspection to be conducted by the administrator. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-20. - Monitoring and inspections. 
(a)  The administrator shall inspect the land-disturbing activity during construction for: 
(1)  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(2)  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and/or 
(4)  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(b)  The administrator, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, may enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash, cash escrow, or letter of credit, the administrator also may enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
(d)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:40, the administrator may require every land-disturbing permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to land-disturbing permit requirements under this chapter, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. 
(e)  Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted by the administrator pursuant to the city's adopted and State Board approved inspection program, and shall occur at least once every 5 years except as otherwise provided in section 33.2-19. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-21. - Hearings. 
(a)  Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to the requirements of this chapter, aggrieved by any action of the city taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction of the city, may demand in writing a formal hearing by the city, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the administrator within 30 days after the administrator gives notice of such action. 
(b)  The hearings held under this section shall be conducted by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings may be taken, at the requester's expense, and filed with the administrator by the permit applicant or permittee. 
(d)  Decisions under this section may be appealed to the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton. Decisions of the circuit court shall be subject to review by the Court of Appeals. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-22. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33.2-23. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the land-disturbing permit conditions or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the permit conditions by any of the following methods: verbal warnings and inspection reports, consent special orders, and notices of violation including corrective action. Written notices shall be served by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or by delivery at the site of the development activities to the representative or employee supervising such activities. 
(1)  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in accordance with subsection (b) herein, or the administrator may revoke the permit. 
(2)  If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this section within the time specified, the administrator may issue an order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land-disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land-disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has been satisfied, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed. 
Such orders shall be issued in accordance with the city's stormwater program inspection and enforcement manual. Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to his address specified in the land records of the city, or by personal delivery by the administrator. However, if the administrator finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the state or otherwise substantially impacting water quality, without advance notice or hearing, it may issue an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all land-disturbing activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not complying with the terms thereof, the administrator may institute a proceeding for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with subsection (c) herein. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedy provided by this chapter, if the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, he may initiate informal and/or formal administrative enforcement procedures in a manner that is consistent with the city's stormwater program inspection and enforcement manual. 
(c)  Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation, ordinance, order, approved standard or specification, or any permit condition issued by the administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted by the city in the Hampton General District Court to obey the same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any order of the administrator shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $32,500.00 for each violation within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1)  Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this subsection shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  No state permit registration; 
b.  No SWPPP; 
c.  Incomplete SWPPP; 
d.  SWPPP not available for review; 
e.  No approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
f.  Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls; 
g.  Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained; 
h.  Operational deficiencies; 
i.  Failure to conduct required inspections; 
j.  Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and 
k.  Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of Section 9VAC25-880-70 of the general permit. 
(2)  The administrator may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty, and the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court. 
(3)  In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection, the court may consider the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator from noncompliance. 
(4)  Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the city shall be paid into the treasury of the city to be used for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the city and abating environmental pollution therein in such manner as the court may direct. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this section or by law, any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, any order of the administrator, any condition of a permit, or any order of a court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months or a fine of not less than $2,500 nor more than $32,500.00, or both. Any such person furthermore shall be liable for all damage, loss, and expense suffered or incurred by the city as a result of such violation. 
(6)  In addition to any penalty imposed for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, a judge hearing the case may direct the person responsible for the discharge or deposit to remediate or remove such discharge or deposit; and each day's default in such remediation or removal shall constitute a separate violation under this section. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-24. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective on July 1, 2014 and as amended thereafter. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER POLLUTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 33.2-26. - Pollution of the storm sewer system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put, throw, place, or deposit or allow to be put, thrown, placed, or deposited any filth, animal or vegetable matter, chips, compost, construction debris, shavings, or any other substance or pollutant, whether solid or liquid, in the stormwater system or place or dispose of such material or substance in any area which drains into the stormwater system, or in any manner pollute the storm sewer system. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pour or discharge, or to permit to be poured or discharged, or to deposit, so that the same may be discharged, any gasoline, oil waste, antifreeze, or other automotive, motor, or equipment fluids into any storm sewer system. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial, industrial, or manufacturing entity to discharge process water, wash water, or any other unpermitted discharge into any storm sewer system. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place, or deposit, or cause to be thrown, placed, or deposited, in any gutter, ditch, storm drain, or other drainage area in the city anything that impedes or interferes with the free flow of stormwater therein. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge chlorinated swimming pool water into the stormwater system. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-27. - Illicit discharges to the storm sewer system. 
(a)  No person shall connect, or cause or permit to be connected, any sanitary sewer to the storm sewer system. 
(b)  No person, either directly or indirectly, shall cause or permit any significant discharge to the city's storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(c)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (d) herein, the following activities shall not be in violation of this ordinance: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows; 
(4)  Rising ground waters; 
(5)  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR § 35.2005(20)); 
(6)  Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
(7)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(8)  Foundation drains; 
(9)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(10)  Irrigation water; 
(11)  Springs; 
(12)  Water from crawl space pumps; 
(13)  Footing drains; 
(14)  Lawn watering; 
(15)  Individual residential car washing; 
(16)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(17)  De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(18)  Street wash water; 
(19)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting; and 
(20)  Any activity authorized by a valid Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("VPDES") permit or Virginia Pollution Abatement ("VPA") permit. 
(d)  In the event any of the activities listed in subsection (c) herein are found to be causing sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes to be discharged into the storm sewer system, the director shall notify the person performing such activities and shall order that such activities be stopped or conducted in such manner as to avoid the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the storm sewer system. Failure to comply with any such order shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Secs. 33.2-28, 33.2-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SERVICE CHARGES AND REVENUES 
 
Sec. 33.2-30. - Purpose; scope. 
The city has developed and continues to maintain an infrastructure of manmade and natural components of a stormwater management system to both limit and manage the volume of stormwater runoff to control flood events and, through stormwater pollution control measures, to prevent degradation of the city's waterways. Adequate revenues shall be generated to provide for balanced operating and capital improvement budgets for the stormwater management system by setting sufficient levels of the service charge. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-31. - Program administration. 
The city stormwater management program shall be administered by the department. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-32. - Findings and determinations. 
(a)  Stormwater runoff is associated with all real estate in the city, whether residential or nonresidential, and the quantity and quality of runoff is correlated to the amount of impervious surface on each parcel. 
(b)  Elements of the stormwater management system provide benefit and service to all land within the city through direct protection of property, control of flooding of critical components of the infrastructure, and enhancement of water quality and the city's natural environment. 
(c)  Costs of monitoring, operating, maintaining, and constructing the system required in the city, both to meet stormwater pollution control regulations and to address and resolve erosion and flooding needs, should be allocated to the extent practicable to all property owners based on their contribution to stormwater runoff and their impact on the stormwater management system. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-33. - Service charge—Establishment; expenditures of revenue. 
(a)  There hereby is established a service charge pursuant to the statutory authority granted to localities in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1102 and 15.2-2114 to provide for the general health, welfare, and safety of the city and its residents. 
(b)  Revenues collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited in a separate ledger account. The funds deposited shall be used exclusively to provide services and facilities related to the system. Services and facilities related to the system shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Acquisition, as permitted by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1800, of real or personal property and interests therein necessary to construct, operate, and maintain the system; 
(2)  The cost of administering such programs, to include the establishment of reasonable operating and capital reserves to meet unanticipated or emergency requirements of the system and all associated legal and collection costs; 
(3)  Engineering and design, debt retirement, construction costs for new facilities, and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities; 
(4)  Facility maintenance; 
(5)  Monitoring of stormwater control devices; 
(6)  Pollution control and abatement, consistent with city, state, and federal regulations for water pollution control and abatement, including public education; and 
(7)  Planning, design, land acquisition, construction, operation, and maintenance activities. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-34. - Same—Imposition. 
(a)  There shall be and hereby is levied an annual stormwater management service charge on real property in the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of determining the service charge, all properties in the city are classified into one (1) of the following classes: 
(1)  Developed residential property; 
(2)  Developed nonresidential property; or 
(3)  Undeveloped property. 
(c)  The service charge for each developed residential property shall equal the rate for one (1) ERU. 
(d)  The service charge for developed nonresidential property shall be the ERU rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious surface area square footage of the property by the square footage contained in one (1) ERU. The number factor then will be rounded up to the nearest whole number if $0.50 or greater, or rounded down to the nearest whole number if less than $0.50; however, in no case shall the service charge for any developed nonresidential property be less than the ERU rate. 
(e)  The service charge for vacant developed property shall be calculated in the same manner as for occupied property of the same class. 
(f)  Undeveloped property with less than 12,000 square feet of developable area shall not be subject to the service charge. Undeveloped property containing 12,000 square feet or greater of developable area, if it is not incorporated as part of one (1) land use with an adjacent developed property, shall be subject to a service charge equal to one-half (½) of one (1) ERU. 
(g)  Stormwater management service charges levied annually under the provisions of this article shall be effective on the first day of July in the year for which the same is made. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-35. - Same—Billing, payment, interest, fee and lien. 
(a)  The levied service charge shall be billed, due, and payable in two (2) equal installments. The first installment shall be due on or before the 5 th day of December, and the second installment shall be due on or before the 5 th day of June. Any parcel or dwelling unit owner who has remitted payment of the service charges and believes that it is incorrect may submit an adjustment request as provided for in this article. 
(b)  The service charge is to be paid by the owner of each parcel or dwelling unit that is subject to the charge. The owner of each parcel or dwelling unit in the city, except undeveloped property less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of developable area, shall be mailed a statement for the stormwater service charges. The statements shall include a date by which payment shall be due. All statements shall be mailed at least thirty (30) days prior to the payment due date stated thereon. Payments received after the due date of the bill shall be subject to interest as established in this article. 
(c)  The service charge due the city from property owners for stormwater management shall be based on the rate of $105.96 per ERU per year. When applicable, the service charge shall be prorated at $8.83 per ERU per month or any part thereof. 
(d)  Any bill which has not been paid by the due date shall be deemed delinquent. Unpaid service charges and accrued interest shall constitute a lien against the property, ranking on parity with liens for unpaid taxes. All charges and interest due may be recovered by action at law or suit in equity. For delinquent charges, interest thereon shall commence on the 1 st day of July following the due date and shall accrue at the rate of up to ten percent (10) per annum until such time as the delinquent charges and accrued interest are paid. 
(e)  When previously undeveloped properties are brought into the system or in the event of alterations or additions to developed nonresidential property that alter the amount of impervious surface, a service charge will accrue, as determined by the director, upon substantial completion of the improvements or, in the event completion of the improvements is not pursued diligently, upon establishment of the impervious area or dwelling units that affect stormwater runoff. A statement then will be issued, and such charges will be prorated for the number of months for which the parcel is subject to the service charge. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0014, 5-13-15 ; Ord. No. 19-0007 , 5-8-19)  
Sec. 33.2-36. - Same—Waivers and adjustments. 
(a)  Waivers: 
(1)  Full waivers of the service charge shall be provided to properties owned by federal, state, and local government agencies when those agencies own and provide for maintenance of storm drainage and stormwater control facilities or are units of the city. 
(2)  Full waivers of the service charge shall be provided for roads and public street rights-of-way that are owned and maintained by state and local agencies. 
(b)  Adjustments: 
(1)  Any owner who has paid his service charge and who believes his service charge to be incorrect may submit an adjustment request to the director. All such requests must be submitted prior to the end of the fiscal year for which the request applies. 
(2)  Adjustment requests shall be made in writing, setting forth sufficient details to substantiate the claim to the satisfaction of the director, including plans, engineering calculations, and related documents prepared by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor. The director may waive the licensed professional requirement if, in his opinion, the specific adjustment request does not warrant such a requirement. 
(3)  Response to the adjustment request, whether providing an adjustment or denying an adjustment, shall be made by the director in writing within 60 days of receipt of the request. 
(4)  Any owner may appeal the director's decision to the city manager, but must do so in writing within 15 calendar days of the date of the director's response. The city manager shall respond to the appeal within 15 calendar days, and such response shall be final. 
(5)  The director may extend such city response times as appropriate to ensure full and complete evaluation of the application. In those cases, the director shall notify the applicant of the action by certified mail. 
(c)  Credit. The city recognizes that on-site stormwater control facilities, increased green area, frequent sweeping of parking lots, and the like, reduce stormwater runoff rates and/or the transport of pollutants. Property owners who provide these private stormwater facilities incur expenses to operate and maintain these facilities in addition to their payment of stormwater fees. To encourage the proper maintenance of private stormwater facilities and other measures which would reduce the polluting effects of stormwater, the following stormwater utility fee credit system hereby is offered: 
(1)  The applicant is required to apply for and to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that a stormwater utility fee credit is warranted. 
(2)  The service charge after credits shall be greater than one (1) ERU. 
(3)  The water quality improvement must be privately constructed, owned, operated, and maintained. 
(4)  The stormwater facility shall be covered under an ongoing maintenance program approved by the director. 
(5)  The facility or stormwater quality improvement practice shall be designed to meet or exceed the minimum criteria established by the director. 
(6)  The following approved facilities and/or practices shall qualify for a specific percentage reduction in stormwater fee for a particular property: 
	Facility or Practice Credit 	Percentage 
1(a) 	Infiltration/bioretention 	30% 
1(b) 	Dry swale 	20% 
1(c) 	Wet retention pond 	25% 
1(d) 	Dry retention pond 	15% 
2(a) 	Green area in excess of 20% 	10% 
2(b) 	Green area in excess of 50% 	25% 
3(a) 	Parking lot sweeping at least once per week 	5% 
3(b) 	Parking lot sweeping at least 5 times per week 	10% 
	MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE CREDIT 	45% 
 
(7)  Stormwater utility fee credits for retention/detention facilities, or for green areas in excess of 50% percent, will be based upon the percentage of the impervious area on-site, which drains to the stormwater facility. 
(8)  Credits are subject to annual review by the property owner and city staff to ensure that the facility is in operation and that it is being properly maintained. 
(9)  Credits for parking lot sweeping shall be applied against the stormwater utility fee for the following fiscal year only after the property owner has paid the full amount of the stormwater fee in the current fiscal year and has provided the city with adequate documentation that sweeping had been performed at the required frequency throughout the current fiscal year. 
( Ord. No. 14-0005, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 33.2-37. - Reserved.  
Chapter 34 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Casting or leaving dead or disabled animal in street, § 5-13; authority of city as to sidewalk improvements, § 2.01a; vacation of streets and alleys, § 2.05; responsibility of department of public works as to construction of streets, § 10.02. 
Cross reference— Building and development regulations, Ch. 9; permit to move buildings on streets, § 9-5; deposit of building material on streets, § 9-6; determination of lot lines as prerequisite to issuance of building permit and duty of building official as to street encroachments, § 9-7; requirements of site plan ordinance relative to streets and sidewalks, § 9-169; land disturbing activity and erosion and sediment control generally, § 13.1-1 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21; disorderly conduct in streets, § 24-12; loitering on streets, § 24-17; obstructing free passage of others, § 24-18; parades, Ch. 25; installation of sewers in streets and other areas open or dedicated to public use, § 30-3; solicitors not to interfere with use of streets, § 31-21; streets in subdivisions, § 35-74 et seq.; vehicles for hire, Ch. 38; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to streets and alleys, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2000 et seq.; franchises, sale and lease of certain municipal public property, public utilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2100 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1456, 1-24-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 34-2. - Certain ordinances relating to streets and alleys not affected by code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance opening, locating, closing, altering or naming any street or alley, or providing for the improvement of same, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-3. - Obedience to authorized barriers and signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the instructions of any barrier or sign placed on any street or sidewalk, when the barrier or sign has been approved by and erected pursuant to the authority of, the city manager, chief of police, fire chief, coordinator of emergency management or director of the department of public works. 
(Code 1956, §§ 14-10, 14-11; Code 1964, §§ 37-1, 37-2; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-4. - Requirements for projecting awnings, wall-mounted signs, gutters, downspouts and other appendages to buildings. 
(a)  Every person who constructs or maintains an awning, wall-mounted sign, gutter, downspout, building or structure-mounted communication antennas or other appendage to buildings projecting over the sidewalks or streets of the city shall take out and keep in force at all times a public liability insurance policy with limits of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on such awning, wall-mounted sign, gutter, downspout or such other appendage to buildings. The city shall be a named additional insured on such policy. 
(b)  The projecting appendage shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular passage. If the encroachment is a wall-mounted sign, all the signs, including the proposed sign, must be in compliance with the city's zoning ordinance, and the sum of the building setback from the property line, when added to the depth of the wall-mounted sign, must not exceed a total of twelve (12) inches, nor shall the depth of the of the sign itself exceed twelve (12) inches. 
(c)  The authority granted herein to construct and maintain such encroachments pursuant this section shall be deemed to be a license merely; shall be revocable at the pleasure of the city; and nothing contained in this section shall be construed to relieve any such person from their liability or negligence. 
(Code 1956, § 19-9; Code 1964, § 37-48; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 09-0017, 10-14-09; Ord. No. 15-0019, 6-10-15 )  
Sec. 34-5. - Obstructions generally—Streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in, on or about any street or alley in the city, any material or substance causing or likely to cause any obstruction or stoppage of the use for which such street or alley was designed. 
(b)  Upon conviction of any person for a violation of this section, the obstruction, unless immediately abated by the person maintaining, causing or permitting the same to be maintained, may be abated by the city at the expense and cost of the offender and the cost of so abating shall be charged and collected as a part of the cost of the trial of the case. 
(Code 1956, § 19-1; Code 1964, § 37-6; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-6. - Same—Sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk with boxes, barrels, kegs, crates, merchandise or in any other manner. After unloading or unpacking wares, foods, goods or merchandise on the sidewalks of the city, two (2) hours shall be allowed every person in which to remove the crates, boxes, rubbish and other material from the sidewalk. 
(Code 1956, § 19-2; Code 1964, § 37-7; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-7. - Sales conducted on or adjacent to public right-of-way. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "sale or exchange" shall be defined as the advertising, displaying, offering or exchanging, for value, of any item mentioned in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  (1)  The sale or exchange of any item, including, but not limited to, any and all goods, wares, flowers, prepared or unprepared food or any other product, by any person from any temporary structure, including, but not limited to, any table or stand, or from any motor vehicle, trailer, cart, dray, wagon, pushcart or any hand or pedal-propelled vehicle, which sale or exchange is conducted in any public right-of-way or on any private property adjacent to a public right-of-way, shall be subject to the regulations set out in this section. 
(2)  Seasonal sales. Sale or exchange shall also include "seasonal sales," which for purposes of this section shall mean the sale or exchange of market produce and agricultural products sold or exchanged during the local growing season, including but not limited to Christmas trees, pumpkins, and summer vegetables and produce. Seasonal sales shall not to include seafood products. 
(c)  No sale or exchange mentioned in subsection (b) above shall be made in any street or public right-of-way along any street, for which the posted speed limit is greater than forty-five (45) miles per hour, nor shall any such sale or exchange be made in any street or public right-of-way within twenty-five (25) feet of any intersection. 
(d)  No person conducting a sale or exchange mentioned in subsection (b) above in any street or public right-of-way may remain within any one (1) block area for more than fifteen (15) minutes before moving to another block. Additionally, such sale or exchange may not be repeated in the same block within any eight-hour period. A block shall be understood to mean a section of a street between its intersection with two (2) adjoining streets, or a section of street five hundred (500) feet in length, whichever is shorter. 
(e)  Persons conducting a sale or exchange of the type described in subsection (b) of this section on private property adjacent to a public right-of-way, and persons allowing their private property to be used for such sale or exchange, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  No sale or exchange shall take place or be conducted, and no structure used for such sale or exchange shall be located, within fifty (50) feet of the closest edge of the nearest sidewalk pavement, or street pavement if there is no sidewalk, of any public right-of-way. 
(2)  The person conducting the sale or exchange shall have obtained written permission to conduct such activity from the owner of the property involved, and shall have also obtained, from such owner, exclusive control over any area of the property, within the allowed area, sufficient to ensure that there is adequate space for the safe circulation of traffic. Such area shall not be less than eight hundred (800) square feet. The person conducting the sale or exchange shall not allow any other activity to be conducted within this minimal eight hundred (800) square foot area. 
(3)  Such sale or exchange shall not be conducted on or from vacant lots except for seasonal sales as defined in this section. 
(4)  Before any person may conduct such sale or exchange, such person must have provided to and have approved by the commissioner of the revenue a plat or site plan identifying the location of the property on which the activity is to be conducted and showing the location of the structure from which the sale or exchange activity will occur, the area under the control of such person and provisions for well-defined vehicular entrances and exits. Such plat or site plan shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for processing. After review and approval of such plat or site plan by the commissioner of revenue, application shall be made to the commissioner of revenue for a permit to engage in the activities covered by this section, in accordance with this section and the approved plat or site plan. Such application shall state the name, address and telephone number of the person conducting the activity and the days and hours of operation, and shall include evidence of the property owner's permission to so use the property, as required above, as well as a copy of the approved plat or site plan. A copy of the permit issued by the commissioner of revenue, as well as a copy of the approved plat or site plan and the written permission of the property owner, shall be kept at the site of the activity, in a convenient place, and shall be exhibited, upon request, to any police officer or agent of the commissioner of revenue. Such permit must be obtained before a business license for such activity may be issued, and shall be renewed annually prior to the renewal of any business license. 
(5)  Seasonal sales shall be permitted in accordance with the requirements of this section and shall not occur at any one parcel more than 120 days in any one calendar year. 
(6)  Such permitted sales or exchanges shall only occur on properties where, pursuant to the zoning ordinance, "retail sales, general" is a permitted use or the primary use of the property is a religious facility, public or private school, structure to house a government function, community center, hospital, or private or fraternal club/lodge. 
(f)  The requirements of this section 34-7 shall not apply to: 
(1)  Outdoor sales and exchanges which occur as an incidental part of the retail sales activity of a merchant regularly conducting business from a permanent building, where such sales are conducted on the premises of the building and in close proximity to the building; 
(2)  The otherwise lawful sale of market produce and related items from the site on which they are grown; 
(3)  Garage sales in residential areas; or 
(4)  Sales or exchanges authorized as part of a special event permit issued pursuant to the City Code. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall exempt any person conducting a sale or exchange of the type described herein from the requirements of the zoning ordinance or any other applicable provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 720, 4-28-82; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 ; Ord. No. 15-0028 , 10-28-15; Ord. No. 18-0009 , 7-11-18) 
Cross reference— Mobile food service facilities generally, § 15-136 et seq.; vehicles used for sale of ice cream, § 15-166 et seq.  
Sec. 34-8. - Installation or maintenance of ramps over gutters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain in or over the gutters of the streets of the city any ramp or "drive-up" intended to facilitate the passage of vehicles from the street over the curb, or vice versa. 
(Code 1956, § 19-5; Code 1964, § 37-9; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-9. - Dragging cables, ropes, etc., over streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag, pull or extend any cables, wires or ropes through, over or on any city street or any other property of the city; provided, however, that public utility companies may string wires and cables over or under the streets of the city by securing a proper permit therefor. 
(Code 1956, § 19-10; Code 1964, § 37-10; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-10. - Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. 
It shall be the duty of the occupant of every house or lot which has a sidewalk of brick, stone, wood, concrete or other permanent material adjoining or touching upon the same, either in the front or rear or on either side, to have all snow removed from such sidewalk within three (3) hours after the same has ceased falling, unless such snow has fallen during the night, in which case it shall be removed by 9:00 a.m. the next morning. The same requirements shall exist with respect to ice and sleet. When there is no tenement on such lot or any occupant of any tenement thereon, it shall be the duty of the owner of such lot or tenement to have the snow or ice removed. In case there is no occupant of the premises and the owner or agent cannot be found, then the city manager shall have the sidewalk cleaned or covered at the expense of the owner. 
(Code 1956, § 19-4; Code 1964, § 37-8; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115.  
Secs. 34-11—34-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WORK ON, OVER, UNDER OR AFFECTING STREETS GENERALLY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-26. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Permittee. The word "permittee" shall mean any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this article. 
Street. The word "street" shall include alleys, avenues, boulevards, parks, public rights-of-way and all other public places or easements. 
Structure. The word "structure" shall mean any building, pole and appurtenance thereto, basketball goal, fixture, post, wire, guy or tower and any cable, vault, culvert, manhole or other underground installation. 
(Code 1956, § 19-16; Code 1964, § 37-16; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-27. - Warning devices required. 
Whenever any person performs any work which might tend to affect the use of any street, whether or not a permit therefor is required by this article, appropriate warning signs, lights or barricades shall be set forth in such manner as to give effective notice thereof to the public. 
(Code 1956, § 19-31; Code 1964, § 37-31; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-28. - Inspections. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works to conduct such inspections of work done under the provisions of this article as may be necessary to assure that the work done and completed conforms to the permit issued therefor under this article. When the permittee reports that such work is completed, the director of public works shall inspect the work and advise the permittee of his approval or disapproval. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the director of public works, a permittee is not going forward with the work in a continuing manner and it appears that more than the normal number of inspections will therefore be necessary, the director of public works shall give the permittee notice in writing of this fact. Should additional inspections thereafter result, the director of public works may charge the permittee an additional fee to cover the actual costs or, where a surety has been given pursuant to section 34-68, appropriate proceedings may be carried out to recover the cost of such inspections. 
(Code 1956, § 19-28; Code 1964, § 37-28; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-29. - Notice and correction of defects. 
If, in the opinion of the director of public works, work has not been or is not being done in accordance with a permit issued under this article, or a street is not left in satisfactory condition, notice shall be given the permittee and the permittee shall have a reasonable time to correct the same. Should the permittee refuse or fail to correct the same within a reasonable time, the director of public works shall cancel the permit and cause the necessary work to be done. The director shall recover the cost of the work from the surety required in section 34-68. 
(Code 1956, § 19-43; Code 1964, § 37-43; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-30. - Location of mail and newspaper boxes in street. 
Mail and newspaper boxes may be placed in the streets without obtaining a permit under this article; provided, that all such boxes shall be so located as not to interfere with or endanger public travel or maintenance on such streets. Any such box so located as to interfere with or endanger public travel or maintenance on streets shall be moved to an approved location, upon reasonable notice from the director of public works. Failure to remove such boxes after such notice has been given shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1956, § 19-37; Code 1964, § 37-37; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-31. - Location of newspaper racks or stands on sidewalks, etc. 
Coin-operated news racks or stands may be placed on the sidewalks and right-of-way areas adjacent to the streets without obtaining a permit under this article; provided, that all such racks or stands shall be so located as not to interfere with or endanger public travel or the use or maintenance of such areas. Any such rack or stand so located as to interfere with or endanger public travel or the use or maintenance of such areas, or which is determined to be not in the public interest, in the opinion of the director of public works, shall be moved to an approved location, upon reasonable notice from the director of public works. If such rack or stand is not removed within seven (7) days from the date such notice was sent, the director of public works may remove such rack or stand to a place of safekeeping. Failure to remove such rack or stand after such notice has been given shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 656, 5-14-80; Code 1964, § 37-37.1; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-32. - Illumination of business place from across street. 
Illumination or floodlighting of a business place from light structures across a street from the business place shall be unlawful and no permit shall be issued under this article for this purpose. 
(Code 1956, § 19-34; Code 1964, § 37-34; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-33. - Restoration of street surface when permit not required for disturbance thereof. 
Whenever any person disrupts or disturbs the paved or improved surface of any street used primarily for public travel and a permit therefor is not required by this article, he shall notify the director of public works when the paved or improved surface should be restored. The city shall restore the paved or improved section and shall render to such person a statement of the costs incurred. Such person shall reimburse the city for such costs. 
(Code 1956, § 19-33; Code 1964, § 37-33; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 34-34—34-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-41. - General requirement and exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work in connection with the erection, construction, removal, relocation or maintenance of any surface, overhead or underground installation or to cut, trim or spray trees or to place signs, if such work, cutting, trimming, spraying or placing is on, under or over a street or affects a street, until such person has obtained a permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this division. Such permit shall also be required before any person stencils or paints any figure, name or other representation on any curb. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any signs authorized pursuant to article III of this chapter. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a government agency or unit doing its own work. 
(Code 1956, § 19-17; Code 1964, § 37-17; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1028, adopted Nov. 13, 1991, deleted the provisions of § 34-42, which pertained to a single permit required for work of a continuing nature and derived from Code 1956, § 19-25, and Code 1964, § 37-25.  
Sec. 34-43. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a permit under this division shall be filed in the office of the director of public works on forms supplied by the city. Such application shall show all required information and be signed by the applicant or his authorized agent. Such application shall include a description of the work to be done and a sketch showing such work. Such sketch shall show the following: 
(1)  The nature of the work to be done. 
(2)  Property lines, where appropriate, and the street right-of-way line, with location of the work with reference to a fixed point on the street. 
(3)  Where surface or underground work is involved, a cross section indicating existing conditions and proposed changes. 
(4)  Where grading operations are involved, the pavement, shoulder, ditch and slope. 
(5)  Any tree which is to be removed, and the location and description of trees and shrubs within and adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(b)  An application for a permit for underground installations must be accompanied by a sketch showing: 
(1)  The exact location and dimensions of conduits, pipes, vaults, manholes, crossings and other installations. 
(2)  Type (concrete, iron, etc.). 
(3)  Depth of covering material. 
(4)  Outlets, showing type and size. 
(5)  Design and location of identification indicators. 
(6)  The location and description of trees and shrubs within and adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(Code 1956, §§ 19-18—19-20; Code 1964, §§ 37-18—37-20; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-44. - Issuance and term generally. 
Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this division, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to ascertain that all work to be done pursuant to the permit applied for complies in all respects with prevailing planning practices and appropriate construction standards and with the ordinances, resolutions, policies and regulations of the city, before he shall issue the permit. The director of public works shall issue the permit when such compliance is apparent or can be assured by the terms of the permit and when all applicable requirements for obtaining the permit have been met. The director of public works may prescribe a time limit for the duration of such permit and may extend the same. 
(Code 1956, §§ 19-21, 19-23, 19-27; Code 1964, §§ 37-21, 37-23, 37-27; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-45. - Liability insurance or bond prerequisite to issuance for disturbing improved street surface. 
Before any permit shall be issued under this division to any person to cut, undermine, disrupt or disturb in any manner the paved or improved surface, including shoulders, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, of any street, evidence of contractors' public liability insurance or a bond shall be given by such person to indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property growing out of the activity to be authorized by such permit, in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(Code 1956, § 19-26; Code 1964, § 37-26; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 34-46—34-48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1028, adopted Nov. 13, 1991, deleted the provisions of former §§ 34-46—34-48, which pertained to permits for drive-in theatre entrances, for service or frontage roads, and for logging roads, tram roads and other temporary structures, and derived from Code 1956, §§ 19-38, 19-40, 19-41, and Code 1964, §§ 37-38, 37-40 and 37-41.  
Sec. 34-49. - Issuance for cutting, trimming or spraying trees or shrubs. 
The director of public works may issue a permit under this division for the cutting, trimming or spraying of trees or shrubs on a street only when such work is fully justified in the public interest and the permit shall prescribe the manner in which such work is to be done. 
(Code 1956, § 19-35; Code 1964, § 37-35; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-50. - Issuance of emergency permit. 
The director of public works may issue an emergency permit to allow work governed by this article, which requires immediate attention, to proceed before the permit application is completely processed. 
(Code 1956, § 19-24; Code 1964, § 37-24; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-51. - Issuance and term of blanket permit. 
Utility companies whose regular course of business requires work within the right-of-way, outside the pavement area, may be granted a blanket permit for such work or use. Such blanket permit shall be for not more than two (2) years' duration. 
(Code 1956, § 19-25; Code 1964, § 37-25; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-52. - Issuance to, and responsibility of, contractor for work on government contract. 
Where work on any government project is to be performed by a contractor, the permit required by this division shall be issued in the name of the contractor. The contractor in such case shall be responsible for inspection fees under this article and shall give evidence of liability insurance or bond as required in section 34-45. 
(Code 1956, § 19-32; Code 1964, § 37-32; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-53. - Contents generally. 
(a)  Permits issued under this division shall specify the manner and the conditions under which the permitted work shall be done. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, every permit issued shall be deemed to include the following provisions: 
(1)  Public travel shall be protected by adequate lights, barricades and appropriate warning signals and signs at all times. 
(2)  Public travel shall be blocked only in the manner and as specified in the permit. 
(3)  Pavement shall be used for piling or storing of excavated material or for deposit of material and the placing of equipment only as specified in the permit. 
(4)  The maximum amount of ditch, trench or other excavation to be opened at one time shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet, including the back-filled portion of any trench which is not in condition for public travel, unless the director of public works finds reason for exception. 
(5)  All backfilling of excavations shall be done to a ninety-five-percent density compaction. Compaction by using water is not permitted. 
(6)  On pavement cuts, the pavement shall be restored to its former dimensions, cross-section and profile with material conforming to city specifications. 
(7)  No tree roots shall be cut or damaged through soil compaction or contamination to the extent of rendering the tree unsafe and, if possible, tunneling through or under roots instead of trenching across roots shall be followed. Care shall be taken to protect plant materials on adjacent property from damage. 
(8)  Shoulders, ditches and drainage mediums shall be left in the same condition as found or as specified in the permit. 
(9)  The permittee agrees to repair any defects in the backfill or pavement occurring within one (1) year after the work done under the permit is completed, with the exception of franchised or legislatively empowered utility companies which shall be responsible for repair until such time as the street is rebuilt or resurfaced. 
(10)  If entrances to adjacent property are affected, the permittee shall provide temporary facilities for safe ingress and egress to such property. 
(11)  The permittee agrees to restore the street to a satisfactory condition consistent with adjoining sections of the street. 
(12)  The permittee agrees, by the acceptance of the permit, to indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property growing out of any activity authorized by the permit, whether such suit is brought against the city either independently or jointly with the permittee. 
(13)  The permittee agrees, by the acceptance of the permit, upon notice in writing, to remove or relocate any structure or installation placed in, on, under or over any street, if such structure or installation interferes with the use of the streets. 
(14)  The permittee shall promptly report to the director of public works when he has completed the work authorized under the permit. 
(b)  Where the work or installation for which a permit is issued under this division will or may disturb or obstruct any natural or artificial drainage medium, including ditches, storm sewers, ravines and the like, the permit shall specify the manner in which the surface water shall be controlled during the progress of work and thereafter, if the disturbance or obstruction is of a permanent nature. All work shall be done in accordance with the Virginia erosion and sediment control laws (e.g., Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq.) and this Code. 
(Code 1956, § 19-22; Code 1964, § 37-22; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-54. - Provision for city work on entrances. 
Wherever, in the opinion of the director of public works, it is in the public interest for the city to construct an entrance for which a permit is requested under this division, he may provide in the permit that the city will install pavement, pipe, curb and gutter or do such other work as he deems to be in the public interest, but in all such cases the permittee shall furnish and deliver to the site any pipe or other materials necessary for the entrance. 
(Code 1956, § 19-39; Code 1964, § 37-39; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-55. - Violation of permit provisions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act in a manner contrary to the provisions of any permit issued under this division. 
(Code 1956, § 19-44; Code 1964, § 37-44; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-56. - Authority of city when work done without permit. 
Whenever any person uses a street for any purpose for which a permit is required by this division, without such permit, the city may remove such work and restore the street to its original condition. Where the city exercises such right, it may recover from such person its costs and expenses. In addition, the city may proceed under section 34-1. 
(Code 1956, § 19-42; Code 1964, § 37-42; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-57. - Correction of unsafe entrances. 
When, in the opinion of the director of public works, an entrance onto a public right-of-way has deteriorated to the point where it constitutes a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicles, the property owner, upon written notice of the unsafe condition, shall make prompt repairs to correct such conditions. In the event the property owner fails to comply with the notice within a reasonable time, the city may remove the entrance and restore the street to a safe condition. Where the city exercises such right, it may recover from such person its costs and expenses, as well as proceed under section 34-1. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 34-58—34-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT, INSPECTION FEES AND SURETIES 
 
Sec. 34-66. - Fee schedule. 
The minimum permit and inspection fees for a permit under this article shall be: 
(1)  The minimum permit and inspection fee for residential right-of-way work shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(2)  The minimum permit and inspection fee for commercial right-of-way work shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(3)  The minimum permit and inspection fee for a utility right-of-way work shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(4)  The fee for a blanket permit shall be determined by the director of public works, based upon the city's cost to permit and inspect utility work in the right-of-way. 
(Code 1956, § 19-30; Code 1964, §§ 37-30, 37-36; Ord. No. 827, 5-28-86; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-67. - Amount of inspection fees. 
Except as to the minimum fees set forth in section 34-66, inspection fees shall be the actual cost of making inspections necessary to assure that the work is done in a proper and orderly manner. 
(Code 1956, § 19-28; Code 1964, § 37-28; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-68. - Surety for residential and commercial right-of-way work. 
(a)  In order to guarantee compliance with all the terms and conditions of the permit and in order to protect the city and any person suffering loss or injury by reason of a violation of the terms and conditions of the permit or this article, or in order to reimburse the city for costs incurred by the city inspecting the project in excess of the permit fee, each applicant shall assure completion and maintenance of the work within the right-of-way by one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  A performance bond covering one hundred (100) percent of the construction cost of the work within the right-of-way and maintenance thereof written by a bonding company licensed to do business in the commonwealth. 
(2)  An escrow agreement, placing in escrow one hundred (100) percent of the construction cost of the work within the right-of-way, in a banking or savings institution licensed to do business in the commonwealth. 
(3)  An irrevocable letter of credit, in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the construction cost of the work within the right-of-way, issued by a banking or savings and loan institution licensed to do business in the commonwealth. 
(4)  A property bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for an existing residence, if the permit is obtained by the homeowner. 
(5)  A cash deposit covering one hundred (100) percent of the construction cost of the work within the right-of-way. 
(Code 1956, § 19-29; Code 1964, § 37-29; Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 34-69—34-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1028, adopted Nov. 13, 1991, deleted former §§ 34-69—34-71, which pertained to a sufficiency of guarantee fee, the return of such fee, an exemption from the permit fee, and derived from Code 1956, § 19-29; Ord. No. 194; and Code 1964, §§ 21A-23 and 37-29.  
Sec. 34-72. - Utility policy. 
The director of public works shall establish a written utility policy which shall be in accordance with the code and which shall provide specific guidelines and standards for the use of city right-of-way and easements by utility companies. 
(Ord. No. 1029, 11-13-91; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 34-73—34-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENCROACHMENTS INTO PUBLIC STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS, PLACES OR PROPERTY  
DIVISION 1. - ENCROACHMENTS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-86. - Application; processing fee; procedures; council review. 
(a)  Applications for encroachments into public streets and other public ways, places or property shall be made to the director of the department of public works. A nonrefundable fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be paid to the city for processing an application for an encroachment into any public street or other public way, place or property. The director of public works or his designee shall not accept any application unless such fee is paid at the time the application is filed. The director of the department of public works or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to prepare and adopt a procedure for the processing of such applications and the reporting to city council of any detrimental effect which a requested encroachment may have on the public health, safety, welfare or interest. Any application for an encroachment presented for city council consideration shall be accompanied by (i) an encroachment agreement executed by the applicant and incorporating all terms and conditions imposed by city staff, (ii) a certificate of liability insurance in such amounts and such coverages as required by the city's risk management administrator and naming the City of Hampton as an additional insured in the endorsement box, and (iii) if required by the director of public works or his designee, a performance bond in the amount set by the department of public works to cover the costs of removal of the encroachment in the event of a violation of the encroachment agreement or failure to remove the encroachment upon notification. 
(b)  City council may deny or grant permission to encroach subject to such additional terms and conditions as city council, in its discretion, deem proper. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, city council shall deny any encroachment request it determines, in its discretion, to be detrimental to the public health, safety welfare or interest or is in violation of any state or federal law or regulation. Permission by city council granted hereunder to any person to construct and maintain an encroachment into any public street or other public way, place, or property shall not relieve such person or encroachment of complying with all applicable laws, regulations and requirements. 
(c)  [ Reserved. ] 
(d)  This section shall not be read as authorizing any encroachment which would be prohibited by any other laws of the City of Hampton, Virginia or the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(e)  Any encroachment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the City of Hampton. 
(f)  Any encroachment granted pursuant to this section is a license merely, is neither transferable nor assignable, and shall be revocable at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 09-0014, 9-9-09; Ord. No. 12-0029, 6-13-12)  
Sec. 34-87 - Administrative approval of certain encroachment applications. 
(a)  Pursuant to its authority under section 15.2-2009 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, the city council hereby authorizes the city manager or her designee, upon application to the department of public works, to administratively approve encroachments into public rights-of-way and other public places for outdoor seating subject to the terms and conditions of article VI of this chapter. 
(b)  If an application for an outdoor seating encroachment does not meet all of the criteria of article VI, then the city manager or her designee is prohibited from administratively approving the encroachment application. The applicant may then follow the procedure set forth in section 34-86 for the encroachment to be considered by city council. 
(Ord. No. 15-0024 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 34-88. - Unlawful encroachments. 
(a)  Except as provided in sections 34-86, and except a public service corporation, no encroachment or use and occupancy of a public street, right-of-way, alley, place or property of whatever nature in a manner not permitted to the general public shall be authorized or permitted without the consent of the city council or a franchise therefor. Every such encroachment, use and occupancy shall constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  Offenders shall be notified of such unlawful encroachments by the director of public works or his designee. Notice shall be given to the owner or occupant of the property to which the unlawful encroachment is associated, affixed or appended, stating the nature of the violation and ordering the removal of the encroachment within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon such owner or his agent or the occupant and shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant if served upon him personally, sent by certified or registered mail to his last known address or the address of the property to which the encroachment is associated, affixed or appended, posted in a conspicuous place in or upon such property, or served by any other method authorized by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from abating such encroachments in any manner provided by law. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the terms of such notice within the time specified therein shall be punishable as a Class 4 misdemeanor, and each day thereafter that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any fine imposed hereunder, the director of public works may, in the name of the city, bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this section; may remove or contract for the removal of any such encroachment, in which event the cost thereof shall be charged to the owner or occupant of the property and collected as real estate taxes are collected; and may on behalf of the city, pending removal of any such encroachment or encroaching portion thereof, charge the owner compensation for the use of such portion of the public street, right-of-way, alley, place or property at the equivalent of the tax upon the land so occupied if it were the property of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 09-0014, 9-9-09)  
Sec. 34-89. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article III shall not apply to subdivision and neighborhood signs funded through the city's neighborhood development fund program, and awnings, wall-mounted signs, gutters, downspouts, building or structure-mounted communication antennas and other appendages to buildings projecting in, upon and/or over city sidewalks and streets which are governed by section 34-4 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-0014, 9-9-09; Ord. No. 15-0019, 6-10-15 )  
DIVISION 2. - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
Sec. 34-90. - Definitions. 
In accordance with Code of Virginia § 56-484.26, as amended, the following definitions apply to this division. 
Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of any type of wireless communications services. 
Co-locate. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to a base station, building, existing structure, utility pole, or wireless support structure. "Co-location" has a corresponding meaning. 
Department. The Department of Public Works. 
Existing structure. Any structure that is installed or approved for installation at the time a wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider provides notice to the city of an agreement with the owner of the structure to co-locate equipment on that structure. "Existing structure" includes any structure that is currently supporting, designed to support, or capable of supporting the attachment of wireless facilities, including towers, buildings, utility poles, light poles, flag poles, signs, and water towers. 
Micro-wireless facility. A small cell facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than eleven (11) inches. 
Small cell facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet and (ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a cumulative volume of no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet, or such higher limit as is established by the Federal Communications Commission. The following types of associated equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
Utility pole. A structure owned, operated, or owned and operated by a public utility, local government, or the Commonwealth that is designed specifically for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires for communications, cable television, or electricity. 
Water tower. A water storage tank, or a standpipe or an elevated tank situated on a support structure, originally constructed for use as a reservoir or facility to store or deliver water. 
Wireless facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless services between user equipment and a communications network, including (i) equipment associated with wireless services, such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul, and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial, or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. 
Wireless infrastructure provider. Any person, including a person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state, that builds or installs transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support structures, but that is not a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services. (i) "personal wireless services" as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C) (i); (ii) "personal wireless service facilities" as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(ii), including commercial mobile services as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d), provided to personal mobile communication devices through wireless facilities; and (iii) any other fixed or mobile wireless service, using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, provided using wireless facilities. 
Wireless services provider. A provider of wireless services. 
Wireless support structure. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole, tower, either guyed or self-supporting, or suitable existing structure or alternative structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include any telephone or electrical utility pole or any tower used for the distribution or transmission of electrical service. 
(Ord. No. 17-0008 , 7-12-17) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Code of Virginia § 56-484.26.  
Sec. 34-91. - Application, permit, and permit fees. 
(a)  Application and permit generally. 
(1)  Upon application by a wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider, the department shall issue a permit granting access to all public rights-of-way to install and maintain small cell facilities on existing structures, provided that the wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider (i) has permission from the owner of the structure to co-locate equipment on that structure and (ii) provides notice of the agreement and co-location to the city. 
(2)  The department shall approve or disapprove any such requested permit within sixty (60) days of receipt of the complete application. Within ten (10) days after receipt of an application and a valid electronic mail address for the applicant, the department shall notify the applicant by electronic mail whether the application is incomplete and specify any missing information; otherwise, the application shall be deemed complete. 
(3)  Any disapproval shall be in writing and accompanied by an explanation for the disapproval. The department may extend the sixty (60) day period in writing for a period not to exceed an additional thirty (30) days. 
(4)  The permit request shall be deemed approved if the department fails to act within the initial sixty (60) days or an extended thirty (30) day period. 
(5)  No such permit shall be required for providers of telecommunications services and nonpublic providers of cable television, electric, natural gas, water, and sanitary sewer services that, as of July 1, 2017, already have facilities lawfully occupying the public rights-of-way under the locality's jurisdiction. 
(b)  The department shall not impose any fee for the use of the rights-of-way, except for zoning, subdivision, site plan, and comprehensive plan fees of general application, on a wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider to attach or co-locate small cell facilities on an existing structure in the right-of-way. A permit application processing fee of $250.00 shall be charged. 
(c)  No fee shall be imposed and no application or permit shall be required for the installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro-wireless facilities that are suspended on cables or lines that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with national safety codes. The department shall require a single-use right-of-way permit if such activities (i) involve working within the highway travel lane or require closure of a highway travel lane; (ii) disturb the pavement, shoulder, roadway, or ditch line; (iii) include placement on limited access rights-of-way; or (iv) require any specific precautions to ensure the safety of the traveling public or the protection of public infrastructure or the operation thereof, and either were not authorized in or will be conducted in a time, place, or manner that is inconsistent with terms of the existing permit for that facility or the structure upon which it is attached. 
(Ord. No. 17-0008 , 7-12-17) 
State Law reference— Access to locality rights-of-way for installation and maintenance of small cell facilities on existing structures, Code of Virginia § 56-484.29.  
Sec. 34-92. - Term and relocation. 
(a)  Except as provided in Article VII, Section 9 of the Constitution of Virginia, public right-of-way permits or agreements for the construction of wireless support structures issued on or after July 1, 2017, shall be for an initial term of at least ten (10) years, with at least three options for renewal for terms of five years, subject to terms providing for earlier termination for cause or by mutual agreement. 
(b)  Nothing in this division prohibits the department from requiring permittees to relocate wireless support structures when relocation is necessary due to a transportation project, the need to remove a hazard from the right-of-way when the Commissioner of Highways determines such removal is necessary to ensure the safety of the traveling public, or material change to the right-of-way, so long as other users of the right-of-way that are in similar conflict with the use of the right-of-way are required to relocate. 
(c)  Such relocation shall be completed as soon as reasonably possible within the time set forth in any written request by the department, as long as the department provides the permittee with a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days' advance written notice to comply with such relocation, unless circumstances beyond the control of the department require a shorter period of advance notice. The permittee shall bear only the proportional cost of the relocation that is caused by the transportation project and shall not bear any cost related to private benefit or where the permittee was on private right-of-way, 
(d)  If the department bears any of the cost of the relocation, the permittee shall not be obligated to commence the relocation until it receives the funds for such relocation. The permittee shall have no liability for any delays caused by a failure to receive funds for the cost of such relocation, and the department shall have no obligation to collect such funds. 
(e)  If relocation is deemed necessary, the department shall work cooperatively with the permittee to minimize any negative impact to the wireless signal caused by the relocation. In the event of an emergency, the permittee and the department shall work diligently to accomplish such emergency relocation. 
(Ord. No. 17-0008 , 7-12-17) 
State Law reference— Agreements for use of public right-of-way to construct new wireless support structures; relocation of wireless support structures, Code of Virginia § 56-484.30.  
Secs. 34-93—34-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STREET NUMBERS FOR BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to require numbering of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2024. 
 
Sec. 34-111. - Violations of article. 
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 927, 4-12-89; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 34-112. - Display generally. 
Every house, building or structure used or intended for use as living quarters or as a place for the conduct of business and having any wall facing or abutting any public or private street, alley or place in the city shall have displayed on that wall legible, easily read characters, which are of contrasting color to the background, the proper street number for such house, building or structure as follows: 
(1)  In the case of residential houses or commercial or manufacturing buildings or structures: 
(a)  The number shall measure a minimum of three (3) inches in height. 
(b)  In cases where a house, building or structure is located more than sixty (60) feet from the public or private street, alley or place, the number shall measure a minimum of six (6) inches in height. 
(2)  In the case of mobile home parks: 
(a)  In cases where a main street address is assigned to the entire park, the main street number shall be visually apparent from the main means of ingress and egress to the property by display of the number on the park identification sign. If no identification sign exists, the main street number shall be visually apparent from the main means of ingress and egress to the property by display of the number on a sign at the entrance to the property. Such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area, shall be at least (3) feet above grade, shall not extend higher than six (6) feet above grade and shall not extend into or over any adjoining property or public right-of-way without permission of that property owner. The number displayed shall measure a minimum of six (6) inches in height. 
(b)  Each mobile home shall be assigned specific identification numbers or letters and such must be displayed on a portion of the mobile home which faces the means of ingress and egress through the park. The number or letter shall measure a minimum of three (3) inches in height. 
(3)  In cases of multiple-family developments: 
(a)  In cases where one (1) main street address is assigned to the entire development, the main street number shall be visually apparent from the means of ingress and egress to the property by display of the number on the development identification sign. If no identification sign exists, the main street number shall be visually apparent from the main means of ingress and egress to the property by display of the number on a sign at the entrance to the property. Such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area, shall be at least three (3) feet above grade, shall not extend higher than six (6) feet above grade and shall not extend into or over any adjoining property or public right-of-way without permission of that property owner. The number displayed shall measure a minimum of six (6) inches in height. 
(b)  Each building or structure shall display the range of numbers for the dwelling units contained therein on a portion of the building or structure which faces the means of ingress and egress through the development and the numbers and/or letters shall measure no less than six (6) inches in height. 
(c)  The street number or letter for each apartment shall be displayed above or near the doorway entrance and the number or letter shall measure a minimum of three (3) inches in height. 
(Code 1956, §§ 19-11, 19-15; Code 1964, §§ 37-11, 37-15; Ord. No. 927, 4-12-89; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 34-113. - Designation and change. 
The zoning administrator or his designee shall designate the proper street numbers for all houses, buildings or structures required to be numbered by section 34-112 and shall have the power to change such numbers when, in his judgment, such change is necessary to avoid or eliminate confusion with other numbers. 
(Code 1956, § 19-12; Code 1964, § 37-12; Ord. No. 927, 4-12-89; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 08-0022, 10-22-08)  
Sec. 34-114. - Duty of person erecting building. 
It shall be the duty of any person erecting any house, building or structure required to be numbered by section 34-112 to ascertain from the zoning administrator or his designee the proper number and to display each number as provided in section 34-112. 
(Code 1956, § 19-14, Code 1964, § 37-14; Ord. No. 927, 4-12-89; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 08-0022, 10-22-08)  
Sec. 34-115. - Record to be kept. 
It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator or his designee to keep a record of the proper numbers for houses, buildings and structures and to furnish such numbers to any person requesting same. 
(Code 1956, § 19-13; Code 1964, § 37-13; Ord. No. 927, 4-12-89; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 08-0022, 10-22-08)  
Sec. 34-116. - Notice to owner. 
Any person owning, leasing, occupying or maintaining any house, building or structure which has no number displayed thereon or on which the number is displayed in a manner in violation of this article, when so informed and notified by the zoning administrator or his designee shall display the number in accordance with this article or change the incorrect number so that the appropriate and correct number shall be displayed within ten (10) days from the date of such notice. Failure to comply with such notice shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 927, 4-12-89; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 08-0022, 10-22-08)  
Sec. 34-117. - Compliance. 
All existing street numbers not in compliance with the provisions of this article shall be brought into conformity when the existing street numbers are removed or when the numbers are changed by the direction of the zoning administrator or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 927, 4-12-89; Ord. 1456, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 08-0022, 10-22-08)  
ARTICLE V. - VACATION OF PUBLIC STREETS, ALLEYS, EASEMENTS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS 
 
Sec. 34-118. - Application; processing fee; review process. 
(a)  In addition to the powers contained in section 2.05 of the City Charter, public streets, alleys, easements and other public ways may be vacated or discontinued pursuant to Code of Virginia § 15.2-2006. An application for vacation of a public street, alley, easement or other public ways shall be made available to an applicant at the office of the director of the department of public works. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority granted under Code of Virginia § 15.2-2007, a nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the city for processing the application including applications processed under section 2.05 of the city charter. The director of public works or his designee shall not accept any application unless such fee is paid at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  The director of public works or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to prepare and adopt a procedure for the processing of such applications. The director of public works or his designee shall prepare a report to the city council when a vacation request should not be approved due to the necessity of continuance of the public street, alley, easement or other public way by a city agency for utilities, stormwater management, future road widening, consistency with the comprehensive plan, redevelopment or other public purpose or the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 12-0031, 6-13-12)  
Sec. 34-119. - Public hearing required. 
(a)  A public hearing shall be held before any ordinance is adopted vacating a public street, alley, easement or other public way or any portion thereof. Notice shall be given as required by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204. The cost of publishing the notice shall be paid for by the applicant as required by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2006. The director of public works or his designee shall not schedule the public hearing until the publication fee is paid by the applicant to the city. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the vacation of a public street, alley or other public way pursued under the authority of section 2.05 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 12-0031, 6-13-12)  
Sec. 34-120. - Sale of public street, alley, easement and other public ways; conditional vacation. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority set forth in Code of Virginia § 15.2-2008, unless otherwise waived by city council, as a condition of the vacation or discontinuance of any public street, alley, easement or other public way, the abutting property owner or owners requesting the vacation shall purchase from the city such abutting owner's fractional portion of the public street, alley, easement or other public way. The price shall be no greater than the property's fair market value or its contributory value to the abutting property, whichever is greater, or the amount agreed to by the parties. No such vacation shall be concluded until the agreed upon price has been paid. If any abutting owner does not pay for such owner's fractional portion within one (1) year, or other time period made a condition of the vacation, then the vacation shall be void as to any such property owner. This provision shall not apply to a vacation pursued under the authority of section 2.05 of the City Charter, a vacation filed by the city or the vacation of a street, alley or easement pursuant to Code of Virginia § 15.2-2270. 
(b)  When an applicant requests a vacation in order to accommodate expansion or development of an existing or proposed business, city council may condition the vacation upon commencement of the expansion or development within a specified period of time. Failing to commence within such time may render the vacation, at the option of the city council, void. 
(c)  City council may attach any additional conditions to the vacation request it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 12-0031, 6-13-12)  
Sec. 34-121. - Ordinance of vacation; vacation agreement; recordation of ordinance of vacation. 
(a)  Any application for vacation of a public street, alley, easement or other public way, pursued under this article or section 2.05 of the City Charter shall be accomplished by an ordinance of vacation adopted by city council. 
(b)  The ordinance of vacation shall be accompanied by a vacation agreement executed by all parties requesting the vacation in the case of a vacation request pursued under section 2.05 of the City Charter or a conditional vacation under section 34-120 of this article and shall be made a part of the ordinance of vacation. 
(c)  A certified copy of the ordinance of vacation and a fully executed vacation agreement, if applicable, shall be recorded as deeds are recorded and indexed in the name of the city. The cost of recording the ordinance of vacation and any applicable vacation agreement shall be borne by the applicant or applicants. A conditional vacation shall not be recorded until the condition or conditions have been met. 
(Ord. No. 12-0031, 6-13-12)  
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR SEATING ADMINISTRATIVE ENCROACHMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-122. - Outdoor seating permit; definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
ABC. The Virginia Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
ADA. The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and the ADA Amendments Act of 2008, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101, et seq. 
Director of community development. The director of the community development department and his authorized designees. 
Director of public works. The director of the department of public works and his authorized designees. 
Establishment. Any business properly licensed and lawfully located in the Phoebus Business (PH-1), Downtown Business (DT-1), or Downtown Waterfront (DT-2) zoning districts. 
Operator. The person or entity that operates an establishment. 
Outdoor seating. Any group of tables, chairs, or other seating fixtures and all related appurtenances maintained within the public sidewalk or other right-of-way when located adjacent to an establishment having the same operator. Further, outdoor seating shall be temporary in nature, shall not be permanently affixed so as to extend below the sidewalk or other right-of-way, must not involve penetration of the sidewalk surface or be attached to any building, and shall be readily removable without damage to the surface of the sidewalk or other right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 15-0024 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 34-123. - Outdoor seating permit; requirements. 
(a)  Permit required; enforcement. Outdoor seating may encroach into the public sidewalk or right-of-way only upon issuance of an outdoor seating permit and encroachment agreement as provided for in this article. No other use of the area devoted to the outdoor seating shall be permitted, except normal use as a public sidewalk during the hours that the outdoor seating is not operated. It shall be the responsibility of the director of public works to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Application for an outdoor seating permit shall be made to the director of public works on such application form and subject to such written procedures as the director may establish. Application for an outdoor seating permit shall be made by the operator of an establishment that is located at street level adjacent to the proposed outdoor seating area. The application shall be signed by the operator of the establishment and by the owner of the property on which the establishment is located if the property owner is not the establishment operator. 
(2)  The following documents and information shall be submitted with the application for an outdoor seating permit: 
(i)  A plan with dimensions showing the layout and arrangement of the proposed outdoor seating area, including its overall dimensions, aisle widths, access to the adjacent building, and the locations and dimensions of chairs, tables, umbrellas, barriers, outdoor heating devices, and all other appurtenances to be located within the boundaries of the proposed outdoor seating area; 
(ii)  A plan with dimensions and photographs showing the following sidewalk conditions and features located within the boundaries of the proposed outdoor seating area and within 10 feet of the outdoor seating area's boundaries: location of the adjacent improved street right-of-way, existing sidewalk paving material and width measured from the building to the face of the curb and from the proposed outdoor seating to the face of the curb; the locations of tree wells, sidewalk grates, benches, bus passenger shelters, mailboxes, newspaper boxes, lampposts, traffic signal poles, traffic and parking signs, parking meters, wheelchair ramps, driveways, fire hydrants, trash receptacles and similar sidewalk features or obstructions; and the boundaries of any existing adjacent outdoor seating; 
(iii)  The number of water closets and lavatories provided in the existing establishment and the seating capacity of the proposed outdoor seating area. 
(iv)  Photographs or other graphic representations, together with specifications, which depict the design, materials, and colors of chairs, tables, umbrellas, barriers, and all other appurtenances to be located within the boundaries of the proposed outdoor seating area; and 
(v)  Such additional information as the director of public works may require as needed to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Application fee. A nonrefundable application fee of $100.00 shall accompany each application for an outdoor seating permit. 
(c)  Encroachment agreement; liability insurance and indemnity. Prior to approval of any outdoor seating permit, the applicant shall submit: 
(1)  An executed encroachment agreement, incorporating all terms and conditions imposed by city staff and in a form approved by the city attorney or her designee, which shall include but not be limited to provisions regarding insurance and indemnification as may be required by the risk manager; and 
(2)  A certificate of liability insurance in such amounts and such coverages as may be required by the risk manager, naming the City of Hampton as an additional insured in a form satisfactory to the risk manager. 
(d)  Fees and taxes to be paid. All City of Hampton fees and taxes required by law and applicable to the establishment, or to the property on which the establishment is located, shall be paid in full and all required city licenses shall be current prior to approval of an outdoor seating permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-0024 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 34-124. - Outdoor seating permit; review process. 
(a)  After a complete application, including all required materials as set forth in section 34-123, is submitted, the director of public works shall respond to the applicant within 30 days by forwarding any comments and identifying any deficiencies in the application or by acting upon the application after consultation with the director of the department of community development. The director of public works may approve the outdoor seating permit, approve the outdoor seating permit with conditions, or deny the outdoor seating permit. 
(b)  Standards for application review. Approval of an outdoor seating permit shall be granted only if: 
(1)  The proposed outdoor seating complies with the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards; 
(2)  The establishment is properly licensed and lawfully located in the Phoebus Business (PH-1), Downtown Business (DT-1), or Downtown Waterfront (DT-2) zoning districts; 
(3)  The proposed outdoor seating complies with the uniform statewide building code and all applicable provisions of federal, state, and local law, including this article; 
(4)  Adequate space will remain in the public sidewalk or right-of-way area to facilitate safe and convenient circulation of pedestrian traffic and compliance with the ADA; and 
(5)  The proposed outdoor seating will not unreasonably interfere with the normal use of city property by the city or general public, and does not present a safety, health, or environmental hazard. 
(c)  Availability of approved permit on the premises. If approved, the outdoor seating permit and related materials as set forth in section 34-123(b) shall be available on the premises of the establishment at all times and shall be provided to representatives of the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 15-0024 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 34-125. - Outdoor seating permit; changes to approved permit. 
No material change to an approved outdoor seating permit shall be made without prior written approval by the director of public works after consultation with the director of community development, provided that the director of public works may modify an approved permit if he finds there is a public need relative to use of the adjacent sidewalk area or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 15-0024 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 34-126. - Outdoor seating permit; duration and transferability. 
(a)  An outdoor seating permit shall be valid until the time the establishment ceases operation, the permit is suspended, or the permit is revoked. 
(b)  An outdoor seating permit shall not be transferable to another operator or location. 
(Ord. No. 15-0024 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 34-127. - Outdoor seating permit; enforcement, revocation and suspension. 
(a)  Any encroachment granted pursuant to this article is a license merely and shall be revocable at the pleasure of the city council. 
(b)  Administrative revocation of approved permit by the director of public works. 
(1)  The director of public works shall have the authority to revoke an approved outdoor seating permit if any of the following occurs: 
(i)  The applicant has misrepresented facts or provided false information in the outdoor seating permit application; 
(ii)  The outdoor seating area is operated in violation of the terms or conditions of the outdoor seating permit, City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards, ABC regulations, or the encroachment agreement; 
(iii)  The outdoor seating area or the establishment is operated in violation of the zoning ordinance, city code, or other applicable federal, state or local law; 
(iv)  The outdoor seating area constitutes a public nuisance or a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare of the public, or is endangering the life or property of others; 
(v)  The establishment has delinquent taxes, unpaid fees, or has not maintained all licenses necessary for operation of the establishment and outdoor seating area; or 
(vi)  The director of public works determines that there is a public need relative to the portion of the sidewalk occupied by or otherwise affected by the outdoor seating, including but not limited to work in the sidewalk area. 
(2)  The director of public works shall provide written notice to the operator and owner of the property where the establishment is located setting forth the effective date of the revocation and the grounds therefor. Such revocation shall not be appealable. Upon revocation, the applicant may elect to follow the procedure set forth in section 34-86 for a new encroachment application to be considered by city council. 
(3)  In the case of revocation of an outdoor seating permit on grounds other than specified in subsection (b)(1)(vi) of this subsection, the operator of the outdoor seating shall not be permitted to re-apply for an administrative outdoor seating permit to operate an outdoor seating area for the same establishment within one year of revocation. 
(c)  Administrative suspension of an approved permit by the director of public works. 
(1)  The director of public works shall have the authority to suspend an approved outdoor seating permit for a period of up to 30 days, or such longer period as may be necessary, if any of the conditions of section 34-127(b)(1) occurs. 
(2)  The director of public works shall provide written notice to the operator setting forth the effective date of the suspension, the length of the suspension, and the grounds therefor. 
(3)  The director of public works may reinstate an outdoor seating permit if the director is satisfied that the grounds for the suspension have been abated. 
(Ord. No. 15-0024 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 34-128. - Outdoor seating permit; marking of outdoor seating area for inspection. 
After approval of an outdoor seating permit and prior to initial occupancy of any area approved for use for outdoor seating, the operator of the outdoor seating shall mark the corners of the approved outdoor seating area in a conspicuous but non-permanent manner on the sidewalk surface and shall notify the director of public works for inspection and approval of the same. 
(Ord. No. 15-0024 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 34-129. - Outdoor seating permit; design standards. 
(a)  The City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards is declared to be a part of this article and to have the same force and effect as if it were fully set forth and described herein. The City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards shall be kept in the office of the department of community development and public works and may be amended by from time to time with the joint approval of the directors of the departments of community development and public works. 
(b)  Every outdoor seating area shall be designed and operated in compliance with the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards. 
(Ord. No. 15-0024 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 34-130. - Reserved.  
Chapter 35 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-0009, adopted August 10, 2011, amended Ch. 35 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 35, §§ 35-1—35-4, 35-21—35-28, 35-35, 35-36, 35-41—35-49, 35-66—35-87, 35-101—35-106, 35-116—35-120, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1956, §§ 20-1, 20-3—20-23, 20-26—20-39, 20-41, 20-43—20-47, 20-49—20-53; Code 1964, §§ 38-1, 38-2—38-23, 38-24—38-45, 38-47—38-51; and subsequent amendatory ordinances. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Charter reference— Vacation of streets in subdivisions, § 2.05; authority of city as to land development, § 2.06. 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-201 et seq.; building and development regulations generally, Ch. 9; land-disturbing activity and erosion and sediment control generally, § 13.1-1 et seq.; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 20; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 30; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 34; water supply, Ch. 39; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference— Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2240 et seq.; mandatory and permissible provisions of subdivision ordinances, §§ 15.2-2241, 15.2-2242; codification of subdivision ordinances, § 15.2-1433. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is: 
(A)  To ensure the orderly subdivision and development of land, as set forth in Code of Virginia § 15.2-2240 et seq. 
(B)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city. 
(C)  To ensure adequate provision of drainage and flood control, including impounding structures, impacts within dam break inundation zones, and other public purposes. 
(D)  To provide adequate and efficient coordination of streets within and contiguous to the subdivision with other existing or planned streets, water, sewage facilities and other public needs and facilities. 
(E)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and re-subdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land. 
(F)  To protect and improve the water quality of the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries. 
(G)  To provide proper ingress and egress through the dedication or reservation of rights-of-way or easements for public improvements within proposed subdivisions. 
(H)  To protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare from the adverse impacts associated with high levels of noise from flight operations at Langley Air Force Base and the potential for aircraft accidents associated with proximity to such military air facility operations. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-2. - Application and scope of chapter; definitions. 
(A)  The subdivision regulations contained in this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the city and shall apply to all subdivisions and re-subdivisions of land. 
(B)  This chapter bears no relation to any private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction, and the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction is not implied herein to any public official. When this chapter calls for more restrictive standards than are required by private contract, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(C)  For purposes of this chapter, except as may otherwise be defined herein, the definitions set forth in chapter 2 of the city zoning ordinance shall control the meaning of any terms or phrases used herein. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35-3. - Administration and enforcement of chapter. 
Pursuant to the authority granted to the city council by the Code of Virginia § 15.2-2255, the city council designates as its agent the city manager for purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of approving or disapproving subdivision plats and enforcing the provisions of this chapter that are not governed by the zoning ordinance or the public works design and construction standards in articles IV and V; except for approval of final subdivision plats which require the concurring approval of the director of public works or his designee, the city manager authorizes and designates the director of the department of community development or his designee to act as the "subdivision agent." The city manager also authorizes and designates the director of the department of public works or his designee to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter related to approval or disapproval of final subdivision plats together with the subdivision agent, approval or disapproval of development plans and design and construction standards and improvements and related requirements as set forth in articles IV and V of this chapter. Wherever the term director of public works is used throughout this chapter, the term shall include his authorized designees. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-4. - Compliance with chapter; penalty for violation. 
(A)  No person shall subdivide land without making and recording, as provided for in this chapter, a plat of such subdivision and without fully complying with the applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(B)  No such plat of any subdivision shall be recorded unless and until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the subdivision agent with the concurrence of the director of public works in writing thereon. 
(C)  No person shall sell or transfer any such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been duly recorded as provided herein, unless such subdivision was lawfully created prior to the adoption of a subdivision ordinance applicable thereto; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the recordation of the instrument by which such land is transferred or the passage of title as between the parties to the instrument. 
(D)  Except as otherwise set forth in chapter 12 of the zoning ordinance, no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision that violates the requirements of this chapter, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall be commenced, except in conformity with the requirements of this chapter. 
(E)  Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating the foregoing provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot or parcel of land so subdivided or transferred or sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transactions from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. In addition, the subdivision agent or the director of public works, as applicable, may pursue injunctive relief and other available remedies to prevent, restrain, abate or correct any violation of this chapter. Nothing contained in this chapter shall excuse compliance with other applicable ordinances or laws. Where local requirements are in conflict with mandatory state or federal requirements, the state or federal requirements shall prevail. 
(F)  No clerk of any court shall file or record a plat of a subdivision required by this chapter until such plat had been approved by the subdivision agent and the director of public works. The penalties provided by Code of Virginia § 17-59, shall apply to any failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35-5. - How chapter may be amended. 
This chapter may be amended in whole or in part by the city council. Any such amendment shall either originate with or be submitted to the planning commission for recommendation prior to adoption. If no recommendation is received from the planning commission after sixty (60) days from submission, the city council may act without a recommendation. No such amendment shall be adopted without a public hearing having been held by the city council and advertised pursuant to Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-6. - Changes, erasures and revisions. 
No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat, nor on accompanying data sheets, after the subdivision agent has approved in writing the plat or sheets, unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the subdivision agent. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-7. - Exceptions. 
(A)  Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, the city council may grant exceptions to the general provisions of this chapter not governed by chapters 9, 13.1, 33.2 and 41.1 of the City Code, the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines", the zoning ordinance or the public works design and construction standards, subject to the following: 
(1)  No such exception shall be granted unless the subdivider submits petition for an exception in writing at the time when the plat is filed for consideration. 
(2)  The petition shall be submitted to the subdivision agent for review by the planning division of the department of community development. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the petition and all of the facts relied upon by the subdivider. 
(3)  The subdivision agent and the planning division staff shall review the petition for completeness and may require such additional information as he or they may deem necessary to process the petition to the planning commission for its consideration. 
(4)  The burden shall be on the subdivider to demonstrate the need for the exception. 
(5)  The planning commission shall consider the petition in the manner of a rezoning petition at a public hearing which shall be advertised in accordance with Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204 and shall submit its recommendation to the city council to approve or deny the petition. The planning commission in considering such petitions may impose such reasonable conditions in addition to the provisions of this chapter as it may deem necessary in the public interest, and it shall make the proper findings as set forth in subsection (B) of this section. Notwithstanding the petition request, the planning commission may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(6)  Following the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall consider the petition at a public hearing advertised in accordance with Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204 and shall recommend approval or denial of the petition with recommended conditions and in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(B)  The city council shall not approve a petition for an exception unless it receives a recommendation from the planning commission and unless it finds that: 
(1)  Strict adherence to the ordinance requirement will cause undue hardship; 
(2)  The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to public safety, health, or welfare, and will not adversely affect the property of others; 
(3)  The facts upon which the petition request is based are unique to the property for which the relief is sought and are not applicable generally to other property so as not to make reasonably practical the formulation of general regulations to be adopted as an amendment to this chapter; 
(4)  No objection to the exception has been received in writing from city's fire chief, or any affected state, federal or local agency including, but not limited to Langley Air Force Base; 
(5)  The hardship is created by the unusual character of the property, including dimensions and topography, or by other extraordinary situation or condition of the property. Personal, financial, or self-inflicted hardship shall not be considered proper justification for an exception; and 
(6)  The relief sought will not in any manner vary the provisions of chapters 9, 13.1, 33.2 and 44.1 of the City Code, the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines", the zoning ordinance, comprehensive plan, or official map, except that those documents may be amended in the manner prescribed by law. 
(C)  If granted, such exception shall be specifically stated in writing as evidenced by a formal council resolution and filed with the preliminary subdivision plat and improvement plans for construction. A note shall be prominently placed on the final plat detailing any exception so granted. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0019, 9-10-14 )  
Sec. 35-8. - Appeals. 
In the event a plat for subdivision is disapproved by the subdivision agent or the city council and the subdivider contends that the disapproval was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, he may appeal such decision to the Hampton Circuit Court within sixty (60) days of written disapproval by the subdivision agent or the city council. No subdivider may pursue approval of an alternative plat while his appeal from the disapproval of the original plat is pending. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-9. - Subdivision classification. 
For purposes of this chapter, the term "subdivision" is the division of any parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for immediate or future transfer of ownership or building development. The term shall be construed to include all changes in lot lines, the creation of new lots involving any division of an existing lot or lots, or if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land, and when appropriate to context, the process of subdividing or the territory subdivided. The term "subdivider" means an individual, corporation, partnership or other entity owning any property to be subdivided. The terms "developer" and "subdivider" are used interchangeably throughout this chapter regardless of whether the subdivider or the developer is or is not the same person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-10. - Vacation of subdivision plat, lot or boundary line and boundary line adjustments. 
(A)  Any recorded plat, or part thereof, may be vacated as follows: 
(1)  Where no lot has been sold, the recorded plat or part thereof, may be vacated in accordance with the procedures set forth in Code of Virginia § 15.2-2271. 
(2)  In cases where any lot has been sold, the recorded plat or part thereof, may be vacated in accordance with the procedures set forth in Code of Virginia § 15.2-2272. 
(3)  No application to vacate a plat shall be processed unless accompanied by a fee as authorized by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2273. 
(4)  Any such vacation pursuant to section 35-10(A)(1) or (2) shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated and divest all public rights in, and to reinvest to the owners, proprietors and trustee, if any, the title to the streets, alleys, easements for public passage and other public areas laid out or described in such plat. 
(B)  Boundary lines may be vacated, relocated or altered pursuant to Code of Virginia § 15.2-2275 and subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The boundary line adjustment plat or vacation plat must be prepared by a certified professional engineer or a certified land surveyor authorized to do business in the state and submitted to the subdivision agent with the required fee; 
(2)  The adjustment or vacation does not result in the creation of irregularly shaped lots; 
(3)  The adjustment does not result in any new violations to the dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance; 
(4)  The adjustment or vacation does not involve the relocation or alteration of streets, alleys, easements for public passage, or other public areas; 
(5)  No easements or utility rights-of-way shall be relocated or altered without the express consent of all persons holding any interest therein; 
(6)  The boundary line adjustment or vacation plat shall comply with the provisions of article II of this chapter unless waived by the subdivision agent; and 
(7)  The adjustment, vacation or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots does not result in an increase of total number of lots and each resulting lot conforms to the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 )  
Sec. 35-11. - Fees. 
(A)  Preliminary plat review fees. At the time any preliminary subdivision plat is submitted for review, the following fees shall be submitted to the subdivision agent and payable to the City of Hampton: 
(1)  Two (2) lot subdivisions that do not require the installation of public improvements, boundary line adjustments or vacations: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(2)  All subdivisions (residential, non-residential, including townhouses, condominiums and mixed use) that do not require the installation of public improvements: Three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each lot shown on the preliminary plat. 
(3)  All subdivisions (residential, non-residential, including townhouses and mixed use) that require public improvements: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each lot shown on the preliminary plat. 
(4)  An additional fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be collected for any review after the first re-submission not to include resubmittals that are the result of substantial redesign due to additional state or federal agency comments. 
(B)  Final plat review fees for any submission that has already been approved as a preliminary subdivision plat. At the time the final subdivision plat is submitted for review, the following fees shall be submitted to the subdivision agent and payable to the City of Hampton: 
(1)  Two (2) lot subdivisions that do not require public improvements: No additional fee. 
(2)  Boundary line adjustments or vacations: No additional fee. 
(3)  All subdivisions (residential, non-residential, including townhouses, condominiums and mixed use) that do not require the installation of public improvements: No additional fee. 
(4)  All subdivisions (residential, non-residential, including townhouses and mixed use) that require public improvements: Two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each lot shown on the final plat. 
(5)  An additional fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be collected for any review after the first re-submission not to include resubmittals that are the result of substantial redesign due to additional state or federal agency comments. 
(C)  Subdivision plat review fees for any subdivision plat that has not been approved first as a preliminary subdivision plat. At the time the subdivision plat is submitted for review, the following fees shall be submitted to the subdivision agent and payable to the City of Hampton: 
(1)  Two (2) lot subdivisions that do not require public improvements, boundary line adjustments or vacations: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(2)  All subdivisions (residential, non-residential, including townhouses, condominiums and mixed use) that do not require the installation of public improvements: Three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each lot shown on the preliminary plat. 
(3)  All subdivisions (residential, non-residential, including townhouses and mixed use) that require public improvements: Seven hundred dollars ($700.00) plus seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each lot shown on the preliminary plat. 
(4)  An additional fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be collected for any review after the first re-submission not to include re-submittals that are the result of substantial redesign due to additional state or federal agency comments. 
(D)  Development plan fees. At the time development plans for improvements are submitted, the following fees shall be submitted to the subdivision agent and payable to the City of Hampton. 
(1)  Residential, including townhouses: Six hundred dollars ($600.00) plus eight dollars ($8.00) per lot shown on the construction plans. 
(2)  Non-residential subdivision, including mixed use: Eight hundred dollars ($800.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per lot shown on construction plans. 
(E)  Permit and inspection fees. At the time of installation of improvements, including vehicle entrances, permit and inspection fees shall be as generally provided for permits and inspections specified in section 35-105 of this chapter and in other ordinances of the city. For permits and inspections not elsewhere specified, fees shall be based on costs, as determined by the agency involved. For re-inspection made necessary (i) by failure to pass earlier inspection, (ii) because work is not ready by the requested inspection time, (iii) due to cancelation of an inspection after the inspector arrives; or (iv) failure to provide safe and sufficient access to allow for proper inspection, the re-inspection fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per re-inspection visit. All fees required by this chapter shall be payable to the City of Hampton within thirty (30) days from billing. Failure to pay within the period stipulated may result in a stop-work order issued by the department of public works or such other action as deemed warranted in the circumstances of the case. 
(F)  Subdivision exception fees. Any petition for an exception shall be accompanied by a fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) payable to the City of Hampton to cover the costs of processing the petition and publication of notice of public hearing. 
(G)  Plat vacation fees. Any application for the vacation of a plat or part thereof shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(H)  At the time separate easement or dedication deeds or plats are submitted a review fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per instrument to be reviewed, payable to the City of Hampton shall be required. 
(I)  If a subdivider, at any time during the subdivision review, submits a revised plat or development plan or portion thereof, files or makes a change to the plat or development plan under review not at the request of the subdivision agent or the director of public works as the case may be, such revision shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per sheet that is revised or changed payable to the City of Hampton. 
(J)  Prior to recordation of the final plat, the subdivider will pay to the city a sewage fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per unit for each lot in the subdivision section being served by the sewer. 
(K)  Recording fees for final subdivision plats, subdivision agreements and any other legal instrument required under this chapter for subdivisions, except for homeowners association documents shall be submitted to the subdivision agent at the time prescribed in this section or in this chapter and shall be made payable to the Clerk of the Hampton Circuit Court. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0017, 8-13-14 )  
Sec. 35-12. - Establishment of homeowners' or property owners' associations. 
Within any subdivision, including any mixed use subdivision, approved under this chapter in which an area is intended to be used in common for recreation and/or conservation, or other public or semipublic purposes, or where other improvements have been made in which operation and/or maintenance is the responsibility of the homeowners or property owners, no lot shall be approved, recorded, sold, or used within the development and no building permits shall be issued for any lot within the subdivision until appropriate documents in a form approved by the city attorney have been executed and duly recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Hampton Circuit Court. Such documents shall set forth the following: 
(A)  The nature of the permanent organization under which common ownership is to be established, including its purpose, and provisions establishing requirements for mandatory membership; 
(B)  How it shall be governed and administered; 
(C)  The provisions made for permanent care and maintenance of the common property or improvements, whether public or private, including bonds where required by the subdivision agent; 
(D)  The method of assessing the individual property for its share of the cost of adequately administering and maintaining and replacing such common property; and 
(E)  The extent of common interest held by the owner of each individual parcel in the tract held in common with others. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-13. - Master plan for phased subdivisions. 
For multiphased subdivisions, the subdivider shall submit to the subdivision agent a master plan for all phases of the proposed subdivision as part of the preliminary plat submittal under article II of this chapter. The purpose of such master plan is to permit the subdivision agent to advise the subdivider whether his plans are generally in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The subdivision agent, upon submission of any master plan, may study it and advise the subdivider where it appears that changes are appropriate. The subdivision agent may mark the master plan indicating appropriate changes. The subdivider shall return the master plan to the subdivision agent with each preliminary plat. The master plan shall, at a minimum, show the name, location and dimensions of all streets entering the property, adjacent to the property or terminating at the boundary of the property to be subdivided. It shall also show the location of all proposed streets, their category (e.g., arterial, collector, etc.) and any future extensions, lots, development phases, parks, playgrounds and other proposed uses of the land to be subdivided and their approximate dimensions and a conceptual layout of the water, sanitary sewer systems, and a stormwater management plan in accordance with the provisions of chapter 33.2 of the City Code. The master plan is not binding on the subdivider or the subdivision agent. Review of a master plan does not constitute preliminary plat approval or final subdivision approval. For multiphased subdivisions reviewed under this section, review of a master plan does not, in any way, guarantee approval of future subdivision phases. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 14-0019, 9-10-14 )  
Sec. 35-14. - Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Secs. 35-15—35-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PRELIMINARY PLAT—PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 35-20. - Preapplication conference and submission of conceptual plan. 
Before submitting any subdivision plat or development plans related to such proposed subdivision, the subdivider is advised to confer with the subdivision agent, the director of public works and such other city, state or federal agencies as he, the subdivision agent or the director of public works deems advisable concerning the general proposal. Such action does not require formal application or fees or formal filing of the plat or development plan and is not to be construed as application for approval of a plat or development plans in computing time limitations in relation thereto. Any comments made at a pre-application conference, whether oral or written, are guidance only and shall not be construed as or be deemed to be official subdivision plat review comments. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 )  
Sec. 35-21. - Mandatory and optional preliminary plats. 
(A)  Subdividers shall submit a preliminary plat for all subdivisions of more than fifty (50) lots, which shall comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  For subdivisions of fifty (50) lots or fewer, a preliminary subdivision plat may be submitted at the option of the subdivider. If the subdivider elects to submit a preliminary subdivision plat, the preliminary plat shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 14-0017, 8-13-14 )  
Sec. 35-22. - Who may prepare. 
The preliminary plat of a subdivision shall be on a black or blue line print and shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer or certified land surveyor authorized to do business in the state. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 )  
Sec. 35-23. - Contents. 
(A)  The preliminary plat of a subdivision shall comply with the standards of VA Code 42.1-82 and 17VAC15-60-10 through 17VAC15-60-70, the minimum standards and procedures for land boundary surveying practices as set forth in the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation APELSCIDLA Board regulation 18VAC10-20-370, the regulations of the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines", and the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards, and shall include a vicinity map, at a scale of one (1) inch to eight hundred (800) feet, which shall show the area for the proposed subdivision and all streets and water bodies that exist within the area of the vicinity map, scale and north arrow. Each lot in a subdivision shall be of sufficient size to permit development thereon, when all zoning setback areas, all areas listed in section 35-23(C) and any other areas required by law are deducted. 
(B)  The preliminary plat of the subdivision shall show the proposed layout of streets, lots, areas to be encumbered by stormwater management facilities as required by chapter 33.2 of the City Code, and other features in relation to existing topography. The preliminary plat shall have a horizontal scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch and clearly show the following: 
(1)  The subdivision name and location. The title of the subdivision shall be placed in the upper right hand corner, leaving a space six-tenths (0.6) of an inch wide and at least six (6) inches long between the border line and the name of the subdivision, the date, the scale, the designation of a section of the subdivision if applicable. 
(2)  (a)  Topographic information of a suitable scale shown as spot elevations or contour intervals. (This requirement applies only to the preliminary plat). 
(b)  Vertical control shall be based on North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88). 
(3)  The name and address of the record owner of the land proposed to be subdivided and the name of the subdivider; the source of title with deed book reference and the owner or contract purchaser of the subdivision and the name of the certified professional engineer or certified land surveyor who prepared the plat and the number of sheets. The certified professional engineer or certified land surveyor shall provide a certification to be signed by the certified professional engineer or certified land surveyor upon submission of a final plat setting forth the source of title of the owner of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one (1) source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon such plat. 
(4)  The location and names of adjoining subdivisions and name of the owners of adjoining parcels of land, establishing the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided. 
(5)  The right-of-way center line location, right-of-way width and name of all existing or platted streets within or adjacent to the subdivision; the center line location, right-of-way width and names of all proposed streets within the proposed subdivision and the location of watercourses, all utilities and railroad lines within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
(6)  The boundaries of all property to be dedicated for public use and of all property to be reserved by covenant in deeds for the common use of the occupants or owners of lots in the subdivision, or otherwise reserved either as passive or active recreation space or natural open space or conservation area, with a statement of the purpose for which the covenant or reservation is made or such use is restricted or limited. 
(7)  The layout, lot lines, lot numbers and block letters and approximate dimensions of proposed lots. All lots shall be numbered with consecutive Arabic numerals in each block and all blocks shall be lettered in consecutive alphabetical order. 
(8)  Boundary lines of any nontidal wetlands as confirmed in writing by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (e-mail or facsimile from the agency followed by original letter from the agency is acceptable). 
(9)  Any grave, object or structure marking a place of burial within the proposed subdivision shall be clearly designated. 
(10)  Where any part of the land proposed for subdivision lies in a mapped dam break inundation zone such fact shall be delineated on the plat. 
(11)  The location of front yard setback lines, unless controlled by the zoning ordinance and any notations referring to any variances granted by the board of zoning appeals, if applicable. 
(12)  Where floodplains lie within a subdivision, the preliminary plat shall delineate the boundaries of all floodways, flood fringes, approximated floodplains, and coastal high hazard areas. Flood elevations for any land located within a special flood hazard area in accordance with the provisions of section 9-31 of the zoning ordinance and the city flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
(13)  If streets are to be private, the subdivision plat and all deeds conveying lots in the subdivision shall contain a statement advising that the streets in the subdivision are private and shall not be maintained by VDOT or the city. Grantors of any subdivision lot to which such statement applies shall include the statement on each deed of conveyance thereof. In the event the streets are subsequently proposed to be dedicated to the city as public streets, the property owners served shall, at no cost to either the city or VDOT, cause the streets to meet the prevailing minimum standards governing VDOT's acceptance of the streets as part of the secondary system of state highways. 
(14)  A method of sewage disposal. 
(15)  The soils characteristics of the land being subdivided. 
(16)  An oblong space one (1) inch by four (4) inches shall be provided in the upper right hand corner below the title block for the signature of the subdivision agent. The final plat will require an additional signature line for the director of public works or his designee. 
(17)  The location, size, alignment or arrangement of all easements provided, with a statement of any restrictions or limitation placed on such use and a designation if the easement is public or private. 
(18)  If the director of public works approves roadside ditches/open drainage system in lieu of piped drainage systems or the elimination of sidewalks, a notation on the plat, which advises all potential purchaser that the city will not be responsible for providing and/ or bearing the costs of installation of sidewalks, curbs and gutters if and when owners of lots in the subdivision desire a piped drainage system, shall be required. 
(C)  The preliminary plat of a subdivision within O-CBP shall comply with all applicable provisions of chapter 9, article II of the zoning ordinance and shall include an environmental site assessment and stormwater management plan as an addendum to the plat or shown on the subdivision plat. The subdivision plat shall also contain a notation thereon to state that land use and development activities or clearing of vegetation within the RPA, the RMA and any IDA are regulated pursuant to chapter 9, article II of the zoning ordinance, and that city confirmation of a site specific CBPD delineation is required prior to the issuance of land use or development permits. Additionally, the subdivision plat shall contain reference to any RPA buffer or IDA encroachment or exception to the O-CBP regulations for development and redevelopment authorized by the City of Hampton. 
(D)  The preliminary plat of a subdivision containing any land located in an aircraft accident potential zone as designated on the geometric specifications and height limitations map and/or in noise zone greater than 75 dB Ldn, 70—75 dB Ldn, or 65—70 dB Ldn as designated on the city zoning map, shall delineate the boundaries of such zones and such plat shall state as follows: "THIS SITE LIES WITHIN AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONE AND/OR NOISE ZONE(S) AND MAY BE SUBJECT TO AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS AND/OR ABOVE AVERAGE NOISE LEVELS DUE TO ITS PROXIMITY TO AIRPORT OPERATIONS. NOISE ATTENUATION MEASURES FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION MAY BE REQUIRED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE AIRPORT NOISE ATTENUATION AND SAFETY ORDINANCE AND HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS HAVE BEEN IMPOSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE HAMPTON CITY ZONING ORDINANCE." 
(E)  The preliminary plat of a subdivision including townhouse and condominium subdivisions shall list any proffers or special use permit conditions that affect the property. If exceptions have been granted by the city council or variances have been granted by the board of zoning appeals, the plat shall include a note detailing any exception or variance so granted. 
(F)  Every plat, or deed of dedication to which the plat is attached, shall contain, in addition to the certified professional engineer's or certified land surveyor's certification, a statement as follows: "The platting or dedication of the following described land (here insert a correct description of the land subdivided) is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors and trustees, if any." The statement shall be signed by such persons and duly acknowledged before some office authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds before approval of the final plat. All final prints and transparent copies shall contain such signatures. 
(1)  Sample notary for owner(s): 
STATE OF VIRGINIA 
CITY OF HAMPTON, TO WIT: 
I ___________, A NOTARY FOR THE CITY AND STATE AFORESAID, DO HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ___________, (Owner/President/Managing Member [choose one] of ___________, WHOSE NAME IS SIGNED TO THE FOREGOING WRITING HAS ACKNOWLEDGED THE SAME BEFORE ME IN MY CITY AND STATE AFORESAID. HE/SHE IS ? PERSONALLY KNOWN TO ME 
OR ? HAS PRODUCED ___________ AS IDENTIFICATION. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS _____ DAY OF _______, 20___. 
___________ 

NOTARY PUBLIC 
REGISTRATION NUMBER: ___________ 
MY COMMISSION EXPIRES: ___________ 
Signature of Trustee(s) under Deed of Trust [if property is encumbered by a mortgage] or any form of trust & acknowledgment of Notary with signature and seal with Registration Number. 
(2)  Sample notary for trustees: (trustees for the lender or other trusts): 
STATE OF VIRGINIA 
CITY OF HAMPTON, TO WIT: 
I ___________, A NOTARY FOR THE CITY AND STATE AFORESAID, DO HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ___________, AND ___________ TRUSTEE(S), WHOSE NAME(S) IS/ARE SIGNED TO THE FOREGOING WRITING HAS/HAVE ACKNOWLEDGED THE SAME BEFORE ME IN MY CITY AND STATE AFORESAID. HE/SHE/THEY ? IS/ARE PERSONALLY KNOWN TO ME OR ? HAS/HAVE PRODUCED ___________ AS IDENTIFICATION. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS _____ DAY OF _______, 20___. 
___________ 

NOTARY PUBLIC 
REGISTRATION NUMBER: ___________ 
MY COMMISSION EXPIRES: ___________ 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0019, 9-10-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35-23.1. - Same—Special provisions. 
(A)  If during the pre-application conference as described in section 35-20, it is determined that portions of the requirements set forth in section 35-23 above are unnecessary or inapplicable in the particular case because it is (i) a subdivision that will result in the creation of not more than two (2) lots abutting an existing public road either accepted by the city or within the Virginia Department of Transportation system of primary or secondary highways and where the dedication of streets, public easements, or the construction or installation of any public or private infrastructure, facilities or utilities(except connection to existing utilities from the proposed principal structure) is not involved; or (ii) a boundary line adjustment or vacation, such requirements may be waived in the case without the necessity of a formal exception process as set forth in section 35-7; provided however, that any such waiver shall be in writing with the reasons therefore, signed by the subdivision agent and director of public works, and shall become part of the record on the application. 
(B)  At the time of submission of preliminary plats and related data, or at any time thereafter, appropriate officers of the city may request additional information required in the circumstances of the particular case. Time elapsing between the request and provision of the information shall be added to the general time limitation of processing. 
(C)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit submittal of preliminary plats and data in the form required for final plats and data for use in both preliminary and final review. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-24. - Submission of copies and application for approval. 
Twelve (12) twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch copies and a digital version acceptable to the subdivision agent of the preliminary plat required by this article and the required fee pursuant to section 35-11 shall be submitted to the subdivision agent in the land development services division of the department of community development, with written application for approval. The subdivision agent has the discretion to increase or decrease the number of copies and the size of the copies required based on the size of the subdivision or need for inter-agency coordination. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-24.1. - Coordination with other agencies and private utilities. 
(A)  The subdivision agent shall require evidence that the appropriate federal and state agencies, to include at a minimum the Army Corps of Engineers, Langley Air Force Base (if applicable) and the Virginia Water Control Board, have been notified of the submission of a preliminary subdivision plat. Such notification shall include a property description and a request that the city be informed of any jurisdictional determinations relative to such property. 
(B)  The preliminary plat may be processed concurrently with a rezoning or plan amendment request. 
(C)  The subdivision agent shall require evidence that Hampton Roads Sanitation District (if applicable) and appropriate private utilities to include at minimum Virginia Natural Gas, Dominion Virginia Power, Verizon, Newport News Waterworks, Cox Communications, and any other private utility as required by the city have been notified of the submission of a subdivision plat. Such notification shall include a request that the city be informed of any conditions or requirements to be included in the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-25. - Distribution of copies. 
The subdivision agent shall distribute the copies of the preliminary plat application to any city, state or federal agencies or entities as necessary for complete review and conformity with the provisions of the this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-26. - Review of preliminary plat—Approval or disapproval generally. 
(A)  A complete preliminary subdivision plat application shall be reviewed as follows: 
(1)  Within sixty (60) days of their official submission, the preliminary plat and other related materials shall be reviewed by the subdivision agent and other appropriate agencies of the city for conformity to this chapter and other applicable regulations, and to allow any discussions with the subdivider as to changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made. 
(2)  However, in cases where approval of a feature or features of the plat by a state agency or public authority authorized by state law is necessary, the subdivision agent shall forward the preliminary subdivision plat to the appropriate state agency or authority for review within ten (10) business days of receipt of such preliminary subdivision plat. Such state agency or public authority shall conduct its review within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the preliminary plat upon first submission and within forty-five (45) days for any proposed plat that has been previously disapproved. The subdivision agent shall act upon a preliminary subdivision plat within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of approvals from all state agencies. 
(3)  The subdivision agent shall not be required to approve a preliminary subdivision plat in less than sixty (60) days from the date of its original submission to the subdivision agent and all actions on preliminary subdivision plats shall be completed by the subdivision agent and, if necessary, state agencies, within a total of ninety (90) days of submission to the subdivision agent. 
(4)  The subdivision agent shall act upon the preliminary plat and related materials as submitted, as modified by the state agency or authority or as modified by the subdivider, and if approved shall certify its approval in writing and shall include the required findings as set forth in section 35-26.1, or if disapproved, shall indicate its disapproval and the reasons therefor by referencing in writing, specific adopted ordinances, regulations and policies. Modifications or corrections that would permit approval shall also be identified. 
(5)  In the review of a resubmitted plat that has been previously disapproved the subdivision agent shall consider only the deficiencies he had identified in the review of the initial submission of the plat that have not been corrected in such resubmission and any deficiencies that arise as a result of the corrections made to address deficiencies identified in the initial submission. In the review of a resubmission of a plat, the subdivision agent shall identify all deficiencies with the preliminary plat that caused the disapproval by reference to specific duly adopted ordinances, regulations or policies and shall identify modifications or corrections that will permit approval of the plat. Upon the second resubmission of such disapproved plat, the subdivision agent's review shall be limited solely to the previously identified deficiencies that caused his disapproval. The subdivision agent shall act on any plat that he has previously disapproved within forty-five (45) days after the plat has been modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval. Notwithstanding the approval of any preliminary plat, any deficiency in any plat, that if left uncorrected, would violate local, state or federal law or regulations, mandatory VDOT engineering and safety requirements, and other mandatory engineering and safety requirements, shall not be considered, treated or deemed as having been approved by the subdivision agent. Should any resubmission include a material revision of infrastructure or physical improvements from the earlier submission or if a material revision in the resubmission creates a new required review by a state agency or public authority authorized by state law, then the subdivision agent's review shall not be limited to only the previously identified deficiencies identified in the prior submittals and may consider deficiencies initially appearing in the resubmission because of such material revision. 
(B)  The action of the subdivision agent shall be noted on all copies of the preliminary plats retained in the record, referenced and in the case of disapproval, attached to any changes or conditions determined. One such copy shall be returned to the subdivider, and others retained as required for records or further action of the subdivision agent or other affected agencies of the city and the state. 
(C)  If the subdivision agent fails to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within the prescribed period of time set forth herein, the subdivider may, after ten (10) days' written notice to the subdivision agent, petition the Hampton Circuit Court to enter such order as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the plat. No alternative subdivision plat may be pursued for approval by the subdivision agent while a subdivider's proceeding in the Hampton Circuit Court is pending. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-26.1. - Required findings. 
In approving a preliminary plat, the subdivision agent shall make each of the following findings in writing which findings shall be made part of the file on record: 
(A)  The proposed development, including its lot sizes, density, access and circulation, and any required buffer areas are consistent with the zoning ordinance and compatible with the existing and/or permissible future use of adjacent property. 
(B)  Required public facilities are adequate (or adequate subject to construction and installation of upgrades by the subdivider at the subdivider's cost) to serve the project under consideration and will provide access to adjoining land in a manner that will allow development of those adjoining lands in accord with this chapter. Street system adequacy shall be based on the street system's ability to safely accommodate trips from existing and planned land uses on the existing and proposed street system without creating safety hazards, generating auto stacking that blocks driveways or intersections, or disrupting traffic flow on any adjacent street. 
(C)  The drainage, erosion, and construction in the area can be handled through normal engineering and construction practices. 
(D)  The lot, block, and street layout are consistent with the subdivision design standards contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-27. - Effect of preliminary plat approval. 
(A)  Approval of a preliminary plat of a subdivision shall not constitute approval of the final plat. It shall be deemed as an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. 
(B)  Once a preliminary subdivision plat is approved, it shall be valid for a period of five (5) years, provided the subdivider (i) submits a final subdivision plat for all or a portion of the property within one (1) year of such approval or such longer period as may be prescribed and (ii) thereafter diligently pursues approval of the final subdivision plat. Diligent pursuit of approval means that the subdivider has incurred extensive obligations or substantial expenses relating to the submitted final subdivision plat or modifications thereto. However, no sooner than three (3) years following such preliminary subdivision plat approval, and upon ninety (90) days' written notice by certified mail to the subdivider, the subdivision agent may revoke such approval upon a specific finding of facts that the subdivider has not diligently pursued approval of the final subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 14-0017, 8-13-14 )  
Secs. 35-28—35-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FINAL PLAT 
 
Sec. 35-41. - When required; submission to subdivision agent. 
(A)  Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, preparation of a final plat is required whenever there is any proposal for subdividing land in the City of Hampton. 
(B)  The final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be prepared as specified in this article and submitted to the subdivision agent. Where provision has been made for phased development in connection with approval of the preliminary plat, including time limitations, the subdivider may submit a final plat for only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, if such portion conforms to all requirements of this chapter. 
(C)  For subdivisions of fifty (50) lots or fewer where a subdivider has elected not to submit a preliminary subdivision plat, the terms "final plat of a subdivision," "final plat," and "final subdivision plat" used interchangeably in this chapter shall be read to refer to the single subdivision plat required for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 14-0017, 8-13-14 )  
Sec. 35-42. - To be accompanied by review fee, required legal instruments and cost of recordation, etc. 
(A)  There shall be submitted to the subdivision agent the appropriate review fee as set forth in section 35-11 along with a check payable to the Clerk of the Hampton Circuit Court for costs of recordation of the final plat. 
(B)  Legal instruments, in writing of sufficient legal form for recordation in the Hampton Circuit Court Clerk's Office, as may be required by this chapter or the subdivision agent shall accompany the final plat. A check payable to the Clerk of the Hampton Circuit Court, for costs of recordation of any such instruments, shall accompany the final plat when submitted for approval. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-43. - Contents of final plat and conformance with preliminary plat. 
(A)  For any subdivision plat which has first been approved as a preliminary subdivision plat, the final plat of a subdivision shall conform to the preliminary plat, as approved under the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  For subdivisions of fifty (50) lots or fewer where the subdivider has elected not to submit a preliminary subdivision plat, the final subdivision plat shall comply with sections 35-22—35-25 and 35-26.1 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 14-0017, 8-13-14 )  
Sec. 35-44. - Preparation generally. 
The final plat of a subdivision to be recorded shall be drawn on black or blue line print and transparent medium (mylar), to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch or larger, with letters and figures not less than one-tenth (0.10) of an inch in height on a sheet or sheets eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches, and shall include a one-quarter (0.25) inch border on the top, bottom and right side, with a one and one-half (1½) inch border on the left side of the eighteen-inch side. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-45. - Contents. 
A final subdivision plat submitted under this article shall contain the following: 
(A)  All of the requirements set forth in article II section 35-23 unless waived by the subdivision agent and director of public works in accordance with section 35-23.1. 
(B)  The name of the subdivision, with designation of section if only a portion of the approved preliminary plat is being developed, the date, the scale, the name of the certified professional engineer or certified land surveyor who prepared the plat and the number of sheets. 
(C)  The signature of the certified professional engineer or certified land surveyor on the certification required under section 35-23(B)(3) of this chapter. 
(D)  The signatures of the owner(s) and trustees, if any, properly acknowledged as set forth in section 35-23(F) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-45.1. - Reserved.  
Sec. 35-45.2. - Reserved.  
Sec. 35-46. - Approval or disapproval. 
(A)  The final plat of a subdivision shall be approved or disapproved by the subdivision agent with the concurrence of the director of public works within the time limitations set forth in section 35-26 of this chapter or shorter time period as may determined by the subdivision agent and the director of public works. The review period begins as of the date of submission of the final plat and related data. 
(B)  In the review of a resubmitted final plat that has been previously disapproved the subdivision agent and the director of public works shall consider only the deficiencies they had identified in their review of the initial submission of the plat that have not been corrected in such resubmission and any deficiencies that arise as a result of the corrections made to address deficiencies identified in the initial submission. In the review of a resubmission of a final plat, the subdivision agent and the director of public works shall identify all deficiencies with the plat that caused the disapproval by reference to specific duly adopted ordinances, regulations or policies and shall identify modifications or corrections that will permit approval of the final plat. Upon the second resubmission of such disapproved plat, the subdivision agent and director of public works' review shall be limited solely to the previously identified deficiencies that caused their disapproval. The subdivision agent and director of public works shall act on any plat that they have previously disapproved within forty-five (45) days after the plat has been modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval. The failure of the subdivision agent and the director of public works to approve or disapprove a resubmitted plat within the time periods required by this section shall cause the plat to be deemed approved. Notwithstanding the approval or deemed approval of the plat, any deficiency in the plat, that if left uncorrected, would violate local, state or federal law or regulations, mandatory VDOT engineering and safety requirements, and other mandatory engineering and safety requirements, shall not be considered, treated or deemed as having been approved by the subdivision agent. Should any resubmission include a material revision of infrastructure or physical improvements from the earlier submission or if a material revision in the resubmission creates a new required review by a state agency or public authority authorized by state law, then the subdivision agent and director of public works' review shall not be limited to only the previously identified deficiencies identified in the prior submittals and may consider deficiencies initially appearing in the resubmission because of such material revision. 
(C)  No final plat shall be approved by the subdivision agent and the director of public works unless the subdivider complies in all respects with the provisions of this chapter. 
(D)  The overall uses and densities, external buffers, and number of access points shall comply with any approved preliminary plat and/or engineering plan, including any conditions attached thereto. 
(E)  In addition to the findings set forth in this chapter, the subdivision agent and the director of public works shall not approve a final plat unless and until satisfactory evidence is filed that the final plat is in a form acceptable for recording with the clerk of the circuit court, that all final plats have been signed by the subdivider and the final plats and development plans have been approved by the director of public works. The subdivider will also be required to submit evidence of payment of all design and construction costs for improvements or appropriate performance surety as set forth in section 35-108. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-47. - Recordation and indexing. 
(A)  When a final subdivision plat under this article has been executed, acknowledged and approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the subdivision agent shall deliver same to the director of public works who shall have the same filed and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Hampton Circuit Court where deeds are admitted to record for the lands contained in the plat, and indexed in the general index of deeds under the names of the owners of lands signing the statement provided for in paragraph (F) of section 35-23 and under the name of the subdivision. No final plat shall be recorded unless and until it shall have been approved by the subdivision agent with the concurrence of the director of public works or the city council, as applicable. 
(B)  The recordation of such plat shall operate to transfer, in fee simple, to the city, such portion of the premises platted as is on such plat set apart for streets, alleys, public easements or other public use and to create a public right of passage over the same; but nothing contained in this article shall affect the right of a subdivider of land heretofore validly reserved. 
(C)  Approved final plats shall be recorded in the Clerk's Office of the Hampton Circuit Court within one hundred eighty (180) days after approval thereof; otherwise such approval shall become null and void unless appropriate and timely extensions are granted by the subdivision agent with the concurrence of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-48. - Distribution of copies after recordation. 
After the recordation of a final subdivision plat has been accomplished, the director of public works shall deliver to the subdivider a copy thereof and distribute the remaining copies among the city and state agencies as deemed necessary.  
Sec. 35-49. - Article creates no city obligation as to improvements prior to acceptance thereof by city. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as creating an obligation upon the city to pay for grading or paving, or for sidewalks, sewers, curb and gutter or other improvement or construction, or for the maintenance and care thereof until duly accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-50. - Effect of final plat approval. 
(A)  An approved final subdivision plat which has been recorded shall be valid for a period of not less than five (5) years from the date of approval thereof or for such longer period as the subdivision agent may, at the time of approval, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development. 
(B)  Phasing. A subdivider may record a section of a final subdivision plat approved by the city pursuant to this chapter if the subdivider furnishes to the subdivision agent the required agreements and assurances in accordance with section 35-108 of this chapter for the estimated cost of the facilities to be dedicated within said section for public use and maintained by the city. The subdivider shall have the right to record the remaining sections shown on the subdivision plat for a period of five (5) years from the date of the last recorded plat of subdivision for the property. The five-year period of validity shall extend from the date of the last recorded plat. Such right shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the Code of Virginia and subject to engineering and construction standards and the zoning ordinance requirements in effect at the time that each remaining section is recorded. 
(C)  Extension of validity. Upon written application of the subdivider filed prior to expiration of a recorded final subdivision plat, the subdivision agent, with the concurrence of the director of public works, may grant one (1) or more extensions of such approval for additional periods as the subdivision agent and director of public works may, at the time the extension is granted, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development, the laws, ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of the request for an extension. 
( Ord. No. 14-0017, 8-13-14 )  
Secs. 35-51—35-64. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 35-65. - Public works design and construction standards. 
The director of public works shall prepare minimum specifications, design and construction standards to be made available to all subdividers or their surveyors or engineers for utilities, streets, street signs, curbs, gutters, alleys, sidewalks, and storm drainage. The design and construction of all streets (whether such street is proposed to be public or to intended to be private), street signs, curbs, gutters, alleys, sidewalks and drainage shall comply with the latest edition of the "public works design and construction standards." Except as otherwise set forth in this article, the director of public works may modify the design and construction standards in order to preserve noteworthy features or otherwise enhance the amenity of neighborhoods only upon findings that the public purposes of the design and construction standards would be met to at least an equivalent degree by such modification and in the case of streets, such modifications have the concurrence of the fire chief. Where such modification is granted the director of public works shall attach such conditions in the form of notations in the development plans and/or the final subdivision plat as deemed necessary to protect the general public interest or the character of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-66. - Drainage generally. 
All drainage systems shall be constructed and designed in conformance with the applicable provisions of the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. Easements for all drainage shall be dedicated to the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-67. - Stormwater drainage system. 
The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a stormwater drainage system, as approved by the director of public works, adequate to serve the area of the subdivision and the contributing drainage area thereto, in accordance with design standards and specifications of chapter 33.2 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0019, 9-10-14 )  
Sec. 35-68. - Subdivision of land subject to flooding. 
No lot, tract or parcel of land, or any part thereof, subject to flooding shall be divided or subdivided for the use of buildings or structures erected or to be erected for dwelling or residential purposes on the portion of the land subject to flooding, unless corrected to the satisfaction of the director of public works and in accordance with chapter 9 article IV of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35-69. - Size of blocks. 
The width of blocks in a subdivision shall generally provide for two (2) tiers of lots. Blocks shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length, except that, wherever the topography, size of property, waterways, and general characteristics of the area to be platted requires blocks of more than one thousand (1,000) feet in length, such reason shall be listed and supported by the subdivision design and approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-70. - Monuments. 
Monuments shall be installed in all subdivisions at all block corners, angle points and radial points along streets or boundary lines. The exact location shall be approved by the director of public works. The monuments shall be either an iron rod a minimum of five-eights ( 5/8 ) inches in diameter and a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in length or an iron pipe a minimum of three-quarters (¾) inches in diameter and a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in length. The replacement of any monuments removed or destroyed during the development of the subdivision shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-71. - Lots generally. 
(A)  Except as provided in subsection (C), all lots in a subdivision shall front on a dedicated public street and lots for residential purposes shall have a minimum area and frontage as required by the zoning ordinance, and the lot shall be configured such that the minimum frontage, or an amount greater is provided at the front building line or the proposed right-of-way line; provided, that where an individual sewage disposal system is to be used for disposal of household and human wastes, the lot area shall contain a minimum width of seventy-five (75) feet at the minimum front building setback line in all instances. The minimum lot frontage requirement shall be identical to the minimum lot width standards; except, that on curving streets and turnarounds areas of culs-de-sac, the required lot frontage may be reduced by no greater than thirty (30) percent, as approved by the subdivision agent, provided the minimum lot width requirement is complied with at the minimum front building setback line. 
(B)  Where lots in a subdivision recorded prior to the adoption of this paragraph have a frontage on a platted street, less than forty (40) feet or a mean width less than forty (40) feet, then such subdivision may be allowed to be resubdivided as prescribed by law having lots that meet at least eighty (80) percent of the minimum frontage and area requirements of the district in which the lots are located. This shall not exclude lots having a mean width of more than forty (40) feet from being resubdivided, if the widths of such resubdivided lots are at least eighty (80) percent of the required frontage. Resubdivided lots shall front on an improved street acceptable to the city. 
(C)  Lots in any subdivision established for the location of a manufactured home park, and fee-simple townhouse developments pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended, or in any commercial, business, or industrial subdivision may be permitted on private streets provided such streets are constructed and maintained in accordance with the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. All zoning ordinance and City Code requirements applicable to public rights-of-way shall also apply to these lots which have frontage on private streets. 
(D)  Remnants of lots not meeting minimum lot requirements shall not generally be created by the subdividing of a tract. All such remnants shall be added to adjacent lots or, as approved by the subdivision agent, identified as common open space or natural open space with a notation that such remnant is unbuildable. 
(E)  Where residential lots abut, arterial, or collector streets the street frontage shall be shown with a no-ingress-egress easement with vehicular access guaranteed the site only through a residential street unless waived by the director of public works. 
(F)  No lot shall be recorded for residential or other use unless the land is suitable for the use permitted by the zoning ordinance and intended for the land. Among other considerations, suitability shall include freedom from extraordinary flooding or storm hazard and adverse soil and ground water conditions. 
(G)  If highly erodible soils are existing, as determined by the subdivision agent on any lot within or adjacent to floodplains, then the plat creating such lot shall contain a statement as follows: "Due to the high erodibility of the soils existing within or adjacent to floodplains, removal of existing vegetation or alteration of existing contours may accelerate erosion and may require additional permits from the City of Hampton or other governmental agencies". For purposes of this article, highly erodible soils are those soils on slopes seaward of the point at which the slope of the ground changes from less than six (6) percent to greater than six (6) percent and the toe of the slope is located within one hundred (100) feet of tidal wetlands, nontidal wetlands or tidal shores. 
(H)  Irregular or non-rectangular lot patterns are generally prohibited. However if the subdivider can justify the establishment of an irregular or non-rectangular lot pattern (i) due to exceptional physical or topographical circumstances and conditions affecting the overall parcel; and (ii) demonstrate that the proposed irregular or nonrectangular lot pattern will not adversely affect the long-term viability and marketability of the lot and other lots in the area, when considering use, re-use, or redevelopment of buildings and sites, the subdivision agent may approve such an irregular lot or lot pattern. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to the street on which the lot faces, radial to curves of the street, or radial to the cul-de-sac turn-around. 
(I)  The shape and orientation of lots and the provided buildable area shall be appropriate for the type of development proposed thereon and compatible with those in the immediate vicinity of the subdivision. 
(J)  Corner lots for residential use shall be platted ten (10) feet wider than interior lots, if necessary, to permit appropriate building setbacks on both streets. 
(K)  The clustering of single-family dwellings and preservation of open space shall comply with the requirements of the zoning ordinance for the zoning district in which the lots are located. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-72. - Utilities. 
All utilities, including, but not limited to wires, cables, pipes, fiber optics, conduits and accessory equipment for electric, telephone, internet, cable television, gas, steam, petroleum, water, sewer or similar services shall be installed and located in accordance with the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-73. - Design, layout and dimensions of commercial lots. 
The design, layout and dimensions of lots, tracts and properties in subdivisions reserved or planned for business and commercial purposes shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking and service facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated and shall be in compliance with applicable provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-74. - Streets generally. 
(A)  Streets, whether public or intended to be private, in subdivisions shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. There shall be no private streets permitted in any subdivision except as otherwise set forth in the city zoning ordinance or this chapter, or as otherwise approved by the director of public works with the concurrence of the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-75. - Reserved.  
Sec. 35-76. - Street lights. 
Street lights shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. Street light fixture type, location and spacing shall comply with the latest edition of the "City of Hampton Outdoor Lighting Policy and Procedures Manual". 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-77. - Street signs. 
In all subdivisions, street signs shall be paid for by the subdivider in advance and shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the provisions of the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-78. - Curbs, gutters and sidewalks. 
Curbs and gutters and sidewalks shall be provided for all streets within a subdivision except as otherwise provided in the public works design and construction standards. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-79. - Sewage disposal system. 
(A)  Every subdivision shall be provided with a sanitary sewer system or an approved system for sewage disposal as provided for in governing provisions of this Code or other ordinances or resolutions. All publicly serviced systems provided by the subdivider shall be offered for dedication to the city at no cost to the city, upon completion. The sanitary sewer system shall include, but shall not be limited to, the necessary force mains, sewer mains, laterals, lines, pipes, pumping stations and other facilities needed to service the various lots of the proposed subdivision. 
(B)  Developers and/or subdividers shall install gravity sanitary sewers incidental to and in subdivisions in accordance with applicable city and state regulations, standards, specifications and plans approved by the director of public works. All warranties shall be in compliance with section 35-108. Before construction is commenced, all plans and specifications must be reviewed by and have the approval of the director of the department of public works. The developer and/or subdivider shall notify the city prior to starting of construction so that inspection may be provided. Any work covered prior to inspection may be required to be uncovered at the developer's and/or subdivider's expense. All construction shall be in accordance with approved plans. No changes shall be made in approved plans without further approval by the director of the department of public works. Upon final approval of the system, the city will notify the developer and/or subdivider in writing when the city will receive sewage originating in the area and will specify the date upon which the developer and/or subdivider may discharge sewage into the city system. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-80. - Water supply. 
Every subdivision shall be provided by the subdivider with a complete potable water supply system conforming with the city's policy thereon and approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-81. - Fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be located and installed by the subdivider in all subdivisions as directed by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-82. - Landscaping. 
(A)  All landscaping required to be installed, including but not limited to the location of street trees in all public rights-of-way, the provision of vegetative buffers for double frontage lots and properties zoned SPI-CBPD, and the selection and spacing thereof shall comply with the regulations in the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" maintained by the department of community development, development services center. Planting requirements for all landscaping may be modified by the subdivision agent to address concerns including, but not limited to: providing for a vegetative buffer adjacent to an incongruent use, revegetating an RPA or IDA buffer or in conformance with good planning practices in compliance with any applicable provisions of the City Code or the zoning ordinance. 
(B)  This section shall apply to any subdivision plat filed subsequent to the 15th day of August, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 )  
Sec. 35-83. - Lands for public acquisition. 
Every subdivider and/or developer shall make available for public acquisition such lands and access thereto in the area to be subdivided as are designated by the comprehensive plan for parks, playgrounds, public buildings and other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-84. - Easements for utilities and drainage. 
Easements for utilities and drainage in subdivisions may be required and, when required, such easements shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. Where the easement is located along a lot line, one-half (½) of the width of the easement, if for open drainage, shall be added to the minimum lot width requirements. The director of public works may require a statement on the preliminary plat indicating that no permanent structures (including fences) may be placed in an open drainage easement. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-85. - Easements along watercourses. 
Wherever a subdivision is traversed by a way or place whose origin is the result of the forces of nature, having a bed, sides or banks through which water flows continuously or intermittently in a particular direction, and whenever a subdivision is traversed by any other way, place or device installed to aid natural drainage and which does not substantially change the course or direction of the flow of water, there shall be provided an easement conforming substantially with the boundaries of such watercourse and of such width as may be necessary for drainage utilities at this location. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-86. - Development in the resource protection area; buffer area. 
There shall be no improvements or development allowed in the resource protection area except as permitted pursuant to chapter 9, article II of the Hampton City Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Secs. 35-87—35-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT PLANS—REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES FOR PERMITTING AND PERFORMANCE ASSURANCES 
 
Sec. 35-101. - Development plans required. 
(A)  For all proposed subdivisions requiring construction and installation of public facilities, before a final subdivision plat may be approved the subdivider shall prepare development plans to install infrastructure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter at the subdivider's expense. The subdivider shall furnish to the director of public works a complete copy of the specifications for the construction of physical improvements to be installed, unless recognized standard specifications are used, in which case the subdivider shall certify to the director of public works, by reference, the specifications to be used. Otherwise, the design and construction of all streets, street signs, curbs, gutter, alleys, sidewalks and drainage shall comply with the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. 
(B)  For any proposed subdivision located wholly or partially within a Chesapeake Bay Preservation District, the subdivider shall provide copies of wetlands permits or approval letters from the Hampton Wetlands Board, the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for any improvements or alterations in wetlands. The director of public works shall not approve the development plans for the subdivision until these items have been provided. Final subdivision plat approval does not absolve the subdivider from any other federal, state or local permit requirements. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 14-0017, 8-13-14 )  
Sec. 35-102. - Who may prepare. 
The development plans required by this article shall be prepared by a duly licensed professional engineer or a duly licensed land surveyor authorized to do business in the State of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 )  
Sec. 35-103. - Contents. 
The development plans required by this article shall be legible as determined by the director of public works and shall contain: 
(A)  Profiles along the centerline of each street, with tentative established grades indicated, at a vertical scale no smaller than one (1) inch equals three (3) feet and a horizontal scale no smaller than one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet, except as otherwise approved by the director of public works. All elevations shall be referenced to North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 1988). 
(B)  The water distribution system plan, showing existing water mains, pipe sizes, location of valves and fire hydrants. 
(C)  The plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewer system, including existing sewers within the proposed subdivision, with grades and sizes indicated, or the method of sewage disposal in lieu of a sanitary sewer system. All possible utility conflicts shall be rendered in the profile view. 
(D)  The plan and profile for the stormwater system or other methods of disposal, conveyance and or treatment of stormwater which shall be submitted in the same manner as outlined in (C) above and shall comply with the provisions of chapter 33.2 of the City Code. 
(E)  The plan of the proposed street lighting system, which will be the responsibility of the director of public works or his designee to review and modify as necessary. 
(F)  The landscape plan in conformance with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". 
(G)  A method of sewage disposal. 
(H)  [Reserved.] 
(I)  For development on property zoned Buckroe Bayfront District , an environmental site assessment must be submitted in accordance with chapter 9, article II of the zoning ordinance. An environmental site assessment submitted with the subdivision plat shall constitute compliance with this provision. 
The subdivider and/or developer may show the physical improvements on its development plans by separate maps or drawings. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0019, 9-10-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35-104. - Submission of copies. 
Eight (8) prints or copies of the development plans required by this article shall be submitted to the director of public works, who shall review the plans for compliance with all provisions of this and other ordinances, including the requirements of the resource protection area. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-105. - Permits for installation of public infrastructure. 
After the development plans are approved by the director of public works and performance of the development plans is assured as may be required in section 35-108, the subdivider shall apply for necessary permits to proceed with the installation of improvements. 
(A)  Infrastructure permit required. An infrastructure permit will be issued by the director of public works for all proposed public improvements to be constructed outside of existing public rights-of-way, but within proposed public rights-of-way or easements. At the time of approval of the development plans, the subdivider and/or developer shall obtain such permit and shall pay all applicable fees for the cost of permitting and inspection of the public improvements. It shall be a violation of the City Code to construct public infrastructure improvements without possession of a valid infrastructure permit. Work within existing public rights-of-way shall be permitted in accordance with section 34-41 of the City Code. 
(B)  Permitting and inspection fees. Permitting and inspection fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of the infrastructure permit for the installation of public improvements, according to the following schedule: 
(1)  One dollar ($1.00) per linear foot of mainline sanitary sewer line, plus 
(2)  One dollar ($1.00) per linear foot of curb and gutter, and sidewalk, plus 
(3)  One dollar ($1.00) per linear foot of storm sewer line. 
(C)  Term of permit. 
(1)  A permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period of one (1) year; provided, however, it may be extended for an additional one (1) year period, by written approval of the director of public works, upon receipt of evidence of reasonable progress toward the completion of the approved project and compliance with all conditions of approval. 
(2)  If the construction of public improvements ceases for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or if the permittee fails to commence construction of the public improvements within one hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance, then the infrastructure permit shall become null and void. 
(D)  Revocation of permit. In the event that public improvements are not being installed in accordance with city standards, the director of public works shall give written notice of construction deficiencies (notice to comply) to the permittee by registered or certified mail to the address specified by the permittee in his permit application, or by delivery at the site of the public improvement activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. If, after seven (7) days of the date of notice, the permittee has not corrected the deficiencies, the director of public works may revoke the infrastructure permit, and the permittee or person responsible for constructing the public improvements shall be deemed to be in violation of this section and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided by paragraph (G) below. 
(E)  Stop work orders. Upon notification of a violation of this section 35-105 which threatens life, limb or property, the director of public works may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply, as specified in paragraph (D) above, issue an order requiring that all or part of the public infrastructure construction on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. The order shall be served in the same manner as the notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for seven (7) days from the date of service, pending the completion of the corrective action. Upon completion of the corrective action, the order shall immediately be lifted. 
(F)  Reinstatement of the permit. In the event that an infrastructure permit has been revoked, the subdivider and/or developer may seek reinstatement of the permit by correcting all identified deficiencies, and by paying a reinstatement fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(G)  Penalties for violation. A violation of the conditions of this section shall be deemed a Class 1 misdemeanor and each day shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 )  
Sec. 35-105.1. - Permits for installation of vehicle entrances. 
After the development plans and the final subdivision plat are approved by the director of public works; the final subdivision plat is recorded and performance of the development plans is assured as may be required in section 35-108, the subdivider (or builder if different from the subdivider) shall apply for any necessary permits to proceed with the installation of any vehicle entrances for the lots shown on the final recorded subdivision plat. 
(A)  Vehicle entrance permit required. A vehicle entrance permit will be issued subject to the approval of the director of public works for all proposed vehicle entrances to be constructed outside of the existing public right-of-way but adjacent to proposed public rights-of-way or easements that are not initially installed and ensured under a maintenance bond by the subdivider, not included in any bonding under the infrastructure permit or not shown on the development plans or the final subdivision plat. The director of public works may also require such permit for a vehicle entrance adjacent to a private street. After the approval of the development plans and recording of the final subdivision plat, the subdivider and/or developer (or builder) may be required by the director of public works to obtain such permit and shall pay all applicable fees for the cost of permitting and inspection of the vehicle entrance. It shall be a violation of the City Code to construct a vehicle entrance without possession of a valid vehicle entrance permit. Work within existing public rights-of-way shall be permitted in accordance with section 34-41 of the City Code. 
(B)  Permit fee and bond. Prior to the issuance of a vehicle entrance permit, the subdivider (or builder if different from the subdivider) shall pay a permit fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per vehicle entrance to cover permitting and inspections and shall submit a bond in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or one hundred (100) percent of the costs of each vehicle entrance to be constructed, whichever is greater, to ensure completion and cover costs of damage to the proposed public rights-of-way or easements. 
(C)  Term of vehicle entrance permit. 
(1)  A permit issued under this section shall be valid for a period of one (1) year; provided, however, it may be extended for an additional one (1) year period, by written approval of the director of public works, upon receipt of evidence of reasonable progress toward the completion of the approved vehicle entrance and compliance with all conditions of approval. 
(2)  If the construction of the vehicle entrance ceases for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or if the permittee fails to commence construction of the vehicle entrance within one hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance, then the vehicle entrance permit shall become null and void. 
(D)  Revocation of permit. In the event that the vehicle entrance is not being installed in accordance with city standards, the director of public works shall give written notice of construction deficiencies (notice to comply) to the permittee by registered or certified mail to the address specified by the permittee in his permit application, or by delivery at the site of the vehicle entrance construction activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. If, after seven (7) days of the date of notice, the permittee has not corrected the deficiencies, the director of public works may revoke the vehicle entrance permit, and the permittee or person responsible for constructing the vehicle entrance shall be deemed to be in violation of this section and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided by paragraph (G) below. Additionally, the director of public works may call on the bond to complete the vehicle entrance and repair any damage to the proposed rights-of-way or easements. 
(E)  Stop work orders. Upon notification of a violation of this section 35-105.1 which threatens life, limb or property, the director of public works may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply, as specified in paragraph (D) above, issue an order requiring that all or part of the vehicle entrance construction on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. The order shall be served in the same manner as the notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for seven (7) days from the date of service, pending the completion of the corrective action. Upon completion of the corrective action, the order shall immediately be lifted. 
(F)  Reinstatement of the permit. In the event that a vehicle entrance permit has been revoked, the subdivider (or builder if different from the subdivider) may seek reinstatement of the permit by correcting all identified deficiencies, and by paying a reinstatement fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and resubmission of the bond in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or one hundred (100) percent of the costs of each vehicle entrance to be constructed, whichever is greater, to ensure completion and cover costs of damage to the proposed public rights-of-way or easements. 
(G)  Penalties for violation. A violation of the conditions of this section shall be deemed a Class 1 misdemeanor and each day shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-106. - Inspections during installation. 
Periodic inspections during the installation of the physical improvements in a subdivision shall be made by the city to insure conformity with the approved development plans and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the proper city administrative officers when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-107. - Acceptance of public improvements by city. 
The installation of public improvements in subdivisions shall in no case serve to bind the city to accept such improvements for maintenance, repair or operation, but such acceptance shall be subject to the existing regulations concerning the acceptance of each type of improvement. After the installation by the subdivider of the public improvements in the subdivision as required by this chapter, the subdivider shall notify the director of public works in writing to schedule an inspection thereof and shall also submit to the director of public works a certificate of completion of the public improvements as required in section 35-108(D). Upon submission of the required certificate of completion as set forth in section 35-108(D) and inspection of the public improvements by the city, the city shall release the remainder of the performance bond, if any, or at the option of the subdivider and/or developer, the city may retain a portion of the performance bond and convert such remainder to satisfy the maintenance bond requirements of section 35-108(C) to allow for the detection and correction of defects. If all defects have been corrected, the director of public works shall determine whether or not the public improvements have been installed in accordance with the development plans, all applicable ordinances and the terms of the subdivision agreement (if any) between the developer and the city, and have survived the defect-detection period. Upon such determination, the city, through its director of public works, shall accept such public improvements for permanent public maintenance, operation and repair, release all remaining maintenance bonds in accordance with section 35-108(E), and shall upon written request furnish certification of acceptance to the subdivider and/or developer, his attorney or agents. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11)  
Sec. 35-108. - Construction and maintenance of public improvements; performance bond in lieu of installation; maintenance bonds; release of bonds. 
(A)  Prior to approval of the final subdivision plat and upon approval by the director of public works, in writing thereon, of the development plans, the subdivider may complete, at its sole cost and expense, all physical improvements required by this chapter to be dedicated for public use, including, but not limited to any right-of-way located within the subdivision or section thereof, any trees, landscape plantings, street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, bicycle trail, drainage or sewerage system, waterline as part of a public system or other improvements or easements dedicated for public use, and to be maintained by the city, and for the provision of other on-site related improvements required by city ordinances for vehicular ingress and egress, including traffic signalization and control, for structures necessary to ensure stability of critical slopes, and for stormwater management facilities as shown on the development plans. Upon installation of the public improvements and inspection thereof by the city, the subdivider shall execute and file with the director of public works a maintenance bond guaranteeing the maintenance thereof and a certificate of insurance coverage as set forth in subsection (C) of this section. The final subdivision plat shall neither be approved nor recorded and no building permits shall be issued under this subsection until the public improvements have been installed and inspected, and the maintenance bond and insurance certification are submitted to the director of public works. 
(B)  (1)  If the actual installation of the public improvements is not completed in whole or in part prior to the application made for final plat approval, the subdivider shall execute and submit to the director of public works a subdivision agreement to be recorded with the final subdivision plat, together with one (1) of the following forms of surety in an amount equal to the estimated costs of all remaining improvements to be installed or completed as follows: (i) certified check or cash escrow with the right of the city to draw upon such account in the event the subdivider fails to install and complete the required improvements; or (ii) a performance bond to be written by a bonding company licensed to conduct the business of surety in the State of Virginia with the right of the city to call on the bond in the event the subdivider fails to install and complete the required improvements; or (iii) an irrevocable letter of credit issued from a bank or savings institution licensed to do business in the State of Virginia and acceptable to the city evidencing the establishment of credit to the subdivider on which letter the city shall be authorized to draw drafts in the event the subdivider fails to install and complete the required improvements. 
(2)  The subdivision agreement and the required surety shall be approved by the city attorney. The subdivision agreement shall set a time, subject to the approval of the director of public works by which it is estimated the subdivider will install and complete the public improvements and shall require the subdivider to indemnify, protect and save harmless the city from and against all losses and physical damage to property and bodily injury or death to persons which may arise out of or be caused by the construction, maintenance or use of the public improvements until the same be accepted by the city. Unless an extension of time is approved by the director of public works in writing, and a new estimated date of completion is established and guaranteed with appropriate surety, the director of public works shall take necessary steps to proceed with the accomplishment and completion of the improvements by calling on the surety. Additionally, in the subdivision agreement, the subdivider shall agree to guarantee the maintenance of the public improvements once installed with surety as set forth in subsection (C) of this section. 
(3)  The costs of uncompleted public improvements under subsections (B)(1) herein shall be set by the director of public works for purposes of determining the amount of said check or cash escrow, bond or letter of credit. However, in no case shall the amount of surety required in subsection (B)(1) be less than twenty (20) percent of the total construction costs of the public improvements. 
(C)  With regard to any improvement to be accepted for dedication by the city, and after installation thereof, the subdivider and/or developer shall remain responsible for all maintenance and repairs to the public improvements, and shall provide a form of surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to 10% the proposed public improvements plus the full value of street surfacing for streets not surfaced and any sidewalks not completed to cover costs of such maintenance and remedy of defects appearing in such improvements within two (2) years from the date of installation of the public improvements and inspection thereof by the city ("maintenance bond"). 
(D)  Performance bonds or other sureties established in accordance with the provisions of section 35-108(B) shall be released when the director of public works or other affected official certifies that the requirements set forth therein have been met. On application by the subdivider and/or developer, portions of such bonds or other sureties may be released in proportion to the cost of the requirements certified by a duly licensed professional engineer or land surveyor as having been met; however, in no case shall the amount of surety be reduced to less than ten (10) percent of the total construction costs of the improvements. Periodic partial releases shall not occur before the completion of at least thirty (30) percent of the public improvements covered by any surety. 
(1)  The director of public works shall not be required to execute more than three (3) periodic partial releases in any twelve month period. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice by the subdivider or developer of completion of part or all of the improvements or facilities required to be constructed, the director of public works shall notify the subdivider or developer of any nonreceipt of approval by an applicable state agency, or of any specified defects or deficiencies in construction and suggestive corrective measure. 
(2)  "Written notice" shall consist of a letter from the subdivider or developer to the director of public works requesting reduction or release of the surety along with a certificate of completion of such improvements or facilities from either a duly licensed professional engineer or land surveyor. 
(3)  If no action is taken by the director of public works within the thirty (30) day period, the request shall be deemed approved and a partial release granted to the subdivider or developer. No final release shall be granted until after expiration of such thirty (30) day period and there is an additional request in writing sent by certified mail to the city manager. The director of public works shall act within ten (10) working days of receipt of this request. If no action is taken, the request shall be deemed approved and final release granted to the subdivider and/or developer. 
(E)  Maintenance bonds or other sureties established in accordance with the provisions of section 35-108(C) shall be released at the end of two (2) years from the date the public improvements have been installed and inspected; provided, however, that all improvements and requirements of this chapter shall have been installed or met. Such release shall be in full if no defects have been found to exist, or if defects found to exist have been corrected by the subdivider and/or developer within the two (2) year period. If defects found to exist have been corrected by action of the city, the costs of such action shall be deducted from the maintenance bond. If defects found to exist within the two (2) year period have not been corrected after proper notice by the end of such period, the director of public works shall estimate the cost of correction and such cost shall be deducted from the maintenance bond, and any balance remaining as a result of lesser actual than estimated cost shall be paid to the subdivider or developer. 
(F)  No maintenance bond shall be released until as-built construction drawings for all improvements, including, but not limited to street trees, landscape plantings, sanitary sewer and storm drains (including tops of curbs and flow lines for rights-of-way) are submitted on an 11-inch by 17-inch approved durable tracing medium and an approved digital version by the subdivider and/or developer for review and approval by the director of public works. Additionally, all detention, retention and impoundment best management practices ("BMP") shall require a certification of as-built conditions in accordance with the public works design and construction standards and chapter 33.2 of the City Code prior to the release of the maintenance bond. 
(Ord. No. 11-0009, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0004, 4-10-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0019, 9-10-14 )  
Secs. 35-109—35-120. - Reserved.  
Chapter 35.1 - SITE PLANS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Land development and site plan, § 2.06. 
Cross reference— Land disturbing operations, Ch. 13.1; stormwater management, Ch. 33.1; subdivisions, Ch. 35; wetlands, Ch. 41.1; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35.1-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(A)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote sound and innovative design to ensure that land is used in a manner that is efficient, in harmony with neighboring property and the environment, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the City Code and the zoning ordinance. If the requirements of this chapter will affect sites which are already developed, or which are partially developed, such sites should be brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without creating an undue hardship especially with regard to a potential need to demolish or relocate existing parking lots or structures. 
(B)  Intent. The intent of this chapter is to provide for a review of site development proposals in terms of: 
(1)  The development's compatibility with its environment and with other land uses and buildings existing in the surrounding area; 
(2)  The quantity, quality, utility, size and type of the development's required green space, impact upon existing natural environment and proposed landscaping improvements; 
(3)  The ability of the development's traffic circulation system to provide for the convenient and safe internal and external movement of vehicles and pedestrians and adequate and efficient coordination of streets within and contiguous to the development with other existing or planned streets, water, sewage facilities and other public needs and facilities; 
(4)  The location and adequacy of the development's provision for drainage and flood control, including impounding structures, impacts within dam break inundation zones, utilities and other public purposes; 
(5)  The development's compatibility with the protection and improvement of the water quality of the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries, as applicable; and 
(6)  Protecting and preserving the public health, safety and welfare from the adverse impacts on the proposed development associated with high levels of noise from flight operations at Langley Air Force Base and the potential for aircraft accidents associated with proximity to such military air facility operations, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-2. - Application and scope of chapter; definitions. 
(A)  The site plan regulations contained in this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the city. 
(B)  Except as may otherwise be defined herein or in other applicable provisions of the City Code and the city zoning ordinance, the definitions set forth in chapter 2 of the city zoning ordinance shall control the meaning of any terms or phrases used herein. The terms "owner" and "developer" are used interchangeably throughout this chapter and the provisions of this chapter are applicable to an owner or developer of a site. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0020, 9-10-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0006, 1-28-15 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35.1-2.1. - Approved site plan required. 
Unless exempt pursuant to section 35.1-2.2, the following shall require submission of a site plan for review and approval prior to the issuance of any building, zoning, right-of-way, or infrastructure permit or certificate of occupancy: 
(1)  New construction and redevelopment. Any structure or improvement permitted by the zoning ordinance as a principal, accessory, conditional, or special exception use in any district. 
(2)  Newly created parking lots and expansions to existing parking lots. Any new parking lot or expansion to an existing parking lot exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land disturbance. 
(3)  Alteration of grade. Alteration of the grade of land in such a manner as to change existing contours in excess of three (3) feet. 
(4)  Construction or alteration of public facilities or infrastructure. Construction or alteration of public streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, retaining walls, off-street parking facilities, sewer or drainage systems, stormwater management improvements, or other such public improvements. 
( Ord. No. 15-0006, 1-28-15 )  
Sec. 35.1-2.2. - Exemptions from site plan approval. 
(A)  The following types of development are exempt from the requirement for a site plan approval: 
(1)  Certain residential development. 
(i)  A subdivision of one-family dwellings if a development plan has been submitted and approved in accordance with chapter 35 of the City Code. 
(ii)  A subdivision of one-family dwellings if a subdivision plat was duly recorded before the adoption of the city's subdivision ordinance. 
(ii)  One-family, two-family and duplex dwellings and accessory buildings or accessory structures to such dwellings, except as may be otherwise regulated or prohibited under other applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance or City Code. 
(2)  Agricultural operations. Agricultural operations as defined by Code of Virginia, § 3.2-300 as amended, and under those uniform standards as may be prescribed by the commissioner of agriculture and consumer services, or those uses devoted to and meeting the requirements and qualifications for payments or other compensation pursuant to a soil conservation program under an agreement with an agency of the federal government. 
(3)  Bona fide tree farmers. Bona fide tree farmers having a forest planting, cutting, or management plan approved by the state forester of the department of forestry and a written certification from the state forester that the proposed operations are in conformity with the approved management plan prior to any timber harvesting operations. 
(B)  The following additional types of development set forth in subsection (C) are exempt from the requirement for site plan approval provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The development does not require direct connection to public infrastructure, not including taps or meter connections. 
(2)  The development does not reduce the amount of existing green area on the site. 
(3)  No part of the development is within the Chesapeake Bay Preservation district as set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
(4)  The applicant submits a scaled two-dimensional plan or drawing and physical property survey as set forth in chapter 1 of the zoning ordinance, which governs issuance of building permits. 
(C)  Provided that all of the requirements stated in subsection (B) are met, the following types of development are exempt from site plan approval: 
(1)  Additions to buildings or storage structures. Additions to building or storage structures less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in area. 
(2)  Alterations or additions to a site. Alterations or additions to a site that do not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land disturbance such as walkways, landscaping, paving, light poles, or lighting fixtures, but not including buildings or structures. 
(3)  Ornamental and accessory structures and façade improvements. Ornamental structures or façade improvements, including but not limited to bay windows, chimneys, canopies, decks (covered and uncovered), vestibules, loading docks, and mechanical equipment. 
(4)  Temporary uses and structures. Temporary uses, buildings, and structures provided that such a use, building, or structure: 
(i)  Does not exceed a continued period of six (6) months; 
(ii)  Does not occur before a period of ninety (90) days has elapsed since the last temporary use building, or structure was terminated and completely removed from the site; and 
(iii)  Does not remain on the site more than thirty (30) days after discontinuance of the temporary use, building, or structure. 
(5)  Public service companies performing normal and necessary maintenance activities. 
(6)  Recreational amenities in public parkland. Recreational amenities in public parkland that do not exceed a total of ten thousand (10,000) square feet land disturbance, including but not limited to gazebos, benches, and playground equipment; provided, however, this exception shall not include uses such as swimming pools, paved tennis or play courts regardless of size. 
(7)  Bus shelters. 
(8)  Retaining walls. Retaining walls affecting less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land-disturbance with review and approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, the Hampton Wetlands Board, the Chesapeake Bay Review Committee, and/or the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, as applicable. 
(D)  All development, regardless of exemption from this chapter, shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of the City Code and zoning ordinance, including but not limited to chapters 9, 13.1, 33.2 and 41.1 of the City Code. 
( Ord. No. 15-0006, 1-28-15 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35.1-3. - Administration and enforcement of chapter. 
Pursuant to the authority granted to the city council by the Code of Virginia § 15.2-2255, the city council designates as its agent the city manager for purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The city manager authorizes and designates the director of the department of community development to act as the "city agent". Accordingly, the city agent is granted the authority to coordinate the site plan review process, to approve or disapprove site plans with the concurring approval of the director of public works or his designee and administer the provisions of this chapter that are not governed by the Zoning Ordinance, chapters 9, 13.1, 33.2 and 41.1 of the City Code or the public works design and construction standards. The city manager also designates the director of the department of public works to (i) administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter related to approval or disapproval of site plans together with the city agent; (ii) administer, review, modify and waive provisions of the City of Hampton Department of Public Works Design and Construction Standards ("public works design and construction standards") and related requirements as set forth in articles III and IV of this chapter; and (iii) enforce compliance with an approved site plan as set forth in section 35.1-4 of this chapter. Additionally, the city manager designates the director of community development to enforce compliance with the provisions pertaining to required landscape plans. Wherever the term director of community development or public works is used throughout this chapter, the term shall include their respective authorized designees. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0020, 9-10-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0022 , 9-9-15)  
Sec. 35.1-4. - Compliance with chapter; stop work orders; penalty for violation. 
(A)  Except as otherwise set forth in chapter 12 of the zoning ordinance, no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel of land that fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall be commenced, except in conformity with the requirements of this chapter. 
(B)  The directors of public works and community development, the building official, and the zoning administrator or their respective authorized representatives shall have the authority, pursuant to applicable ordinances and policies to enforce non-compliance with the provisions of said ordinances and policies, prosecute violations of an approved landscape plan or commencement of construction without an approved landscape plan, and to stop site construction, improvements or alterations in the event of any deviations from an approved site plan, or on the discovery of unexpected adverse impacts of the development activity on adjacent properties or public facilities. 
(C)  The directors of public works or community development or their authorized representatives have the authority to serve a written notice of violation for violations of this chapter, to order the abatement of such violation, and to issue a summons to appear in the general district court to any person who shall fail to obey a lawful order contained in such notice of violation. 
(D)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating the provisions of this chapter shall be upon conviction thereof, guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If the violation is uncorrected at the time of conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with this chapter, within a time period established by the court. Failure to remove or abate a violation in compliance with this chapter within the specified time period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and any such failure during any succeeding ten-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each ten-day period punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(E)  In addition, the city may pursue injunctive relief and other available remedies to prevent, restrain, abate or correct any violation of this chapter. Nothing contained in this chapter shall excuse compliance with other applicable ordinances or laws. Except where more stringent requirements are expressly set forth by state or federal statute, where local requirements are in conflict with mandatory state or federal requirements, the state or federal requirements shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 ; Ord. No. 15-0022 , 9-9-15)  
Sec. 35.1-5. - How chapter may be amended. 
This chapter may be amended in whole or in part by the city council. Any such amendment shall either originate with or be submitted to the planning commission for recommendation prior to adoption. If no recommendation is received from the planning commission within sixty (60) days after submission, the city council may act without a recommendation. No such amendment shall be adopted without a public hearing having been held by the city council and advertised pursuant to § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, (1950), as amended. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-6. - Changes, erasures and revisions. 
Except for field changes as may be required by other ordinances, no change, erasure or revision shall be made on any site plan, or on accompanying data sheets, after the city agent and the director of public works have approved in writing the plan or sheets, unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the city agent and the director of public works. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-7. - Exceptions. 
(A)  Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, the city council may grant exceptions to the general provisions of this chapter not governed by the zoning ordinance, chapters 9, 13.1, 33.2 and 41.1 of the City Code, the public works design and construction standards, or the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" subject to the following: 
(1)  No such exception shall be granted unless the owner or developer submits a petition for an exception in writing at the time when the plan is filed for consideration. 
(2)  The petition shall be submitted to the city agent for review by the planning division of the department of community development. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the petition and all of the facts relied upon by the owner or developer. 
(3)  The city agent and the planning division staff shall review the petition for completeness and may require such additional information as he or they may deem necessary to process the petition to the planning commission for its consideration. 
(4)  The burden shall be on the owner or developer to demonstrate the need for the exception. 
(5)  The planning commission shall consider the petition in the manner of a rezoning petition at a public hearing which shall be advertised in accordance with Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204, and shall submit its recommendation to the city council to approve or deny the petition no later than one hundred (100) days from the date of the public hearing on the petition. Failure of the planning commission to act on the petition within the one hundred (100) day period shall constitute a recommendation of approval and the petition shall be forwarded to the city council for consideration. The planning commission in considering such petitions may impose such reasonable conditions in addition to the provisions of this chapter as it may deem necessary in the public interest, and it shall make the proper findings as set forth in subsection (B) of this section 35.1-7. The planning commission may require a guarantee or bond to ensure continuing compliance with any conditions imposed. 
(6)  Following the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall consider the petition at a public hearing, advertised in accordance with Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204, and shall approve or deny the petition with any additional conditions it may deem necessary in the public interest and in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(B)  The city council shall not approve a petition for an exception unless it receives a recommendation from the planning commission and unless it finds that: 
(1)  Strict adherence to the ordinance requirement will cause undue hardship; 
(2)  The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to public safety, health, or welfare, and will not adversely affect the property of others; 
(3)  The facts upon which the petition request is based are unique to the property for which the relief is sought and are not applicable generally to other property so as not to make reasonably practical the formulation of general regulations to be adopted as an amendment to this chapter; 
(4)  No objection to the exception has been received in writing from the city's fire chief, or any affected state, federal or local agency including, but not limited to Langley Air Force Base; provided however, that any such objection and the reasons therefore must reference specific adopted ordinances, laws, regulations and policies. Modifications or corrections that would permit approval shall also be identified in the letter of objection; 
(5)  The hardship is created by the unusual character of the property, including dimensions and topography, or by some other extraordinary situation or condition of the property. Personal, financial, or self-inflicted hardship shall not be considered proper justification for an exception; and 
(6)  The relief sought will not in any manner vary the provisions of the zoning ordinance, chapters 9, 13.1, 33.2 or 41.1 of the City Code, the comprehensive plan, the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines", the public works design and construction standards or official map, except that those documents may be amended in the manner prescribed by law. 
(C)  If granted, such exception shall be specifically stated in writing as evidenced by a formal council resolution and filed with the preliminary site plan and improvement plans for construction. A note shall be prominently placed on the site plan detailing any exception so granted. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0020, 9-10-14 )  
Sec. 35.1-8. - Appeals. 
In the event a site plan is disapproved by the city agent or the city council and the owner or developer contends that the disapproval was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, he may appeal such decision to the Hampton Circuit Court within sixty (60) days after written disapproval by the city agent or the city council. No owner or developer may pursue approval of an alternative site plan while his appeal from the disapproval of the original site plan is pending. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-9. - Reserved.  
Sec. 35.1-10. - Compliance with other ordinances. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, site plans shall comply with the provisions of all city ordinances and the zoning ordinance and specifically, chapters 13.1, 33.2, and 41.1 of the City Code, and chapter 9, articles IV and II of the city zoning ordinance unless exempted thereunder. The owner will be required to submit any additional plans, delineations, calculations, declaration of covenants and place required notations on the site plan as required by the City Code or the city zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0020, 9-10-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35.1-11. - Fees. 
(A)  Site plan review fees. At the time any site plan is submitted for review, the following fees shall be submitted to the city agent and payable to the "City of Hampton": 
(1)  For any site involving one (1) acre or less: Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), plus one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per acre of the site or part thereof in excess of one (1) acre. 
(2)  An additional fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be collected for any review after the first re-submission not to include resubmittals that are the result of redesign due to additional state or federal agency comments. 
(B)  Permit, inspection and re-inspection fees. At the time of installation of any public improvements, permit and inspection fees shall be required as set forth in section 35.1-103(B) of this chapter and in other ordinances of the city. For permits and inspections not specified elsewhere, fees shall be based on costs, as determined by the agency involved. For re-inspections made necessary (i) by failure to pass earlier inspection, (ii) because work is not ready by the requested inspection time, (iii) due to cancelation of an inspection by the owner or developer after the inspector arrives; or (iv) failure to provide safe and sufficient access to allow for proper inspection, the re-inspection fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per re-inspection visit. All fees required by this chapter shall be payable to the City of Hampton within thirty (30) days after billing. Failure to pay within the period stipulated may result in a stop-work order issued by the department of public works or such other action as deemed warranted under the circumstances of the case. 
(C)  Site plan exception fees. Any petition for an exception shall be accompanied by a fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) payable to the City of Hampton to cover the costs of processing the petition and publication of notice of public hearing. 
(D)  [Separate private easements; private dedication deeds/plats.] When separate private easements or private dedication deeds or plats are submitted a review fee shall be required in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per instrument, payable to the City of Hampton. 
(E)  [Revised site plan.] If an owner or developer, at any time during the site plan review, submits a revised site plan or portion thereof, files or makes a change to the site plan or public improvement plan under review not at the request of the city agent or the director of public works as the case may be, such revision shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per sheet that is revised or changed payable to the City of Hampton. 
(F)  [Recording fees.] Recording fees for any legal instrument required under this chapter for site plans shall be submitted to the city agent at the time prescribed in this section or in this chapter and shall be made payable to the Clerk of the Hampton Circuit Court. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-12. - Maintenance of improvements and landscaping required. 
Maintenance of all site improvements, including landscaping, required by this chapter and shown on an approved site plan shall be perpetually maintained by the property owner. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-13. - Off-site public facilities. 
The owner or developer shall install or modify off-site public facilities, such as utilities, sidewalks, curb and gutter, storm drainage facilities, and stormwater management facilities when such improvements are affected or required by the proposed development and pursuant to the authority of and in accordance with the requirements of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or any other applicable provisions of the City Code or the zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-14. - Dedication of on-site easements, rights-of-way. 
The owner or developer shall dedicate to the city adequate rights-of-way, easements and/or additional areas to increase existing or establish new rights-of-way or easements when it is determined that: (i) there is a mutual desire on the part of the owner or developer and the city to install public facilities on the site; (ii) public facilities are presently located or partially located on the site; (iii) storm drainage systems (manmade or natural) that convey stormwater from public rights-of-way or public drainage systems are located or partially located on the site; or (iv) on-site public facilities are required to meet the provisions of this chapter or other city ordinances or policies. Easements for utilities, sewer and drainage when required shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. The director of public works may require a statement on the site plan indicating that no permanent structures (including fences) may be placed in a public easement. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-15. - Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Secs. 35.1-16—35.1-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 35.1-20. - Preapplication conference and submission of conceptual plan. 
Before submitting any application for site plan review, the owner or developer is advised to confer with the city agent and the director of public works concerning the proposed improvements. Such action does not require formal application or fees or formal filing of the site plan and is not to be construed as an application for approval of a site plan in computing time limitations in relation thereto or any requirements of this chapter or any other applicable city ordinance or code. Any comments made at a pre-application conference, whether oral or written, are guidance only and shall not be construed as or be deemed to be official site plan review comments. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-21. - Who may prepare a site plan. 
(A)  A site plan shall be on a black or blue line print and shall be prepared by a duly licensed professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect authorized to do business in the State of Virginia. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-22. - Contents of a site plan. 
(A)  A site plan shall comply with the standards of Code of Virginia § 42.1-82, 17VAC15-60-10 through 17VAC15-60-70 and the minimum standards and procedures for surveys determining topography as set forth in the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation APELSCIDLA Board regulation 18VAC10-20-382, the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines", and the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards, and shall include a vicinity sketch, at a scale of one (1) inch to eight hundred (800) feet, which shall show the area for the proposed development and all streets and water bodies that exist within the area of the vicinity sketch, date, scale and north arrow. A site plan shall show the total land area of the site, the area to be developed, approximate land area of separate parcels of land, areas to be encumbered by stormwater management facilities, and other features in relation to existing topography, including any existing impervious areas in any RPA, RMA or IDA. The site plan shall have a horizontal scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch and clearly show the following, and where applicable show the location, dimension and size of the following when existing or proposed by the owner or developer: 
(1)  The name of the development and the street address, when available or assigned by the city. 
(2)  (a)  Topographic information of existing and proposed ground and paved areas, elevations of streets, alleys, utilities, grading and surface drainage, sanitary and storm sewers, and ground floor elevation of proposed buildings and other structures. Topography shall be a suitable scale shown as dashed lines illustrating one-foot or five-foot contours, as may be required by the director of public works or by spot elevations. 
(b)  Vertical control shall be based on North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88). 
(3)  The name, address and any other contact information of the record owner and the developer and the name, address, signature and registration number and seal of the professional engineer, land surveyor, architect, or landscape architect who prepared the site plan. 
(4)  A legal property description showing subdivision, lot, block and section number where applicable and the land record serial number (LRSN). 
(5)  Driveways, entrances, exits, parking areas, sidewalks, streets, alleys, utilities, public sewer systems, including lateral and cleanout locations, pipe sizes, materials and grades with relevant calculations, water mains, meters and valves, standpipes, fire service lines and fire hydrants and all connections to existing and proposed central water and sewer systems. 
(6)  Buildings and structures, and all building restriction lines, highway setback lines, easements, reservations and rights-of-way which affect the development of the site. 
(7)  The zoning of the site and adjacent properties and identifying number and approval date of proffers and conditions of any special exceptions, variances, conditional use permits, conditional privileges, conditional rezonings or exceptions granted pursuant to this chapter affecting the site. 
(8)  Existing slopes, terraces and retaining walls, including heights, grades or elevations. 
(9)  Natural and artificial water courses and limits of floodplains, including a delineation of the boundaries of all floodways, flood fringes, approximated floodplains, and coastal high hazard areas. Flood elevations for any land located within a special flood hazard area in accordance with the provisions of section 9-31 of the zoning ordinance and the city flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
(10)  Proposed erosion and sediment control and stormwater pollution prevention measures and the limits of clearing and land disturbance. 
(11)  Estimates of the following: 
(a)  Number of dwelling units and each type; 
(b)  Number of parking spaces and loading spaces; 
(c)  Square footage of floor space; 
(d)  Height of building(s); and 
(e)  Approximate number of commercial or industrial tenants. 
(12)  Proposed point of refuse collection (dumpster pads). 
(13)  Plans for collecting and depositing stormwater and the method and treatment of natural and artificial water courses, including appropriate drainage calculations and site impervious area calculations ,and existing and proposed storm drainage easements and direction of drainage flow in streets, storm sewers, valley gutters, streams and ditches as required by chapter 33.2 of the City Code. 
(14)  Courses and distances of the right-of way center line of all abutting and on-site streets and all property lines on the site being developed, with a curve data table showing curve number, arc lengths, radii and delta angles, tangent lengths, chord distances and chord bearings. 
(15)  All passive or active recreation space and natural green space. 
(16)  Boundary lines of any nontidal wetlands as confirmed in writing by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality or the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(17)  Any grave, object or structure marking a place of burial within the proposed development shall be clearly designated. 
(18)  Where any part of the land proposed for development lies in a mapped dam break inundation zone such fact shall be delineated on the plat. 
(19)  A method of sewage disposal. 
(20)  The soil characteristics of the land being developed. 
(21)  Two (2) signature and date lines for the signed approval by the city agent and the director of public works. 
(22)  All structures intended to support on-site or off-site lighting. 
(23)  Location and minimum light source for site lighting in accordance with section 35.1-41(I). 
(24)  If the director of public works approves roadside ditches/open drainage system in lieu of piped drainage systems or the elimination of sidewalks, a notation on the site plan shall be required, which advises any potential purchaser that the city will not be responsible for providing and/ or bearing the costs of installation of sidewalks, curbs and gutters if and when owner(s) of lot or lots on the site desire a piped drainage system. 
(25)  Other information as necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable city ordinances, regulations and policies. 
(D)  A site plan for development within O-CBP shall contain a notation thereon to state that land use and development activities including land disturbing activities or clearing of vegetation within the RPA, RMA and any IDA are regulated pursuant to chapter 9, article II of the zoning ordinance. Additionally, the site plan shall contain reference to any RPA buffer or IDA encroachment or exception to the O-CBP regulations for development and redevelopment authorized by the City of Hampton. 
(E)  A site plan containing any land located in an aircraft accident potential zone as designated on the geometric specifications and height limitations map and/or in a noise zone greater than 75 dB Ldn, 70—75 dB Ldn, or 65—70 dB Ldn as designated on the city zoning map, shall delineate the boundaries of such zones and such plan shall state as follows: "THIS SITE LIES WITHIN AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONE AND/OR NOISE ZONE(S) AND MAY BE SUBJECT TO AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS AND/OR ABOVE AVERAGE NOISE LEVELS DUE TO ITS PROXIMITY TO AIRPORT OPERATIONS. NOISE ATTENUATION MEASURES FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION MAY BE REQUIRED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE AIRPORT NOISE ATTENUATION AND SAFETY ORDINANCE AND HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS HAVE BEEN IMPOSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE HAMPTON CITY ZONING ORDINANCE." 
(F)  A landscape plan for the site which complies with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" shall be required unless waived or modified by the city agent in accordance with this chapter. 
(G)  At the time of submission of site plans and related data, or at any time thereafter, appropriate officers of the city may request additional information required due to the circumstances of the particular case. Time elapsing between the request and provision of any such additional information shall be added to the general time limitation of processing. 
(H)  The city agent with the concurrence of the director of public works may waive or modify any of the requirements of this section so long as the waiver of modification is not in conflict with any requirement set forth in chapter 9 of the City Code, any provisions of the City Code, the zoning ordinance, the public works design and construction standards or the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0020, 9-10-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35.1-23. - Submission of copies and application for approval, to be accompanied by review fee. 
A completed application for site plan review, twelve (12) twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch copies and a digital version of the site plan required by this article, acceptable to the city agent, and the required fee pursuant to section 35.1-11 shall be submitted to the city agent in the development services center of the department of community development. The city agent has the discretion to increase or decrease the number of copies and the size of the copies required based on the size of the site or need for inter-agency coordination. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-23.1. - Coordination with other agencies and private utilities. 
(A)  The city agent shall require evidence that the appropriate federal and state agencies, to include at a minimum the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Langley Air Force Base (if applicable) and the Virginia State Water Control Board have been notified of the submission of a site plan. Such notification shall include a property description and a request that the city be informed of any jurisdictional determinations relative to such property. 
(B)  The city agent shall require evidence that Hampton Roads Sanitation District and Newport News Waterworks (if applicable) and appropriate private utilities to include at a minimum Virginia Natural Gas, Dominion Virginia Power, Cox Communications, Verizon and any other private utility as required by the city have been notified of the submission of a site plan. Such notification shall include a request that the city be informed of any conditions or requirements to be included in the site plan. 
(C)  The site plan may be processed concurrently with a rezoning or a use permit. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-24. - Distribution of copies. 
The city agent shall distribute the copies of the site plan application to any city, state or federal agencies or entities as necessary for complete review and conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-25. - Review of site plan—Approval or disapproval generally. 
(A)  A site plan application with the applicable fees shall be reviewed as follows: 
(1)  Within sixty (60) days of their official submission, the site plan and other related materials shall be reviewed by the city agent and other appropriate agencies of the city for conformity to this chapter and other applicable regulations, and to allow any discussions with the owner as to changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made. Review and approval of any applicable erosion and sedimentation control plans and stormwater management plans shall be in conformance with chapters 13.1 and 33.2 of the City Code respectively. 
(2)  However, in cases where approval of a feature or features of the site plan by a state agency or public authority authorized by state law is necessary, the city agent shall forward the site plan to the appropriate state agency or authority for review within ten (10) business days of receipt of such site plan. Such state agency or public authority shall conduct its review within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the site plan upon first submission and within forty-five (45) days for any proposed plan that has been previously disapproved. The city agent shall act upon a site plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of approvals from all state agencies. 
(3)  The city agent shall not be required to approve a site plan in less than sixty (60) days from the date of its original submission to the city agent and all actions on site plans shall be completed by the city agent and, if necessary, state agencies and authorities, within a total of ninety (90) days of submission to the city agent. 
(4)  The city agent shall act upon site plan and related materials as submitted, as modified by the state agency or authority or as modified by the owner, and if approved shall certify its approval in writing or if disapproved, shall indicate its disapproval and the reasons therefor by referencing in writing specific adopted ordinances, regulations and policies. Modifications or corrections that would permit approval shall also be identified. 
(5)  In the review of a resubmitted site plan that has been previously disapproved the city agent shall consider only the deficiencies he had identified in the review of the initial submission of the site plan that have not been corrected in such resubmission and any deficiencies that arise as a result of the corrections made to address deficiencies identified in the initial submission. In the review of a resubmission of a site plan, the city agent shall identify all deficiencies with the site plan that caused the disapproval by reference to specific duly adopted ordinances, regulations or policies and shall identify modifications or corrections that will permit approval of the site plan. Upon the second resubmission of such disapproved site plan, the city agent's review shall be limited solely to the previously identified deficiencies that caused his disapproval. The city agent shall act on any site plan that he has previously disapproved within forty-five (45) days after the site plan has been modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval. Notwithstanding the approval of any site plan, any deficiency in any site plan, that if left uncorrected, would violate local, state or federal law or regulations, mandatory VDOT engineering and safety requirements, and other mandatory engineering and safety requirements, shall not be considered, treated or deemed as having been approved by the city agent. Should any resubmission include a material revision of infrastructure or physical improvements from the earlier submission or if a material revision in the resubmission creates a new required review by a state agency or public authority authorized by state law, then the city agent's review shall not be limited to only the previously identified deficiencies identified in the prior submittals and may consider deficiencies initially appearing in the resubmission because of such material revision. 
(B)  The action of the city agent, with the concurrence of the director of public works, shall be noted on all copies of the site plans retained in the record, referenced and in the case of disapproval, attached to any changes or conditions determined. One (1) such copy shall be returned to the owner, and others shall be retained as required for records or further action of the city agent, or other affected agencies of the city and the state. 
(C)  If a disapproved site plan is not resubmitted within one (1) year of the date of disapproval, such site plan shall become null and void, unless within such period, upon application in writing to the city agent an extension not exceeding one (1) year is granted by the city agent. 
(D)  If the city agent fails to approve or disapprove the site plan within the prescribed period of time set forth herein, the owner may, after ten (10) days' written notice to the city agent, petition the Hampton Circuit Court to enter such order as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the site plan. No alternative site plan may be pursued for approval by the city agent while an owner's proceeding in the Hampton Circuit Court is pending. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0020, 9-10-14 )  
Sec. 35.1-26. - Required legal instruments and cost of recordation. 
Legal instruments, in writing, of sufficient legal form for recordation in the Hampton Circuit Court Clerk's Office as may be required by this chapter or the city agent, shall accompany the site plan. A check payable to the Clerk of the Hampton Circuit Court, for costs of recordation of any such instruments, shall accompany the site plan prior to approval except as otherwise set forth in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-27. - Effect of approval. 
(A)  Approval of a site plan as evidenced by the dated signatures of the city agent and the director of public works shall constitute the final site plan. 
(B)  An approved site plan shall become null and void if no significant development is made on the site within five (5) years from the date of approval, unless, within such period, upon application to the city agent in writing, an extension not exceeding one (1) year is granted by the city agent. However, upon application by the owner or developer, filed prior to the expiration of the extension period, the city agent may grant one (1) or more extensions of such approval for additional periods as the city agent may, at the time the extension is granted, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development, and the laws, ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of the request for extension. If the city agent denies an extension requested as provided herein and the owner or developer contends that such denial was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, he may appeal such decision to the Hampton Circuit Court within sixty (60) days of written disapproval by the city agent or the city council. No owner or developer may pursue approval of a new site plan while his appeal from the disapproval of the extension of the original approved site plan is pending. 
(C)  For so long as the approved site plan remains valid in accordance with the provisions of this section no change or amendment to any city ordinance, map regulation, policy or plan adopted subsequent to the date of approval of the site plan shall adversely affect the right of the owner or developer, or their respective successors in interest, to commence and complete a development in accordance with the lawful terms of the approved site plan unless the change or the amendment is required to comply with state law or there has been fraud. 
(D)  Application for minor modifications to approved site plans made during the periods of validity of such plans shall not constitute a waiver of the provisions of this chapter nor shall the approval of such minor modifications extend the period of validity of the approved site plan. 
(E)  Substantial modification of an approved site plan shall be treated as a new site plan application and subject to the review procedures of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-28. - Distribution of copies after approval. 
After approval of the site plan, the city agent shall retain copies to distribute among the city agencies as deemed necessary. The remaining copies shall be delivered to the owner, and the owner shall be responsible for distributing copies to appropriate state and federal agencies as required by state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-29. - Article creates no city obligation as to improvements prior to acceptance thereof by city. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as creating an obligation upon the city to pay for grading or paving, or for public sidewalks, sewers, curb and gutter or other public improvements or construction, or for the maintenance and care thereof until duly accepted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-30. - Compliance with site plan. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect or enlarge any building or structure or develop, change or improve land for which an approved site plan is required by this chapter, except in accordance with the approved site plan. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-31. - Public records. 
Copies of approved site plans or combined plans shall be kept on file in the development services center of the department of community development and shall be deemed public records. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Secs. 35.1-32—35.1-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WORK AND DEVELOPMENT PURSUANT TO APPROVED PLAN 
 
Sec. 35.1-41. - General requirements. 
(A)  All work and development covered by a site plan approved pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Any building or structure erected or enlarged and any work of development on the site shall comply with all of the provisions of the City Code, the zoning ordinance and any applicable state and federal laws. 
(2)  Any building or structure shall provide access to fire, police, emergency and service vehicles as required by the City Code. 
(3)  Access points to the development shall, insofar as reasonably practicable, provide good and safe circulation to adjacent lands, existing streets, alleys, sidewalks and proposed or planned streets, alleys and minimum necessary access points with the location and spacing as determined by the director of public works to provide for vehicle cross connectivity between adjacent parcels. 
(4)  Adequate provisions shall be made to protect other lands, structures and persons. 
(5)  To the extent reasonably practicable, the width, grade, location, alignment and arrangement of public, dedicated streets, sidewalks and alleys shall conform to the master plan of the city. All streets, whether public or private, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. 
(6)  The limits of clearing and methods to be used to protect existing vegetation shall be provided. 
(7)  The obstruction of natural water courses shall be avoided. 
(8)  Land development shall minimize impervious cover to promote infiltration of stormwater into the ground consistent with the development permitted. 
(B)  Measures shall be taken for erosion and sediment control to comply with the standards and procedures set forth in chapter 13.1 of the City Code. 
(C)  On properties zoned O-CBP, areas shown on the site plan as undisturbed, or as a buffer proffered as part of a conditional rezoning or required for a use permit, or as part of a resource protection area, shall be protected from disturbance as required by chapters 13.1 and 33.2 of the City Code, chapter 9, article II of the city zoning ordinance or in accordance with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" on file with the department of community development, development services center, as applicable. 
(D)  All public drainage systems shall be constructed and designed in conformance with the applicable provisions of the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. Easements for all public drainage shall be dedicated to the city by separate instrument. 
(E)  Off-street parking facilities shall be reasonably accessible and all such parking areas shall be paved in order to reduce erosion and dust and to facilitate positive drainage. Areas designated as overflow parking or construction material or equipment storage may not be required to be paved if not deemed necessary by the director of public works. Notwithstanding the foregoing, grid and modular pavements, or other pervious pavement which promote infiltration are encouraged and may be required for any required parking area alley, or other low traffic driveway within property zoned SPI-CBPD. 
(F)  All dumpsters and compaction devices shall be screened by an enclosure constructed of durable materials with a lockable gate to fully screen the refuse container(s) in addition to any required vegetative screening treatment of trees and/or shrubs as set forth in the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". Dumpsters and compaction devices shall not be located within front yards or side yards adjacent to a street unless specifically authorized by the director of public works. When authorized in yards adjacent to streets, the enclosure shall be constructed of durable materials which are consistent and compatible with the principal structure. Refuse collection points shall be accessible and located so as to minimize the disruption of on-site vehicular movements and the public right-of-way. Dumpster pads shall be constructed of concrete capable of withstanding the weight of the dumpster and be adequately sized to serve the collection point. Protective bollards shall be provided as necessary to protect the enclosure. 
(G)  The owner shall provide the development with a stormwater drainage system, as approved by the director of public works, adequate to serve the area of development and the contributing drainage area thereto for the collection and disposal of all stormwater and natural water in accordance with design standards and specifications of chapter 33.2 of the City Code. 
(H)  Adequate approved water mains and fire hydrants shall be provided in accessible places and installed by the owner as directed by the fire chief in accordance with the city fire prevention code. 
(I)  Exterior lighting shall be installed at the Owner's expense. Light fixture type, location and spacing shall comply with the latest edition of the "City of Hampton Outdoor Lighting Policy and Procedures" manual which is administered by the director of public works. Exterior lighting shall be reasonably designed to provide for the safety of the public in their use of parking lots, walkways and entrance areas. These areas shall be illuminated by a source providing not less than one-half of one (0.5) foot candle of light at the surface during hours of darkness. The light source shall be fully shielded, located so as not to cause glare or excessive light spillage onto neighboring sites and mounted or installed to maintain the aforementioned characteristics. All light poles located within pavement areas shall be protected by concrete curbing or shall be installed at the intersection of four (4) parking spaces. 
(J)  Street signs required by the city agent or the director of public works shall be paid for by the owner in advance and shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the provisions of the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. 
(K)  Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be provided within a development except as otherwise provided in the public works design and construction standards. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0020, 9-10-14 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35.1-42. - Development of land subject to flooding. 
No lot, tract or parcel of land, or any part thereof, in a floodplain or flood prone area, shall be developed for the use of buildings or structures erected or to be erected for dwelling or residential purposes on the portion of the land within the floodplain or flood prone area, unless corrected to the satisfaction of the director of public works and in accordance with chapter 9, article IV of the zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35.1-43. - Utilities. 
All utilities, including, but not limited to wires, cables, pipes, fiber optics, conduits and accessory equipment for electric, telephone, internet, cable television, gas, steam, petroleum, water, sewer or similar services shall be installed by the owner and located underground in accordance with the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards or chapter 9 of the City Code, as applicable. All connections shall be shown on the site plan. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-44. - Design, layout and dimensions of commercial development. 
The design, layout and dimensions of structures on a site reserved or planned for business and commercial purposes shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking and service facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated and shall be in compliance with applicable provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-45. - Sewage disposal system. 
(A)  Every development shall be provided with a sanitary sewer system or an approved system for sewage disposal as provided for in governing provisions of this Code or other ordinances or resolutions. All publicly serviced systems provided by the owner shall be offered for dedication to the city at no cost to the city, upon completion. The sanitary sewer system shall include, but shall not be limited to, the necessary force mains, sewer mains, laterals, lines, pipes, pumping stations and other facilities needed to service the development. 
(B)  All warranties shall be in compliance with section 35.1-106. Before construction is commenced, all plans and specifications must be reviewed by and have the approval of the director of the department of public works. The developer shall notify the city prior to start of construction so that an inspection may be provided. Any work covered prior to inspection may be required to be uncovered at the developer's expense. All construction shall be in accordance with approved plans. No changes shall be made in approved plans without further approval by the director of the department of public works. Upon final approval of the system, the city will notify the developer in writing when the city will receive sewage originating in the area and will specify the date upon which the developer may discharge sewage into the city system. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-46. - Water supply. 
The owner shall provide the development with a complete potable water supply system conforming to the city's policy thereon and approved by Newport News Waterworks. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-47. - Lands for public acquisition. 
The city agent may require, in any development pursuant to an approved site plan, the reservation of land for public acquisition; such lands as are designated by the comprehensive plan for parks, playgrounds, public buildings and other purposes. In the event such reservations are required, the city must acquire the reserved land within one hundred twenty (120) days of approval of the site plan. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-48. - Development in the resource protection area; buffer area. 
There shall be no improvements or development allowed in the resource protection area except as permitted pursuant to chapter 9, article II of the zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 )  
Sec. 35.1-49. - Green areas and landscaping requirements. 
(A)  In recognition of the environmental value of maintaining a balance between the manmade and natural environment, each site developed pursuant to a site plan under this chapter shall be required to provide and maintain natural green areas in accordance with the city zoning ordinance. 
(B)  The director of community development has prepared minimum specifications, and standards governing landscaping, tree removal, tree preservation and buffer establishment and maintenance entitled the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" ("Landscape Guidelines"), as amended, and on file in the department of community development, development services center. In any development pursuant to a site plan under this chapter, all required green areas shall be landscaped as set forth in the Landscape Guidelines, and landscape and tree protection or removal shall comply with the provisions of the Landscape Guidelines or any other applicable provision of the City Code. 
(C)  In any development pursuant to a site plan under this chapter, a landscape plan complying with all applicable provisions of the Landscape Guidelines shall be submitted to and reviewed and approved by the city agent prior to the issuance of any building permit(s). 
(1)  A landscape plan that deviates from the Landscape Guidelines may also be approved by the city agent. Such landscape plan must be submitted to the city agent for review. Approval of any landscape plan which does not meet the Landscape Guidelines shall be at the discretion of the city agent in accordance with good planning practices and in compliance with any applicable provisions of the City Code or the zoning ordinance. The purpose of this provision is to not preclude innovative landscaping treatments and site designs which may create a quality design while not explicitly meeting the standards specified in the Landscape Guidelines. 
(2)  Except as otherwise set forth in the City Code or the city zoning ordinance, the city agent may waive the requirement of a landscape plan for legally nonconforming lots and structures, or in order to accommodate topographical or size or area of a lot or parcel or any circumstance resulting in an unnecessary hardship other than economic hardship. 
(3)  Where such modification or waiver is granted under this subsection (C), the city agent shall attach such modification or waiver in the form of notations on the landscape plan or site plan. 
(D)  Where landscaping is required, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the required landscaping is completed in accordance with the approved landscape plan as certified by an on-site inspection by the department of community development. When the occupancy of a structure is desired prior to the completion of the required landscaping, a certificate of occupancy may be issued only if the owner or developer provides to the city a form of surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the remaining plant materials, related materials, and installation costs with the costs approved by the city agent. All required landscaping must be installed and approved within six (6) months following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or the surety shall be forfeited to the city. 
(E)  Maintenance of landscaping is a continuing obligation of the owner, and the owners and their agents shall be responsible for providing, protecting and maintaining all landscaping in healthy and growing conditions at all times, replacing unhealthy fifty (50) percent or more, dead or completely dead plant material, within ninety (90) days upon written notice of violation, except when replacements should be delayed because of seasonal factors until the next planting season. Replacement materials shall conform to the original intent of the approved landscape plan as determined by the city agent. 
(F)  This section shall apply to any site plan filed subsequent to the 9th day of May, 2013. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0022 , 9-9-15)  
Sec. 35.1-50. - Stormwater management facilities. 
(A)  Where stormwater management facilities are required, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the facilities are completed and an as-built survey has been submitted and approved, in accordance with the approved site plan and chapter 33.2 of the City Code. 
(B)  The inspection, monitoring, enforcement and bonding of stormwater management facilities shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 33.2 of the City Code. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0020, 9-10-14 )  
Secs. 35.1-51—35.1-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS—REQUIREMENTS, PROCEDURES FOR PERMITTING AND PERFORMANCE ASSURANCES. 
 
Sec. 35.1-101. - Public improvements. 
(A)  The director of public works may require in any development pursuant to a site plan approved under this chapter, the dedication of land for, and the installation of public streets, street signs, alleys, sidewalk, curbs, gutters, sewers, drains and other public improvements substantially generated by the development. The design and construction of all streets, street signs, curbs, gutter, alleys, sidewalks and drainage shall comply with the latest edition of the public works design and construction standards. 
(B)  Public Improvements required by the director of public works shall be shown on the site plan or by separate sheet if necessary, depicting the improvements and specifications as required by the director of public works. However, prior to acceptance by the city, all such public improvements shall be dedicated or conveyed by separate legal instrument, with necessary plats attached for recordation at the expense of the owner or developer. 
(C)  An engineering cost estimate for construction of stormwater management facilities, all infrastructure located within the public rights-of-way and public easements, and all erosion and sediment control measures shall be provided to the director of public works. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-102. - Reserved.  
Sec. 35.1-103. - Permits for installation of public improvements and inspections. 
At the time of approval of the site plan, in order to proceed with the installation of any required public improvements, the owner or developer must have applied for and obtained all necessary and applicable permits. 
(A)  Infrastructure permit. An infrastructure permit will be issued by the director of public works for all proposed public improvements to be constructed outside of existing public rights-of-way, but within proposed public rights-of-way or easements. At the time of approval of the site plan, the owner and/or developer shall obtain such permit and shall pay all applicable fees for the cost of permitting and inspection of the public improvements. It shall be a violation of the City Code to construct public improvements without possession of a valid infrastructure permit. Work within existing public rights-of-way shall be permitted through a right-of-way permit in accordance with section 34-41 of the City Code. 
(B)  Permitting and inspection fees. Permitting and inspection fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of the infrastructure permit for the installation of public improvements, according to the following schedule: 
(1)  One dollar ($1.00) per linear foot of mainline sanitary sewer line, plus 
(2)  One dollar ($1.00) per linear foot of curb and gutter, and sidewalk plus 
(3)  One dollar ($1.00) per linear foot of storm sewer line. 
(C)  Term of permit. 
(1)  A permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period of one (1) year; provided however, such permit may be extended for an additional one (1) year period prior to the expiration of the original permit, by written approval of the director of public works, upon receipt of evidence of reasonable progress toward the completion of the public improvements and compliance with all conditions of approval. 
(2)  If the owner or developer fails to commence construction of the public improvements within one (1) year after the date of the permit issuance, and the permit is not extended as set forth in subsection (C)(1) hereinabove, then the infrastructure permit shall become null and void. A new infrastructure permit must be obtained, new permit fees must be paid for and new surety must be provided as set forth in this section in order to commence construction of the public improvements. However, if the infrastructure permit is extended as set forth in subsection (C)(1) hereinabove, no new fees or surety will be required. 
(D)  Revocation of permit. In the event that public improvements are not being installed in accordance with city standards, the director of public works shall give written notice of construction deficiencies (notice to comply) to the permittee by registered or certified mail to the address specified by the permittee in his permit application, or by delivery at the site of the public improvement activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. If, after seven (7) days of the date of notice, the permittee has not corrected the deficiencies, the director of public works may revoke the infrastructure permit, and the permittee or person responsible for constructing the public improvements shall be deemed to be in violation of this section and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided by paragraph (G) below. 
(E)  Stop work orders. Upon notification of a violation of this article which threatens life, limb or property, the director of public works may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply, as specified in paragraph (D) above, issue an order requiring that all or part of the public improvement construction on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. The order shall be served in the same manner as the notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for seven (7) days from the date of service, pending the completion of the corrective action. Upon completion of the corrective action, the order shall immediately be lifted. 
(F)  Reinstatement of the permit. In the event that an infrastructure permit has been revoked, the owner or developer may seek reinstatement of the permit by correcting all identified deficiencies, and by paying a reinstatement fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(G)  Penalties for violation. A violation of the conditions of this section shall be deemed a Class 1 misdemeanor and each day shall constitute a separate violation. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-104. - Inspections during installation. 
Periodic inspections during the installation of the public improvements on a site shall be made by the city to ensure conformity with the approved site plan. The owner or developer shall notify the department of public works when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-105. - Acceptance of public improvements by city. 
After the installation by the owner or developer of the public improvements in the development as required by this chapter, the owner or the developer shall notify the director of public works in writing to schedule an inspection thereof and shall also submit to the director of public works a certificate of completion of the public improvements as required in section 35.1-106(C). Upon submission of the required certificate of completion as set forth in section 35.1-106(C), inspection and approval of the public improvements by the city, and performance of all requirements set forth in section 35.1-106, the city shall accept the public improvements and release the remainder of the performance bond either as set forth in the right-of-way permit or pursuant to section 35.1-106, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 35.1-106. - Construction and maintenance of public improvements; performance bond; release of performance bond. 
(A)  Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the owner or developer shall execute and submit to the director of public works one of the following forms of surety in an amount equal to the estimated costs of any physical improvements required by this chapter and/or Code of Virginia § 15.2-2241.A.5 to be installed, which are not located in the existing right-of-way or not covered by a right-of-way permit, to be dedicated for public use, including, but not limited to any right of way located within the development or section thereof as follows:(i) certified check or cash escrow with the right of the city to draw upon such account in the event the owner fails to install and complete the required improvements; or (ii) a performance bond to be written by a bonding company licensed to conduct the business of surety in the State of Virginia with the right of the city to call on the bond in the event the owner fails to install and complete the required improvements; or (iii) an irrevocable letter of credit issued from a bank or savings institution licensed to do business in the State of Virginia and acceptable to the city evidencing the establishment of credit to the owner on which letter the city shall be authorized to draw drafts in the event the owner fails to install and complete the required improvements (the foregoing forms of surety shall be referred to as the "performance bond". 
(B)  The required surety as set forth in subsection (A) herein ("performance bond"), shall be approved by the city attorney. The costs of public improvements under subsection (A) herein shall be set by the director of public works for purposes of determining the amount of said check or cash escrow, bond or letter of credit. 
(C)  Performance bonds established in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be released when the director of public works certifies that the requirements set forth therein have been met. On application by the owner or developer, portions of such bonds or other sureties may be released in proportion to the cost of the requirements certified by a duly licensed professional engineer or land surveyor as having been met; however, in no case shall the amount of surety be reduced to less than ten (10) percent of the total construction costs of the public improvements. Periodic partial releases shall not occur before the completion of at least thirty (30) percent of the public improvements covered by any surety. 
(1)  The director of public works shall not be required to execute more than three (3) periodic partial releases in any twelve (12) month period. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice by the owner or developer of completion of part or all of the improvements or facilities required to be constructed, the director of public works shall notify the owner or developer of any nonreceipt of approval by an applicable state agency, or of any specified defects or deficiencies in construction and suggestive corrective measure. 
(2)  "Written Notice" shall consist of a letter from the owner or developer to the director of public works requesting reduction or release of the surety along with a certificate of completion of such improvements or facilities from either a duly licensed professional engineer or land surveyor. 
(3)  If no action is taken by the director of public works within the thirty (30) day period, the request shall be deemed approved and a partial release granted to the owner or developer. No final release shall be granted until after expiration of such thirty (30) day period and there is an additional request in writing sent by certified mail to the city manager. The director of public works shall act within ten (10) working days of receipt of this request. If no action is taken, the request shall be deemed approved and final release granted to the owner or developer. 
(D)  Performance bonds established in accordance with the provisions of section 35.1-106(C) shall be completely released at the end of one (1) year from the date the public improvements have been installed and inspected; provided, however, that all improvements and requirements of this chapter shall have been installed or met and no defects have been found to exist. If defects found to exist at the end of the one (1) year period have not been corrected after proper notice, the director of public works shall estimate the cost of correction and such cost shall be deducted from the performance bond. 
(F)  No performance bond shall be released in full until as-built construction drawings for all public improvements, including, but not limited to street trees, landscape plantings, sanitary sewer and stormwater infrastructure (including tops of curbs and flow lines for rights-of-way) are submitted on an 11-inch by 17-inch approved durable tracing medium and an approved digital version by the owner or developer for review and approval by the director of public works. All detention, retention and impoundment best management practices ("BMP") shall require a certification of as-built conditions in accordance with the public works design and construction standards and chapter 33.2 of the City Code prior to the release of the performance bond. 
(G)  No performance bond shall be released until the owner or developer executes and submits any required deed of dedication or easement with attached plats in a form acceptable to the city attorney accompanied by the required recordation fees payable to the clerk of the circuit court for the City of Hampton. 
( Ord. No. 13-0008, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 14-0020, 9-10-14 )  
Chapter 36 - SWIMMING POOLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General building and development regulations, Ch. 9; land disturbing activity and erosion and sediment control generally, § 13.1-1 et seq.; parks and recreation, Ch. 26; water supply, Ch. 39; zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate swimming pools, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-921, 15.2-1110, 35.1-9. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless otherwise clearly indicated to the contrary: 
Certified lifeguard means an individual who shall possess a current certification for meeting standards recommended by the American Red Cross, Y.M.C.A. or a program shown to be the equivalent thereof to the director of public health at the senior lifesaving level or its equivalent. 
Certified operator means the individual responsible for the everyday operation of a public swimming pool, public spa and/or hot tub or tourist establishment swimming pool and who has successfully passed a course approved by the health department in proper pool operation and maintenance. 
Coping means the cap on the pool, spa and/or hot tub wall that provides a finishing edge around the perimeter of the pool, spa and/or hot tub. 
Director or director of public health means the director of public health for the city or his authorized agent. 
Disinfectant means any chemical that kills or neutralizes the organisms that cause disease and/or infection and is able to be measured. 
Fence means a close type vertical barrier not less than forty-eight (48) inches in height above ground surface. A woven steel wire, chain link, picket or solid board-type fence or a fence of similar construction, which has spacing of not greater than four (4) inches and which will prevent the smallest of children from getting through, shall be construed as within this definition. 
Free available (residual) chlorine means the portion of the total chlorine remaining in water that is not combined with ammonia or nitrogen compounds and will react chemically with undesirable or pathogenic organisms. 
Grease tile means ceramic or plastic tiles which line the interior perimeter of the pool, spa and/or hot tub and extend from the edge of the shell or white coat to the bottom of the coping. 
Hazard means any condition or situation, which exists within a pool or pool area that poses a risk of injury or harm to the patron(s). 
Hydrotherapy spa means a unit designed for recreational and therapeutic use which is not drained, cleaned or refilled for each user. It may include but not be limited to hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water, mineral baths, air induction bubbles, or some combination thereof. Industry terminology for a spa includes but is not limited to "therapeutic pool," "hydrotherapy pool," "whirlpool," "hot spa," "hot tubs," etc. 
Lifeguard means a competent adult, age eighteen (18) or greater, currently certified in CPR and first aid. 
Life line refers to a coarse rope or line with attached buoys used to separate the point at which a pool increases in depth suddenly. It must be securely attached to opposite sides of the pool where the drop-off occurs. 
Maximum load or design load means the maximum number of bathers permitted in a swimming pool at any one (1) time and shall be determined by dividing the total square footage of the swimming pool water surface area by twenty-seven (27). 
Operator or manager shall mean the individual responsible for the operation and management of a swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub. 
Permit to operate is the document issued by the director of public health to the applicant upon fulfillment of the requirements of this chapter. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, governmental agency, club, school or organization of any kind. 
Pool area means that area immediately surrounding and adjacent to the swimming pool to include all areas within the fence, if required, or within the walls of the room in which the pool is located if it is an indoor pool. 
Private residential swimming pool means any swimming pool located on private residential property under the control of the homeowner or a tenant, the use of which is limited to swimming or bathing by members of his family or their invited guests. 
Public spas and hot tubs means any spa and/or hot tub, other than a private residential spa or hot tub, which is intended solely for bathing and is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for such use. Public spas and hot tubs may be individual units or may be integrated into a larger swimming pool or bathing pool. 
Public swimming pool is any swimming pool, other than a private residential swimming pool, or a hotel, motel, or campground swimming pool operated in conjunction therewith and duly regulated and inspected by the state department of health, intended to be used collectively by numbers of persons for swimming or bathing and operated by any person, whether as owner, lessee, operator or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for such use. The term "public swimming pool" includes, but is not limited to, a swimming pool owned or operated by a condominium, marina, private club or association or a civic club or any association of persons. The term "public swimming pool" shall not include single-occupant tanks and showers used exclusively for therapeutic purposes. 
Swimming pool or pool means any swimming, wading or spray pool, including all appurtenant equipment, structures and facilities for the purpose of providing a swimming, bathing or wading place for any person or persons. 
Tourist establishment pool refers to any pool operated by or in conjunction with a hotel, motel, campground or summer camp. 
Turnover rate means the amount of time required by a filtration system to filter the equivalent of the entire volume of a pool or spa. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 36-3. - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations relating to the design, construction, alteration and maintenance of sanitation and safety features applying to the use and operation of public swimming pools and public spas and/or hot tubs to provide for permits for the construction of such swimming pools, spas and/or hot tubs to provide for permits for the operation of such swimming pools, spas and/or hot tubs to provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, to provide for the collection of an annual permitting fee and to provide a penalty for violations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-4. - Application of chapter generally. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to public swimming pools, spas and/or hot tubs as defined in section 36-1. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 08-0013, 8-20-08)  
Sec. 36-5. - Application of chapter to existing pools, spas and/or hot tubs. 
The structural and equipment provisions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub constructed prior to December 11, 1974, except as follows: 
(1)  When any condition exists in such a swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub that would endanger the health, safety or life of any person, the director of public health shall have the authority to order such swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub closed until such condition is corrected. 
(2)  When any alteration, placement or replacement of any equipment is made in any such swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub, such portion altered, placed or replaced shall comply with such requirements. 
(3)  The provisions and requirements of this chapter with respect to fences, operational procedures and standards, chemical feeding equipment, flow meters, pressure gauges, toilet facilities and life guards shall be complied with by all public swimming pools, spas and/or hot tubs, regardless of date of construction. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-6. - Plans and specification for construction, reconstruction or alteration; building permit. 
(a)  No person shall begin construction of a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub or substantially alter or reconstruct a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub without first submitting plans and specifications to the director of public health for review and approval and obtaining a permit for such work from the building official. A building permit shall not be issued by the building official, until approval has been granted for construction by the director of public health and other necessary departments as required by law. 
(b)  For any items not specifically covered in this chapter, the director of public health is hereby authorized to require that all materials, methods of construction and design features of a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub shall prove to function adequately, effectively and without excessive maintenance and operation difficulties before he grants approval thereof and such approval shall be based upon the need for protecting the health and safety of those using the pool, spa and/or hot tub. It shall be the duty of the applicant to provide such data, tests or other adequate proof that the device, material or product will satisfactorily perform the function for which it is intended before such item shall be approved. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-7. - Location. 
The location of a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub shall in no way hinder the operation for which it is designed or adversely affect the user's safety or water quality. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-8. - Water supply. 
All water used in public swimming pools, spas and/or hot tubs shall be from sources that are approved by the director of public health. No piping arrangements shall exist which, under any conditions, will permit sewage or waste to enter the swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub system or water from the swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub to enter the make-up supply. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07) 
Cross reference— Water supply, Ch. 39.  
Sec. 36-9. - Fencing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, use, posses or control any public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub not elevated over four (4) feet above the immediately surrounding ground level of any property in the city, unless the property on which the pool, spa and/or hot tub is located is enclosed with a fence which complies with the provisions of the building code and the zoning ordinance of the city. All fencing shall be maintained in good repair so as to provide an effective barrier. 
(b)  In lieu of fencing the property pursuant to subsection (a) above, the pool, spa and/or hot tub itself may be completely surrounded by a fence. Such fence shall be constructed so as to come within two (2) inches of the ground at the bottom and shall be at least five (5) feet from the edge of the pool at any point. In addition, such fence shall be equipped with a self-locking gate or door that shall be kept locked when the pool is not in use. 
(c)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to swimming pools, spas and/or hot tubs that are housed in a separate structure. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or confinement in jail for not more than thirty (30) days, either or both. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 15-0010, 3-25-15 ) 
Cross reference— Building code, § 9-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Ordinances requiring fencing of swimming pools, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-921.  
Sec. 36-10. - Lifeguards. 
(a)  The operator or manager of any public swimming pool two thousand (2,000) square feet or more in area shall have on duty and within the pool area at all times while the pool is in use, at least one (1) person who shall possess a current certification for meeting the standards recommended by the American Red Cross, Y.M.C.A. or a program shown to be the equivalent thereof to the director of public health, as a certified lifeguard and two (2) or more certified lifeguards for pools having four thousand (4,000) square feet or more of water surface. The ratio of certified lifeguards to bathers at a public swimming pool shall be one (1) certified lifeguard on duty for the first seventy-five (75) bathers and one (1) additional certified lifeguard for every additional fifty (50) bathers or fraction thereof. 
(b)  The operator or manager of any public swimming pool one thousand (1,000) to two thousand (2,000) square feet in area and a maximum depth of five (5) feet or less shall have on duty and within the pool area at all times while the pool is in use, at least one (1) lifeguard, defined as a competent adult, eighteen (18) years or older with current certification in CPR and first aid. 
(c)  The operator or manager of any public swimming pool less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in area and a maximum depth five (5) feet or less shall not be required to provide a lifeguard. In lieu of a lifeguard signage must be provided in plain view of the public, in minimum four-inch letters, that states: 
No Lifeguard on Duty 

Swim at Your Own Risk 

No Swimming Alone 

No Children Under the Age of 14 Without an Adult Present 
(d)  The provisions of this section regarding certified lifeguards or lifeguards shall not apply to condominium or homeowner association pools which are not open to the general public, provided the pool has less than two thousand (2,000) square feet of water surface and is not equipped with a diving board, and a sign as required in section 36-10(c) is provided. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-11. - Operation records. 
Daily records of the operation of a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub shall be maintained. These records shall include pH, the free chlorine residual, water clarity and temperature, cleanliness, safety and such other matters as may be required by the director of public health for the health and safety of the users of the pool, spa and/or hot tub. These records shall be kept on file for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-12. - Inspections. 
As a condition for the issuance of an operator's permit under this chapter, the operator or person in charge of any public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub shall, upon request of the director of public health, permit access to all parts of the establishment at all reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-13. - Authorization to order pool closed. 
When the director of public health finds that any condition exists that endangers the health or safety of the users of a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub he may order the pool, spa and/or hot tub closed until such condition is corrected. It shall be unlawful for any operator to fail to comply with such order. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 36-14—36-25. - Reserved  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT TO OPERATE 
 
Sec. 36-26. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to open a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub for use or to operate a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub in the city, unless he has a current permit to operate issued by the director of public health. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-27. - Certified operator; required. 
All public swimming pools, public spas and/or hot tubs and tourist establishment swimming pools shall be required to have a certified operator. Such individual shall have successfully completed a course in swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub operation and maintenance approved by the director of public health, or shall be able to demonstrate that he has the knowledge and ability to operate and maintain a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-28. - Issuance. 
The director of public health shall issue a permit required by this article, upon proper application therefor, if he finds that the pool, spa and/or hot tub involved and the operator thereof are in substantial compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-29. - Posting. 
An operator's permit issued under this article shall be posted, under transparent waterproof material, in plain view of the users of the pool, spa and/or hot tub involved. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-30. - Term. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 36-31, an operator's permit issued under this article shall be valid until the end of the calendar year in which issued, or as otherwise specified on the permit, unless sooner revoked by the director of public health. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-31. - Temporary permit. 
The director of public health may, when in his judgment it seems proper, issue a temporary permit to an applicant for an operator's permit under this article pending the issuance of such permit. Such temporary permit shall be effective only for so many days as the director of public health shall indicate thereon in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-32. - Revocation. 
Continued failure to comply with this chapter shall be cause for revocation, by the director of public health, of any operator's permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-33. - Fees. 
Prior to the issuance of an operating permit each year, the owner, operator or other responsible person of a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub shall be required to pay a permitting fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the health department. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 36-34—36-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AS TO CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 36-46. - Shells generally. 
Public swimming pool shells shall be of reinforced concrete, or its equivalent in strength and durability, designed and built to withstand anticipated stresses. Such shells shall be of watertight construction and shall have smooth and easily cleanable surfaces. A white or light-colored waterproof interior finish, which will withstand repeated brushing, scrubbing and cleaning procedures, shall completely line the pool to the coping and shall be maintained in good condition that does not pose a hazard to bathers. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-47. - Shape, contour, slope, etc. 
A public swimming pool shall be designed and constructed of such shape and contour that efficient and safe control of the bathers can be accomplished. In water depths under five (5) feet, the slope of the bottom shall not exceed one (1) foot vertical in twelve (12) feet horizontal. Pool walls shall be vertical from the break point toward the deep end for at least three (3) feet below the water line and vertical from the break point to shallow end to within one (1) foot of the finished floor of the pool. The transition point between shallow and deep water shall not be more than five (5) feet deep. The transition point shall be clearly marked through the use of a floating lifeline, connected to opposite sides of the pool, to warn swimmers of the depth change. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-48. - Deck. 
(a)  There shall be a deck at least four (4) feet wide extending around the entire perimeter of a public swimming pool. The deck shall be constructed of concrete or other approved material, having a non-slip but smooth finish. The deck shall have a pitch of not less than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of an inch nor more than five-eighths ( 5/8 ) of an inch to the foot and be so designed as to conduct drainage away from the pool area in a manner that will not create or maintain pools of water or health nuisance. The deck shall be maintained in good condition and shall not pose a hazard to bathers. 
(b)  If the recirculation system is designed for water to enter the bottom portion of the pool and overflow the top, then adequate drainage of the scum and floating material from the deck must be provided. This may be by a continuous drain or multiple drains. In multiple drains, each drain grating shall have a total orifice area of at least four (4) times the cross-sectional area of the drain pipe, which shall have a minimum diameter of two and one-half (2½) inches. In the use of drain channels, continuous around the perimeter of the pool, the channel grating shall be designed so as not to create a hazard to fingers and toes and to be resistant to corrosion. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-49. - Steps and ladders. 
Two (2) or more ladders or other means of egress shall be provided for all public pools having a perimeter greater than one hundred (100) feet and one (1) means of egress for pools one hundred (100) feet or less. Steps below the water level projecting out into the pool beyond the line of the pool wall are prohibited. Treads of all steps, ladders or other means of egress shall be of non-slip construction. Each recessed step area shall be provided with one (1) or more handrails. Such handrails shall be maintained in good condition and tightly secured. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-50. - Overflow facilities. 
(a)  Provision shall be made for removal of floating material and scum from the surface of the water in a public swimming pool. If a recessed type of gutter located near the top of the walls is to be used, the gutter shall have a minimum depth of three (3) inches and shall be of a design, which will permit satisfactory cleaning of the overflow channel. The gutter drain outlets shall be spaced around the pool not more than fifteen (15) feet on centers. The gutter bottom shall slope toward these outlets with a minimum slope of one-quarter (¼) inch to the foot. The drains shall not be less than two and one-half (2½) inches in diameter and the total orifice area of the grating shall be at least twice the cross sectional area of the outlet pipe. 
(b)  For public pools with overflowing gutters, a water level control tank shall be provided which will effectively provide for maintenance of the water level so as to produce constant skimming action at all times. 
(c)  The above-described gutter may be replaced by an arrangement of overflow skimming devices in the walls which will provide the proper removal of scum and floating material. There shall be one (1) such device for each five hundred (500) square feet of pool area or fraction thereof, with a minimum of two (2) per pool, each of which shall be individually controlled. These devices shall be maintained in good condition and working order. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-51. - Outlet drain. 
Each public swimming pool shall be provided with an outlet drain located at the deepest point in the pool. It shall be capable of emptying the entire contents of the pool. Direct connection to a sanitary sewer or septic tank shall not be permitted. The outlet drain shall be covered with a grate of such design that it cannot be readily removed by, or produce any hazard to, the bathers. Pool water must be de-chlorinated and filtered prior to disposal. Disposal of pool water to a storm sewer or natural watercourse shall be subject to written approval by the director of public health, having regard for the health, safety and public welfare and applicable city and state code provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 14-0003, 4-9-14 )  
Sec. 36-52. - Depth markings. 
The depth of the water in a public swimming pool shall be marked at every foot increment of depth in water five (5) feet and under on both sides of the pool and on top of the coping. In water deeper than five (5) feet the markings need not be closer than three (3) feet apart. Numerals and letters shall be at least five (5) inches in size and of good contrast with the walls and deck. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-53. - Diving boards and areas. 
(a) At least twelve (12) feet of free and unobstructed headroom shall be provided above the diving boards at a public swimming pool. The minimum depth of water in the diving areas shall be determined as follows: 
0 to 24 in. inclusive 	8 ft. 	12 ft. 	12 ft. 
24 in. plus to 30 in. inclusive 	8 ft. 	13 ft. 	17 ft. 
30 in. plus to 1 meter inclusive 	8 ft. 6 in. 	15 ft. 	20 ft. 
1 meter plus to 3 meters inclusive 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 	20 ft. 
3 meters plus to 5 meters 	14 ft. 6 in. 	17 ft. 	23 ft. 
 
The minimum length of any diving area terminating at a vertical wall shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  Where multiple diving boards are used, the space between center lines shall not be less than ten (10) feet, and the center of no board shall be closer than ten (10) feet to a side wall. These dimensions shall apply both from a point of projection four (4) feet from the end wall and the point of maximum depth. 
(c)  The space between center lines of three-meter and five-meter diving boards shall not be not less than fifteen (15) feet and between five-meter and ten-meter boards shall be not less than eighteen (18) feet. The minimum distances from center lines of five-meter and ten-meter boards shall be the same as to the side walls. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-54. - Lighting fixtures. 
Where a public swimming pool is to be used after dark, the pool area shall be equipped with lighting fixtures of such number and design as to light all parts of the pool, the water therein and the entire area. Fixtures shall be installed in such manner as to create no hazard to the bathers. The design and installation of the fixtures shall be such that lifeguards can clearly see every part of the swimming pool, including decks, spring boards and other appurtenances without being blinded by glare. If installed, submarine lights shall provide at least one (1) watt per square foot of pool area. Each submarine light shall be properly connected to a ground wire. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-55. - Wading pools. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall apply to wading pools operated and maintained in connection with any public swimming pool. 
(b)  The water supply, lighting, overflow facilities, inlets and outlets for wading pools shall be the same as required in this chapter for swimming pools. 
(c)  The wading pool shall be located so that drainage from the surrounding area will not wash contamination into the pool during rainfall. The bottom of the wading pool shall slope not less than three (3) inches in ten (10) feet toward the drain. 
(d)  The wading pool shall be entirely surrounded by a deck at least four (4) feet in width, constructed of permanently impervious material, which shall have and retain a finish as smooth as possible and that is non-slip to bare feet. The deck shall slope not less than three (3) inches in ten (10) feet away from the pool edge, and the water on the deck discharged to waste. The deck shall be maintained in good condition and shall not pose a hazard to bathers. 
(e)  Wading pools and wading areas shall be separated from swimming pools by appropriate protection features. 
(f)  A complete, separate recirculation system shall be installed at wading pools. The recirculation system shall provide a pool volume turnover rate of once in three (3) hours or less. The free chlorine residual content and the hydrogen-ion content (pH) for wading pools shall be as required in article IV of this chapter for swimming pools. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-56. - Spray pools. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply to spray pools operated and maintained in connection with any public swimming pool. 
(b)  The water sprayed into the pool shall be from an approved supply. Spray heads shall be installed so that there will be no possibility for their submergence as might result in the case of clogged drains. 
(c)  Spray pools shall be constructed of permanently impervious material that shall have and retain a finish as smooth as possible and that is non-slip to bare feet. 
(d)  Spray pool bottoms shall slope not less than three (3) inches in ten (10) feet toward the drains. 
(e)  The spray pool shall be equipped, at its low point, with an unvalved drain to waste. The drain shall be of such size and design that water sprayed into the pool will not pond in the pool bottom. 
(f)  The spray pool shall be entirely surrounded by a deck at least four (4) feet in width, constructed of permanently impervious material, which shall have and retain a finish as smooth as practical and be non-slip to bare feet. The deck shall slope not less than three (3) inches in ten (10) feet away from the pool edge and the water on the deck shall be discharged to waste. The deck shall be maintained in good condition and shall not pose a hazardous to bathers. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-57. - Life-saving and first aid equipment and facilities. 
(a)  Public swimming pools shall be equipped with one (1) or more light, but strong, poles with blunt ends or "shepherd's crook" of not less than twelve (12) feet in length, for making reaching assists or rescue; one (1) or more throwing buoys, not less than fifteen (15) inches in diameter, having a one hundred fifty (150) pound test line attached of sufficient length to reach twice the width of the pool, placed in easily accessible racks adjacent to the pool; a first aid kit which shall be kept filled and readily accessible for emergency use; and a telephone which shall be accessible for emergency use. 
(b)  In lieu of a throwing buoy, a rescue tube, approved by the Red Cross, may be substituted. 
(c)  The director of public health may, in writing, require additional life-saving equipment when such is deemed necessary due to the size of the pool or activity therein. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-58. - Food and drink facilities. 
Food and drink preparation, serving and consumption facilities at public swimming pools must be approved and permitted by the health department, shall be permitted only within designated areas and, in all cases, shall be located a minimum of twelve (12) feet away from the pool water. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07) 
Cross reference— Food and food establishments, Ch. 15.  
Sec. 36-59. - Dressing rooms, showers, toilet facilities and lavatories. 
(a)  A dressing room shall be provided for each sex at public swimming pools. Metal lockers, wire baskets, hooks or other sanitary means of storage of clothing and personal accessories shall be provided. Wooden lockers or clothes bags shall not be permitted. All liquid wastes shall be discharged to an approved sewerage system or to an approved individual sewage disposal system. The floors shall have a minimum pitch of three (3) inches in ten (10) feet to the drains, with no low spots, that would allow water to stand. The floors shall be of smooth, but non-slip, finish and the rooms shall be ventilated so that the floors do not remain damp or wet between periods when the swimming pool is in use. All dressing room surfaces and equipment shall be maintained in good repair and condition. 
(b)  Showers shall be provided at public swimming pools in the proportion of one (1) for each forty (40) persons at the time of maximum load. Each shower shall supply an adequate quantity of heated water through a device that will prevent scalding. Drainage from each shower shall be such as to prevent water from one (1) shower draining across the floor area of another. Showers shall be so located that the bathers will normally pass them on their way to the pool or there shall be directional signs in the dressing area indicating their locations. 
(c)  A minimum of one (1) water closet for females and one (1) water closet and one (1) urinal for males shall be provided at all swimming pools except as exempted by the building official. The urinals and water closets shall be so located that the bathers will pass them on their way to the pool, or have directional signs in the dressing area indicating their location. 
(d)  A minimum of one (1) lavatory for females and one (1) lavatory for males shall be provided for public swimming pools. Each lavatory shall be provided with suitable facilities for making soap available. 
(e)  Apartment pools the use of which is restricted to occupants and guests, where the farthest apartment is not over five hundred (500) feet from the pool, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section regarding dressing rooms. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-60. - Grease line. 
All pools and spas shall be constructed with grease tiles that are attached to the interior perimeter of the pool, spa and/or hot tub and extend from below the water surface to the bottom of the coping. The grease tiles shall be maintained in good repair and clean. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-61. - Coping. 
All pools shall be constructed with coping that is installed around the perimeter of the pool and extended from the edge of the deck to the edge of the pool. All coping shall be maintained in good repair. The seams around the coping shall be sealed in an approved manner so they are watertight. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Secs. 30-62—36-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RECIRCULATION SYSTEM AND APPURTENANCES 
 
Sec. 36-76. - General requirements. 
All public swimming pools, spas and/or hot tubs shall be equipped with a recirculation system consisting of pumps, hair and lint catchers, filters, mechanical disinfection equipment and necessary pipe connections to the inlets and outlets. The recirculation system of all pools constructed after August 27, 1980, shall be designed for a six-hour or less turnover of the swimming pool water. The recirculation system of all hot tubs and spas constructed after the date of these regulations shall be designed for a thirty-minute turnover rate. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-77. - Inlets. 
The inlets for recirculation shall be submerged and be located to produce uniform circulation of water throughout a public swimming pool, without the existence of dead spots. Wall inlets shall be located on not more than twenty (20) foot centers entirely around the perimeter of the swimming pool. Bottom inlets shall be spaced, depending on the dimensions, so as to produce uniform water circulation. The number of bottom inlets shall be the same as required of wall inlets. Each inlet shall be designed as an adjustable office or provided with a valve and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-78. - Filtration system generally. 
(a)  The recirculation system required by this article shall be equipped with a filtration system that will filter the entire content of the swimming pool within six (6) or less hours at the rate of three (3) gallons per minute or less per square foot of filter area for rapid sand filters and twenty (20) gallons per minute or less per square foot of filter area for high rate sand filters. Pressure filters shall be equipped with readily accessible air relief valves and with an access hole large enough to permit inspections, maintenance and repair work. Each pressure filter system shall be equipped with a pressure gauge, at least two (2) inches in diameter, on the inlet and outlet to indicate the pressure in pounds per square inch, and a sight glass that can be easily removed for cleaning shall be provided on the waste discharge line. Gravity-type filters shall be equipped with a loss-of-head gauge. 
(b)  The filtration rate for diatomaceous earth filters and similar equipment may not exceed one and one-half (1½) gallons per square foot of filter area, with eight (8) hours turnover of pool volume, unless continuous slurry feed is provided, in which case the rate shall not exceed three (3) gallons per square foot of filter area. 
(c)  Arrangements or equipment shall be provided for application of filter aid and proper recoating and cleaning of filter elements. All filters shall be capable of being cleaned or backwashed by use of the wash-water pump and the manipulation of valves. In view of the constant change of design of such equipment, it will be necessary to evaluate such system individually and approval or rejection will be at the discretion of the director of public health, based upon the need for protecting the health and safety of those using the pool. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-79. - Filter room. 
(a)  All public swimming pools shall be provided with a room to contain the filtration equipment, pumps, and other recirculation system appurtenances. Such room shall be finished in a light color and provided with adequate ventilation and illumination (at least twenty (20) foot candles). The floor of the filter room shall be designed to provide adequate drainage, and constructed of concrete or other smooth, durable surface. The provision of any facility for discharging filter backwash water onto the filter room floor is strictly prohibited and adequate provision shall be made for the discharge of backwash water. All of the recirculation equipment in this room shall be installed so that it is easily convenient to operate or repair. All entrances below ground surface shall be by stairway and vertical door. Adequate headroom shall be provided above all filters. Below ground filter rooms shall be provided with mechanical ventilation. 
(b)  A placard shall be prominently displayed in the filter room showing the following data: 
(1)  Size of the swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub in feet and volume of gallons. 
(2)  Capacity of the filters in square feet of filter area and gallons per minute. 
(3)  Capacity of the pumps in gallons per minute at the appropriate head in feet. 
(4)  Head loss at which the filters shall be backwashed and complete instructions for operating the recirculation and disinfection equipment. 
(c)  All chemicals stored in the filter room shall be stored up off of the floor, on a dry surface and in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-80. - Pumping equipment. 
The pumping equipment of a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub shall have sufficient capacity to discharge the volume of water for the required turnover of the pool against the maximum head in the recirculation system. The pump used for backwashing sand filters shall have sufficient capacity to backwash the unit at the rate of at least twelve (12) gallons per minute per square foot of filter area against the maximum head developed during the backwashing. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-81. - Hair and lint catchers. 
The hair and lint catchers of a recirculation system required by this article shall be installed ahead of the filter pump and be designed and located so that they can be easily and simply dismantled for cleaning and inspection. They shall be maintained in good condition and cleaned regularly as needed. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-82. - Rate-of-flow indicator. 
The recirculation system required by this article shall be equipped with a rate-of-flow indicator reading in gallons per minute, located so as to indicate the rate of flow of the effluent from the filter and also the rate of backwash in gallons per minute in sand or anthracite coal filters. The devices shall be maintained in good repair and working order. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-83. - Suction cleaner. 
A suction cleaner (vacuum) shall be provided for each public swimming pool. Where the suction cleaner is operated by the recirculating pump, a device shall be provided for throttling the flow from the pool outlet and the suction cleaner line shall be connected through the hair and lint catcher. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-84. - Chemical feeding and testing equipment generally. 
(a)  Means shall be provided for regulating the feeding of chemicals to the water in the recirculation system of a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub. The installation of mechanically operated, positive chemical feeders or open-type chemical machines is required. The installation of closed-type solution pots is prohibited. 
(b)  Each public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub shall be provided with satisfactory equipment for the determination of hydrogen-ion concentration (pH) ranging from six point eight (6.8) to eight point zero (8.0). Satisfactory equipment shall also be provided for determination of free chlorine residual content ranging from zero (0) to five point zero (5.0) ppm. Where stabilized chlorines are used, satisfactory equipment shall be provided for determination of free chlorine residual content ranging from zero (0) to five point zero (5.0) ppm. For spas and/or hot tubs, satisfactory equipment shall be provided for determination of bromine residual content ranging from one (1) to ten (10) ppm. 
(c)  Tests for determining the hydrogen-ion concentration (pH) and disinfectant level for all swimming facilities shall be conducted no less than every four (4) hours. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-85. - Disinfection equipment; chlorinator room. 
All public swimming pools, spas and/or hot tubs shall be provided with disinfectant-feeding equipment. The disinfection equipment shall be capable of applying a dose sufficient to maintain minimum free disinfectant residuals as required by section 36-86. Chlorine gas feeding equipment and chlorine gas cylinders shall be installed in an enclosed space or room, separate from the filter room, equipped with a door capable of being locked. Such room shall be equipped with a forced draft fan exhausting to the outside from the floor level and a fresh air inlet shall be provided near the ceiling. The exhaust fan discharge shall terminate at least twelve (12) feet above any area that may be occupied by any person. Forced draft apparatus shall have sufficient capacity to exhaust the contents of the room in not more than three (3) minutes. The chlorine gas tanks shall be protected from direct sunlight and fastened in place during storage and use. A laboratory approved type gas mask shall be provided where chlorine gas is being utilized. This shall be located accessible to, but outside of, the chlorinator room. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-86. - Chemical content of water. 
(a)  The treatment system of a public swimming pool shall be so designated and installed to provide in the water, at all times when the pool is in use, free chlorine residual of not less than point five (0.5) ppm. Where stabilized chlorines are used, a minimum of one point (1.0) ppm. free chlorine residual must be maintained, or disinfection may be provided by other means with prior written approval of the director of public health. 
(b)  The hydrogen-ion concentration (pH) of the water in a public pool, spa and/or hot tub shall not be below seven point two (7.2) or more than seven point eight (7.8). 
(c)  Chemicals other than chlorine, sodium hypochlorite or calcium hypochlorite, bromine, lime, soda ash and cyanuric acid shall not be used to treat public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub water without prior approval of the director of public health. 
(d)  The treatment system of a public spa shall be so designed and installed to provide in the water, at all times when the spa is in use, bromine or free chlorine residual of not less than one (1) ppm. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-87. - Operation of filters; clarity of water. 
The filters shall be operated twenty-four (24) hours per day during the season of use of a public swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub. At all times when the pool is open for use, the water shall be sufficiently clear to permit a disc six (6) inches in diameter, divided into alternate black and white quadrants, when placed on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point to be clearly visible from the swimming pool deck at all distances up to ten (10) yards in a horizontal direction from the projection of the disc on the swimming pool surface or the main drain(s) at the bottom of the deepest part of the pool shall be clearly visible from the deck around the pool. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-88. - Alternate methods of disinfection and filtration. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as disqualifying any other method of disinfection or any other filtration equipment demonstrated of at least equal efficiency to that required by this article and which is approved by the director of public health. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Sec. 36-89. - Temperature. 
At no time shall the temperature of any pool or spa exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 1397, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 1458, 1-24-07)  
Chapter 37 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General authority of city as to taxation, § 2.02a; collection of taxes, §§ 6.17, 6.18. 
Cross reference— Tax levy ordinances not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-6(3); fee for passing bad check to city in payment of taxes, § 2-135; dog and cat license tax, § 5-53 et seq.; license taxes generally, Ch. 18.1; license tax on vehicles, § 21-40 et seq. 
State Law reference— Taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1 et seq.; local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3000 et seq.; general authority of city relative to taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 37-1. - Fees imposed to cover additional costs in collection of delinquent taxes or other charges. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon each person chargeable with delinquent taxes or other delinquent charges, a fee to cover administrative costs which shall be in addition to all penalties and interest and shall not exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to thirty (30) or more days after notice of delinquent taxes or charges pursuant to Code of Virginia § 58.1-3919 but prior to the taking of any judgment with respect to such delinquent taxes or charges, and thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to judgment. If the collection activity is to collect on a nuisance abatement lien, the fee for administrative costs shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or twenty-five (25) percent of the cost, whichever is less; however, in no event shall the fee be less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  There is also imposed upon each person chargeable with delinquent taxes or other delinquent charges, reasonable attorney's or collection agency's fees which shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the taxes or other charges so collected. 
(Ord. No. 1136, 5-3-96; Ord. No. 1220, 7-15-98; Ord. No. 1360, 12-3-03; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 09-0003, 2-11-09) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3916, 58.1-3958.  
Sec. 37-2. - Refunds. 
(a)  The city treasurer is hereby authorized to issue refunds of all local tax, including penalty and interest thereon, assessed under this chapter, including without limitation, refunds due to erroneous or incorrect assessments, proration, or clerical error. Issuance of refunds shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. In addition, issuance of refunds are subject to applicable provisions in the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3983.1. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall issue refunds of local tax, penalty and interest assessed thereon, owing to a taxpayer due to an erroneous or incorrect assessment, provided that the assessing officer certifies the amount of refund due the taxpayer. No refund in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per invoice for tax, penalty and interest shall be made until the amount of the refund is approved by city council in accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3981. 
(c)  No refund of tax shall be made in any case where application is made more than three (3) years after the last day of the tax year for which such taxes were assessed or where the application is otherwise made beyond the applicable statute of limitations set out in Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 09-0003, 2-11-09)  
Sec. 37-3. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IA. - PROPERTY EXEMPT FROM TAXATION BY DESIGNATION AND CLASSIFICATION 
 
Sec. 37-4. - Authorized. 
(a)  Pursuant to subsection 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia and to § 58.1-3651 of the Code of Virginia, the city by ordinance may by designation or classification exempt from real or personal property taxes, or both, the real or personal property, or both, owned by a non-profit organization that uses such property for religious, charitable, patriotic, historical, benevolent, cultural, or public park and playground purposes. The ordinance shall state the specific use on which the exemption is based, and the continuance of the exemption shall be contingent on the continued use of the property in accordance with the purpose for which the organization is classified or designated. 
(b)  No exemption shall be provided to any organization that has any rule, regulation, policy, or practice that unlawfully discriminates on the basis of religious conviction, race, color, sex, or national origin. 
(c)  The city assessor is delegated the authority to promulgate guidelines to assist staff in the administration of this division. The guidelines and any amendments shall be approved by the city manager and submitted to council for information. 
(Ord. No. 1388, 12-8-04; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-5. - Exemption by designation. 
(a)  Application. Any organization seeking an exemption by designation pursuant to the provisions of this division shall file an application with the city assessor on such forms as the assessor shall prescribe. A committee consisting of the city assessor and a representative from the office of the commissioner of revenue, the office of the treasurer, the office of the city manager and the office of the city attorney, shall review all applications and shall make a written recommendation to the city manager, who shall make a recommendation to council. 
(b)  Public hearing requirement. An ordinance exempting property by designation pursuant to section 37-4 shall be adopted only after holding a public hearing on the application at which citizens shall have the opportunity to be heard. The city shall publish notice of a hearing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Hampton. The notice shall include the assessed value of all real and tangible personal property for which an exemption is requested, as well as the property taxes assessed against such property. The public hearing shall not be held until at least five (5) days after the notice is published in the newspaper. Prior to processing the application, the city shall collect a deposit of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) to cover a portion of the cost of publication of the notice from the requesting organization. The deposit shall be returned to the requesting organization in full if the organization withdraws its request in writing prior to the submission of the notice to the newspaper for publication. Should the cost of the publication of notice exceed the deposit, the requesting organization shall pay the balance to the city. Should the cost of the notice be less than the deposit, the balance shall be remitted to the organization. The effective date of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this section shall be governed by section 37-10. 
(c)  Criteria for exemption by designation. Before adopting any such ordinance exempting property by designation, the city council shall consider the following questions: 
(1)  Whether the organization is exempt from taxation pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
(2)  Whether a current annual alcoholic beverage license for serving of alcoholic beverages has been issued by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board to such organization for use on such property; 
(3)  Whether any director, officer, or employee of the organization is paid compensation in excess of a reasonable allowance for salaries or other compensation for personal services which such director, officer, or employee actually renders; 
(4)  Whether any part of the net earnings of such organization inures to the benefit of any individual, and whether any significant portion of the service provided by such organization is generated by funds received from donations, contributions, or local, state or federal grants. As used in this subsection, donations shall include the providing of personal services or the contribution of in-kind or other material services; 
(5)  Whether the organization provides services for the common good of the public; 
(6)  Whether a substantial part of the activities of the organization involves carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting to influence legislation and whether the organization participates in, or intervenes in, any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office; 
(7)  The revenue impact to the locality and its taxpayers of exempting the property; and 
(8)  Any other criteria, facts, and circumstances that the governing body deems pertinent to the adoption of such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1388, 12-8-04; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-6. - Exemption by classification. 
(a)  Any organization that claims exemption by classification pursuant to Article X, Section 6(a)(1) through (4) of the Virginia Constitution, or pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3606, or pursuant to Article 3 of Chapter 36 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3609 et seq.), or pursuant to any ordinance adopted in accordance with this section, shall submit a letter to the assessor describing the basis of its claim. The assessor and commissioner of the revenue or their designees shall review the request and jointly determine if the organization qualifies for a classification exemption. 
(b)  Following a review and recommendation by the committee established in section 37-5(c) and the city manager, council may by ordinance establish local classifications for common types of organizations that are not exempted directly by the self-executing provisions of Virginia Constitution Article X, Section 6(a)(1) through (4). A new classification shall only apply to property used by its owner for religious, charitable, patriotic, historical, benevolent, cultural or public park and playground purposes. 
(c)  Any ordinance exempting property by classification pursuant to section 37-4 and subsection (b) of this section shall be adopted only after holding a public hearing with respect thereto, at which citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. The city shall publish notice of the hearing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Hampton. The public hearing shall not be held until at least five (5) days after the notice of publication in the newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 1388, 12-8-04; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-7. - Exemptions strictly construed. 
All exemptions of property from taxation created under this division shall be strictly construed in accordance with Article X, Section 6(f) of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1388, 12-8-04; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-8. - Validity of previously granted exemptions. 
Nothing in § 58.1-3651 of the Code of Virginia, or in this Division, or in any ordinance adopted pursuant to this Division, shall affect the validity of either a classification exemption or a designation exemption granted by the General Assembly, prior to January 1, 2003, pursuant to Article 2 (§ 58.1-3606 et seq.), Article 3 (§ 58.1-3609, et seq.), or Article 4 (§ 58.1-3650, et seq.) of Chapter 36 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. An exemption granted pursuant to Article 4 (§ 58.1-3650, et seq.) of Chapter 36 may be revoked in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3605. 
(Ord. No. 1388, 12-8-04; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-9. - Triennial review of exemptions. 
(a)  Every organization except the Commonwealth, any political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the United States which owns real and personal property in the City of Hampton previously exempt pursuant to Chapter 36 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, shall be required to file triennially an application with the city assessor on such forms as the assessor shall prescribe as a requirement of retention of exempt status of the property. 
(b)  Every organization exempt pursuant to section 37-4 shall be required to file triennially following approval of its exemption, an application with the city assessor as a requirement of retention of exempt status of the property. 
(c)  The city assessor shall give each organization sixty (60) days notice of the due date of the application. If the organization certifies that the ownership and the use of the property are the same as when the exemption was initially granted, and the financial status of the organization is substantially the same, the city assessor and the commissioner of revenue may accept that certification as the application; however, the city assessor and the commissioner of revenue may require a more complete application including one (1) identical to the application required in section 37-5. The application shall be filed within the next sixty (60) days preceding the tax year for which such exemption or retention thereof is sought. 
(d)  Failure to timely file the required triennial application shall result in termination of the exemption. 
(e)  The commissioner of revenue and the city assessor or their designees shall review the applications, and provided the ownership and use of the property remains the same as when the exemption was initially approved, the exempt status shall continue. 
(Ord. No. 1388, 12-8-04; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3605.  
Sec. 37-10. - Effective dates. 
(a)  The effective date of the exemption by designation for all proratable property such as real estate and vehicles shall be the first day of the month following the later of the payment to the city of the full cost of the publication of notice and the adoption by city council of the ordinance of exemption. The effective date of the exemption by designation for non-proratable property, such as certain tangible personal property shall be January 1st following the later of the payment to the city of the full cost of the publication of notice or the adoption by city council of the ordinance of exemption. 
(b)  The effective date of the exemption by classification for all proratable property such as real estate and vehicles shall be the first day of the month following the adoption by city council of the ordinance of exemption. The effective date of the exemption by classification for non-proratable property, such as tangible personal property, shall be January 1st following the adoption by city council of the ordinance of exemption. 
(c)  For any organization that filed an application for an exemption by designation prior to the adoption of Division 2A, council may provide that the ordinance establishing the exemption by designation takes effective on or after January 1, 2003. 
(d)  The effective date of an exemption by classification determined pursuant to section 37-6(a) shall be jointly determined by the city assessor and the commissioner of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 1388, 12-8-04; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 09-0016, 10-14-09)  
Sec. 37-11. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The council finds the costs of providing police, fire, refuse collection services and all other municipal services has been continually increasing over the past years. 
(b)  The council further finds that it is the announced policy of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the City of Hampton to distribute the tax burden uniformly, fairly and upon all property. 
(c)  The council further finds that in the interest of sound fiscal policy further study is necessary to ensure that the process for granting exemption from taxation by designation is fair, effective and efficient. 
(Ord. No. 09-0020, 11-18-09)  
Sec. 37-12. - Moratorium on acceptance of applications for tax exemption. 
(a)  After the date of adoption of this ordinance, the assessor shall not accept or continue to process any applications filed by non-profit organizations seeking exemption from taxation by designation pursuant to the provisions of section 37-5, or pursuant to the provisions of section 37-6 (b) or (c). 
(b)  The assessor may receive applications from any organization which claims exemption under the provisions of section 37-6 (a). Such applications for exemption under existing classifications shall be reviewed jointly by the assessor and the commissioner of the revenue, or their designees, to determine if the organization qualifies for an existing classification exemption. 
(c)  This moratorium on acceptance and/or processing of any applications filed by non-profit organizations seeking exemption from taxation by designation shall be in effect until repealed by the council. 
(Ord. No. 09-0020, 11-18-09)  
Secs. 37-13—37-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REAL ESTATE TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to levy and collect ad valorem taxes on real estate, § 2.02a. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-16. - Establishment, composition and general powers and duties of assessment department and office of assessor. 
(a)  There shall be a department for the assessment and equalization of assessment of real estate for taxation, which shall be known as the office of the assessor of real estate or the office. Such office shall consist of a department head known as the assessor who shall be appointed by the city manager and such other officers and employees as shall be assigned to such office. Within the budget adopted by city council, the city manager shall employ and assign to such office such personnel as is necessary for the efficient and proper operation of such office. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the office established by this section to assess the value of all land and lots, together with the improvements thereon, in the city, and to that end, the office shall hear and give consideration to such complaints and equalize such assessments and shall, moreover, be charged with the special duty of increasing as well as decreasing assessments, whether specific complaint is made or not, if, in its judgment, the same is necessary to equalize and accomplish the end that the burden of taxation shall rest equally upon all citizens of the city. 
(c)  All duties imposed and all powers conferred by law on the commissioner of revenue with respect to the assessment and equalization of real estate for taxation, including, but not limited to, the preparation of the land book, shall be transferred to the office of the assessor of real estate. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the office established by this section to compile and maintain an inventory of all real estate owned by the city at its fair market value. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-2—39-4, 39-6; Ord. No. 389; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
Charter reference— Authority to establish above department, § 6.06.  
Sec. 37-17. - Annual assessment and extension of tax. 
All real estate, except public service corporation property, shall be assessed at its fair market value as of January first of each year, by the office of the assessor of real estate and taxes for each year on such real estate shall be extended on the basis of the last assessment made prior to such year, subject to such changes as may have been lawfully made. Public service corporation property shall continue to be assessed at its value as of January first, prior to such assessment date. 
(Code 1964, § 39-5; Ord. No. 389; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 08-0027, 1-14-09) 
Charter reference— Assessment of real estate for taxation, § 6.06. 
State Law reference— Real estate assessments, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3200.  
Sec. 37-17.1. - Assessment of new buildings substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy; abatement of levies on buildings razed, destroyed or damaged. 
All new buildings in the city substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy prior to May 1 of the fiscal year of completion shall be assessed when so completed or fit for use and occupancy, and the assessing officer shall enter into the books the fair market value of such building; provided, however, that no such partial assessment shall become effective until information as to the date and the amount of such assessment is recorded in the office of the city treasurer and made available for public inspection. The tax on such new building for that fiscal year shall be the sum of (i) the tax upon the assessment of the completed building, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the fiscal year such building is substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire fiscal year, and (ii) the tax upon the assessment of such new building as it existed on July 1 of that fiscal year, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the fiscal year such building was not substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire fiscal year, and with respect to any assessment made pursuant hereto after March 1 of any fiscal year the ten (10) percent penalty for nonpayment for June 5 shall be extended to August 5 of the succeeding fiscal year and the interest for nonpayment starting on July 1 shall be extended to September 1 of such fiscal year. 
The tax levies on buildings which are razed, destroyed or damaged by a fortuitous happening beyond the control of the owner shall be abated. No such abatement, however, shall be allowed if the destruction or damage to such building shall decrease the value thereof by less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). No such abatement shall be allowed unless the destruction or damage renders the building unfit for use and occupancy for thirty (30) days or more during the fiscal year. The tax on such razed, destroyed or damaged building shall be computed according to the ratio which the portion of the fiscal year such building was fit for use, occupancy and enjoyment bears to the entire fiscal year. Application for such abatement shall be made by or on behalf of the owner of the building within six (6) months of the date on which the building was razed, destroyed or damaged. 
(Ord. No. 772, 6-13-84; Ord. No. 821, 5-14-86; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3222, 58.1-3292.  
Sec. 37-17.2. - Equalization of assessments—Application to assessor for hearing. 
Any property owner or lessee of real property in the city shall have the right to appeal any assessment thereof to the city's real estate assessor in writing at any time prior to March 1 of the year for which the assessment is made or within thirty (30) days after the date of the notice of the change in assessment, whichever is later. If the appeal is filed by an agent of the owner or lessee, the agent shall submit a notarized statement from the owner or lessee authorizing the agent to file the appeal. The assessor may schedule specific dates for hearings on assessments or the assessor may grant a hearing by appointment. The assessor may authorize persons employed in the assessor's office who are competent to do so to hold any hearing pursuant to this section, provided that the evidence presented or a summary thereof is transmitted to the assessor for action. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 08-0027, 1-14-09; Ord. No. 11-0010, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0021, 11-13-13 )  
Sec. 37-18. - Board of review of assessments—Established; composition; appointment, qualifications and terms of members. 
(a)  For the purposes of this division, a real estate professional is defined to include a commercial or residential real estate appraiser, other real estate professional, builder, developer, or legal or financial professional. 
(b)  There is hereby established a board of review of real estate assessments, which shall be composed of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the city council. All members of such board shall be residents of the city and all shall own an interest in real property in fee within the city whether directly in their individual capacities or indirectly as holders of a greater than fifty (50) percent equity interest in a business entity duly authorized to do business in Virginia or beneficial interest in real property held in trust. At least thirty (30) percent of the members of the board shall be real estate professionals. No person assigned to the office of the assessor of real estate shall serve as a member of such board. 
(c)  In order to be eligible for appointment, each prospective member of such board shall attend and participate in the basic courses of instruction given by the Department of Taxation under § 58.1-206 of the Code of Virginia. In addition, annually, each member shall take continuing education instruction provided by the tax commissioner pursuant to Virginia Code § 58.1-206. 
(d)  The members of the board of review of real estate assessments shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years; provided, that the council may appoint or reappoint members for lesser terms in order that the term of one (1) member of the board shall expire each year. All vacancies shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term. No member shall serve for more than nine (9) consecutive years and upon the expiration of such nine (9) consecutive years such person shall not be eligible for reappointment for a period of three (3) years. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-8, 39-10, 39-12; Ord. No. 389; Ord. No. 637, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 1377, 6-9-04; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 09-0021, 11-18-09; Ord. No. 13-0003, 2-13-13 ) 
Charter reference— Duty to establish above board, and provisions similar to subsection (b), § 6.06. 
Cross reference— General requirement that members of boards and commissions be city residents, § 2-2.  
Sec. 37-19. - Same—Officers and employees; compensation of members. 
The board of review of real estate assessments shall annually elect one (1) of its members as chairperson and a secretary, who need not be a member of the board. A person assigned to the office of the assessor of real estate may act as secretary for the board upon its direction. The board of review may employ necessary clerical or other personnel, subject to appropriations made by the city council. Within the provisions of the Charter, the members of the board shall receive such per diem compensation as shall be appropriated by the city council for the time they are actually engaged in the duties of their office at the rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day except that the chairman shall receive one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per day. Such per diem compensation may be limited to such number of days as in the judgment of the city council is sufficient for the work of the board in any calendar year. 
(Code 1964, § 39-12; Ord. No. 389; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 09-0021, 11-18-09) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 6.06. 
State Law reference— Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3375.  
Sec. 37-20. - Same—General powers. 
The board of review of real estate assessments shall have and may exercise the power to revise, correct and amend any and all assessments of real estate made by the office of the assessor of real estate. Such board shall also have all the powers conferred upon boards of equalization by §§ 58.1-3378 through 58.1-3387 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1964, § 39-9; Ord. No. 389; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 09-0021, 11-18-09) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 6.06.  
Sec. 37-21. - Same—Meetings; rules of procedure. 
The board of review of real estate assessments shall meet at such place or places and for such time as may be necessary to properly discharge its duties and exercise the powers conferred by this division. Public notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to each meeting by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
In all cases brought before the board, there shall be a presumption that the valuation determined by the assessor is correct, and the board shall be advised that it is not necessary that the taxpayer show that the assessment is a result of manifest error or disregard of controlling evidence. 
The burden of proof shall be upon a taxpayer seeking relief to show that the property in question is valued at more than its fair market value, that the assessment is not uniform in its application, or that the assessment is otherwise not equalized. In order to receive relief, the taxpayer must produce substantial evidence that the valuation determined by the assessor is erroneous and was not arrived at in accordance with generally accepted appraisal practice. Mistakes of fact, including computation, that affect the assessment shall be deemed not to be in accordance with generally accepted appraisal practice. 
Such board may adopt rules and regulations of procedure pertaining to requests for review or appeal. The secretary of such board shall file any rules so adopted with the clerk of council. Except as otherwise provided by law, all proceedings of such board shall be in public session and no decision shall be made unless and until such board has heard a report on such assessment or the equalization thereof from the office of the assessor of real estate. The board's rules, regulations and procedures, and the conduct of its meetings shall be in accordance with § 58.1-3378 through § 58.1-3387 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1964, § 39-11; Ord. No. 389; Ord. No. 1377, 6-9-04; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 09-0021, 11-18-09) 
State Law reference— Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3379.  
Sec. 37-22. - Same—Right of appeal to board; deadline for action on complete applications. 
Any person aggrieved by any assessment made by the office of the assessor of real estate may apply for review or appeal of same to the board of review of real estate assessments, provided such appeal is filed on forms provided by the board of review by April 1 of the year for which the assessment is made or within sixty (60) days of the date of the notice of the change in assessment, whichever is later. When the board considers any case involving commercial, industrial, or multi-family residential property, at least one (1) member who is a real estate professional shall be present and participate in hearing the case unless waived by the taxpayer. 
The board shall finally dispose of all complete applications filed in a timely manner by the June 30 immediately preceding the July 1 effective date for which taxes on such contested assessed value will be levied, except that any real estate newly assessed after the January 1 immediately preceding the July 1 effective date shall be subject to review until and disposed of by June 30 of the following year. The assessor shall notify all owners of real estate of such deadlines on the annual notice of assessment. 
(Code 1964, § 39-7; Ord. No. 389; Ord. No. 1377, 6-9-04; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 08-0027, 1-14-09; Ord. No. 09-0021, 11-18-09; Ord. No. 11-0010, 8-10-11; Ord. No. 13-0021, 11-13-13) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 6.06. 
State Law reference— Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3378.  
Sec. 37-23. - Same—Appeal from decisions of board. 
Any person, including the office of the assessor of real estate, aggrieved by any assessment or the equalization thereof made by the board of review of real estate assessments may apply for relief to the court in the manner provided by sections 58.1-3984 through 58.1-3989. 
(Code 1964, § 39-13; Ord. No. 389; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 6.06.  
Sec. 37-24. - Assessments by state corporation commission. 
(a)  The preceding sections of this division shall not apply to the assessment of any real estate assessable pursuant to law by the state corporation commission. 
(b)  The assessment by the state corporation commission of the real properties of public service corporations for the preceding year shall be taken as the assessment of such properties for levying taxes and collecting the first installment thereon pursuant to this division, until the regular annual assessment of such properties by the commission for the current year is completed as provided by state law. Upon the payment of the final installment of such taxes to the city by any such public service corporation, the total of such taxes for the current year shall be adjusted on the basis of the assessment by the state corporation commission for the current year. 
(c)  The state corporation commission may, upon the application of any such public service corporation or the city filed with the commission on or before the fifteenth day of January in any year, amend its assessment for the preceding year by increasing or decreasing the same, by reason of any improvements or additions thereto, or proper deductions therefrom, or other changes affecting the assessment of the properties of such corporation within the preceding year, such increases, decreases and changes to be subject to adjustment by the commission until the regular annual assessment of the properties of the corporation is completed by the commission. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-14, 39-54, 39-55; Ord. No. 273; Ord. No. 389; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Assessments on pubic service corporations, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3917.  
Sec. 37-25. - When tax due and payable. 
All taxes in the city levied on real estate shall become due and payable as follows: One-half (½) shall become due and payable on or before the fifth day of December and one-half (½) shall become due and payable on or before the fifth day of June of the tax year in which the levy is made. 
(Code 1964, § 39-52; Ord. No. 273; Ord. No. 447; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 37-26. - Tax bills. 
The city treasurer shall, as soon as may be in each year, send by United States mail, to each taxpayer assessed with real estate taxes for that year, a bill or bills in the form prescribed by the state department of taxation. The bill or bills for real estate taxes due on June fifth shall be mailed to the taxpayer not later than May tenth and the bill or bills for real estate taxes due on December fifth shall be mailed to the taxpayer not later than November tenth. 
(Code 1964, § 39-53; Ord. No. 273; Ord. No. 441; Ord. No. 447; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Tax bills, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3912.  
Sec. 37-27. - When taxes to be received without penalty and interest. 
The treasurer shall commence to receive real estate taxes as soon as he receives copies of the landbook from the assessor, which shall be no later than the first day of September, and the treasurer shall continue to receive the amount due and payable for the first semiannual installment of one-half (½) to the total tax due for the then current year, or the total amount due, if the taxpayer desires, up to and including the fifth day of December of each year, without penalty or interest. The treasurer shall also continue to receive the second semiannual installment of the remaining one-half (½) of the total tax due for the then current year up to an including the fifth day of June of each year, without penalty or interest. 
(Code 1964, § 39-55; Ord. No. 273; Ord. No. 441; Ord. No. 447; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-28. - Penalty on delinquencies. 
Any person failing to pay an installment of real estate levies on or before the fifth day of December or June of the assessment year, when such installment falls due, shall incur a penalty thereon of ten (10) percent of the tax due, which shall be added to the amount of taxes or levies due from such taxpayer. Such penalty, when so assessed, shall become a part of the tax. 
(Code 1964, § 39-57; Ord. No. 273; Ord. No. 441; Ord. No. 447; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 707, 12-16-81; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to impose penalties for nonpayment of taxes, § 6.18. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 37-29. - Interest on delinquencies. 
Interest, at a rate of one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of ten (10) percent per month or portion of a month from the first day of July of the year next following the assessment year shall be collected upon the principal and penalties of all real estate taxes and levies then remaining unpaid, which penalty and interest shall be collected and accounted for by the officers charged with the duty of collecting such taxes or levies, along with the principal sum thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
Editor's note— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 37-30. - How payments credited. 
Pursuant to § 58.1-3913 of the Code of Virginia, the city treasurer shall credit any payment of real estate taxes first against the most delinquent account, the collection of which is not subject to a defense of an applicable statute of limitations. 
(Code 1964, § 39-58.1; Ord. No. 690; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1308, 6-13-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-31. - Surplus proceeds paid to the city from delinquent real estate tax sales. 
Within three (3) calendar years of the city receiving surplus funds from the sale of real estate pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3967, as amended, the council may, upon the request of the former owner, his heirs or assigns, or unknown beneficiary of said real estate pay over such amount of the surplus funds as the council may deem appropriate to the former owner, his heirs or assigns, or unknown beneficiary upon presentation of an order of the circuit court in which such real estate is located evidencing a prior entitlement thereto and the amount of such entitlement, subject o offset of administrative costs incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1428, 8-10-06; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Secs. 37-32—37-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ASSESSMENT OF LAND DEVOTED TO AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL USES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3231. 
 
Sec. 37-41. - Findings of fact. 
The city council finds that the preservation of real estate devoted to agricultural and horticultural uses within its boundaries is in the public interest and, having heretofore adopted a land-use plan, hereby ordains that such real estate shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of article 4 of chapter 32 of title 58.1 (§ 58.1-3230 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia and of this division. 
(Code 1964, § 39-107; Ord. No. 530; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-42. - Application for classification and assessment generally. 
(a)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in §§ 58.1-3230 and 58.1-3233 of the Code of Virginia may, on or before May 1 of each year, preceding the tax year for which such taxation is sought, apply to the assessor for the classification, assessment and taxation of such property for the next succeeding tax year on the basis of its use, under the procedures set forth in § 58.1-3236 of the Code of Virginia. In any year in which a general reassessment is being made, such application may be submitted until thirty (30) days have elapsed after the notice of increase in assessment is mailed in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3330, or sixty (60) days preceding the tax year, whichever is later. Applications submitted after May 1 will be considered late applications and may be filed no more than sixty (60) days after the May 1 filing deadline specified herein, upon the payment of a late fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Such application shall be on forms provided by the state department of taxation and supplied by the assessor and shall include such additional schedules, photographs and drawings as may be required by the assessor. 
(b)  An individual who is the owner of an undivided interest in a parcel may apply under this section on behalf of himself and the other owners of such parcel, upon submitting an affidavit that such other owners are minors or cannot be located. 
(c)  An application shall be submitted under this section whenever the use or acreage of such land previously approved changes. 
(d)  An application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall accompany each application under this section. 
(e)  Property owners must revalidate annually any previously approved application with the real estate assessor on forms prepared by the real estate assessor on or before May 1 of each year preceding the tax year for which revalidation is sought. No revalidation fee will be required for such applications submitted on or before the May 1 deadline specified herein. Revalidation applications submitted after that date will be considered late applications and will be accepted no more than sixty (60) days after the May 1 revalidation deadline, upon the payment of a late fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(f)  A separate application shall be filed under this section for each parcel on the land book. 
(Code 1964, § 39-108; Ord. No. 530; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 11-0010, 8-10-11) 
State Law reference— Applications, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3234.  
Sec. 37-43. - Determination by assessor. 
(a)  Promptly upon receipt of any application under this division, the assessor shall determine whether the subject property meets the criteria for taxation hereunder. If the assessor determines that the subject property does meet such criteria, he shall determine the value of such property for its qualifying use, as well as its fair market value. 
(b)  In determining whether the subject property meets the criteria for "agricultural use" or "horticultural use," the assessor may request an opinion from the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services. Upon the refusal of such commissioner to issue an opinion, or in the event of an unfavorable opinion which does not comport with standards set forth by such commissioner, the party aggrieved may seek relief from the circuit court of the city, if the court finds in his favor, it may issue an order which shall serve in lieu of an opinion for the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1964, § 39-109; Ord. No. 530; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-44. - Land book entries; tax to be extended from use value. 
The use value and fair market value of any property qualifying under this division shall be placed on the land book before delivery to the city treasurer and the tax for the next succeeding tax year shall be extended from the use value. 
(Code 1964, § 39-110; Ord. No. 530; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-45. - Roll-back tax when use changes to nonqualifying use. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a roll-back tax, and interest thereon, in such amounts as may be determined under § 58.1-3237 of the Code of Virginia, upon any property as to which the use changes to a nonqualifying use under this division, or any property as to which the zoning is changed to a more intensive use at the request of the owner or his agent. 
(b)  The owner of any real estate liable for roll-back taxes shall, within sixty (60) days following a change in use or zoning, report such change to the assessor on such forms as may be prescribed. The assessor shall forthwith determine and assess the roll-back tax, which shall be paid to the treasurer within thirty (30) days of assessment. On failure to report within sixty (60) days following such change in use or zoning, or failure to pay within thirty (30) days of assessment, such owner shall be liable for an additional penalty equal to ten (10) percent of the amount of the roll-back tax and interest, which penalty shall be collected as a part of the tax. In addition to such penalty, there is hereby imposed interest of one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of eight (8) percent of the amount of the roll-back tax, interest and penalty, for each month or fraction thereof during which the failure continues. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-111, 39-112; Ord. No. 530; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Change in use or zoning of real estate assessed, roll-back taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3237.  
Sec. 37-46. - Misstatements in application filed under division. 
Any person making a material misstatement of fact in any application filed pursuant to this division shall be liable for all taxes, in such amounts and at such times as if such property had been assessed on the basis of fair market value as applied to other real estate in the city, together with interest and penalties thereon; and if such material misstatement was made with the intent to defraud the city, he shall be further assessed with an additional penalty of one hundred (100) percent of such unpaid taxes. 
(Code 1964, § 39-112; Ord. No. 530; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Misstatements, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3238.  
Sec. 37-47. - Applicability of general tax law. 
The provisions of title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia applicable to local levies and real estate assessment and taxation shall be applicable to assessments and taxation under this division mutatis mutandis including, without limitation, provisions relating to tax liens, boards of equalization and the correction of erroneous assessments, and for such purposes the roll-back taxes shall be considered to be deferred real estate taxes. 
(Code 1964, § 39-113; Ord. No. 530; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3243.  
Secs. 37-48—37-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTION FOR PROPERTY UTILIZING SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES OR DEVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3661. 
 
Sec. 37-61. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Certified solar energy equipment, facilities or devices shall mean any property, including real or personal property, equipment, facilities or devices, certified by the local certifying authority, that is designed and used primarily for the purpose of providing for the collection and use of incident solar energy for water heating, space heating or cooling or other application which would otherwise require a conventional source of energy, such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity, regardless of the existence of a conventional energy backup system. 
Local tax rate shall mean the real property tax rate. 
Local certifying authority shall mean the local building departments or the department of waste management. 
(Code 1964, § 39-130; Ord. No. 636, 10-24-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-62. - Equipment, facilities and devices constitute separate class of property. 
Certified solar energy equipment, facilities and devices, as defined in section 37-61, are hereby declared to be a separate class of property and shall constitute a classification for local taxation separate from other classifications of real or personal property. 
(Code 1964, § 39-129; Ord. No. 636, 10-24-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-63. - Authorized. 
Tax exemption is provided according to the terms of this division for qualified property owners who use certified solar energy equipment, facilities or devices to provide or to supplement their energy requirements. 
(Code 1964, § 39-131; Ord. No. 636, 10-24-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-64. - Administration. 
The exemption provided for in this division shall be administered by the building inspection department and the office of the assessor of real estate according to the general provisions of this division. 
(Code 1964, § 39-132; Ord. No. 636, 10-24-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-65. - Eligibility requirements. 
Exemptions shall be granted to persons under this division subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The title of the property for which exemption is claimed is held, or partially held, on the first day of the taxable year, by the person claiming exemption. 
(2)  The building inspection department has determined, after examination of the solar energy equipment, facility or device, that the unit primarily performs at least one (1) of the functions set forth in section 37-61 and conforms to the requirements set by regulations of the state department of housing and community development. 
(3)  The state department of housing and community development has certified to the city assessor that the applicant has met all requirements qualifying such equipment, facilities or devices for exemption from taxation. 
(Code 1964, § 39-133; Ord. No. 636, 10-24-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-66. - Application. 
(a)  A person claiming an exemption under this division shall file an application with the building inspection department, on forms provided by the state department of housing and community development and available from the building inspection department. 
(b)  The application required by this section shall be submitted with a complete set of plans and specifications of the solar energy equipment, facilities or devices for which exemption is claimed. 
(Code 1964, § 39-134; Ord. No. 636, 10-24-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-67. - Determination of, and presumption as to, value of equipment, facilities or devices. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the certificate referred to in section 37-65 from the state department of housing and community development, the city assessor shall proceed to determine the value of solar energy equipment, facilities or devices covered by the certificate. 
(b)  For purposes of the administration of this division, and for no other purposes, the value of certified solar energy equipment, facilities or devices qualifying for exemption shall be presumed to be not less than the normal cost of purchasing and installing such equipment, facilities or devices. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-134, 39-136; Ord. No. 636, 10-24-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-68. - Amount of exemption. 
The amount of the exemption provided for by this division shall be determined by applying the local tax rate to the value of the certified solar energy equipment, facilities or devices and subtracting one hundred (100) percent of such amount from the total real estate property tax due on the real property to which such equipment, facilities or devices are attached. 
(Code 1964, § 39-136; Ord. No. 636, 10-24-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-69. - Effective date of exemption. 
The exemption provided for in this division shall be effective in the tax year next succeeding the year in which application for the exemption is made. In the case of real estate assessed pursuant to § 58.1-3292 of the Code of Virginia, the exemption shall be effective when the real estate is first assessed or on the date of application for exemption, whichever is later. 
(Code 1964, § 39-137; Ord. No. 636, 10-24-79; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-70. - Appeal from decisions under division. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building inspection department under this division may appeal such decision to the local board of building code appeals, which may affirm or reverse such decision. 
(Code 1964, § 39-135; Ord. No. 636, 10-24-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Secs. 37-71—37-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - EXEMPTION FOR REHABILITATED RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3220. 
 
Sec. 37-81. - Authorized. 
There is hereby provided an exemption from taxation of real estate, which has been substantially rehabilitated for residential or multi-family use. For the purposes of this section, any real estate shall be deemed to have been substantially rehabilitated when a structure, which is no less than twenty-five (25) years of age, has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than forty (40) percent, without increasing the total square footage of such structure by more than fifteen (15) percent. 
(Code 1964, § 39-91; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 1290, 1-10-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-82. - Building permits required. 
No property shall be eligible for the exemption provided by this division, unless the appropriate building permits have been issued prior to the beginning of the new alterations. 
(Code 1964, § 39-93; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 681, 2-25-82; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-83. - Application. 
(a)  A person claiming an exemption pursuant to the provisions of this division shall file an application with the city assessor on such forms as the assessor shall prescribe. Such application shall be filed within five (5) working days after the building permits referred to in section 37-82 have been issued and prior to any renovations being started. 
(b)  The owner under oath shall sign the application for tax abatement. 
(c)  Only one (1) application per residential structure for inclusion in this program shall be approved. 
(d)  All renovations must be completed within one (1) year from being approved in order to qualify for the exemption. 
(e)  There shall be a non-refundable fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for processing each application under this section. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-93, 39-94; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 681, 2-25-81; Ord. No. 1290, 1-10-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-84. - Verification and certification of rehabilitation. 
(a)  When renovations are completed, the property owner, or his agent, must notify the assessor. When notified of completion, the city assessor shall verify that the rehabilitation indicated on the application filed under this division meets all requirements for the exemption, or that the requirements have not been met. 
(b)  The property must at all times be in full compliance with all Hampton City Codes including, without limitation, the Building Code, the Housing Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hampton, and all other rules and regulations which affect or control the occupancy, use and management of the property. Should the director of codes compliance determine that the property is substantially out of compliance with applicable city ordinances, the director of codes compliance shall thereupon give notice to the owner. The owner, having received written notice of ordinance violations, shall be granted thirty (30) days in which to correct said violations or to establish, to the satisfaction of the director of codes compliance, that the citation is in error. If after thirty (30) days have elapsed and the ordinance violation has not been corrected to the satisfaction of the director of codes compliance, the city assessor shall be given written notification to revoke any tax abatement approved under this division. 
(c)  The city assessor's determination of eligible properties as applies to this program shall be final and not subject to appeal. 
(d)  All taxes and assessments due the City of Hampton must be current prior to approval of exemption. 
(e)  If, after investigation, the city assessor determines that the real estate for which the exemption is claimed qualifies under this division, he shall so certify to the city treasurer, who shall deduct the amount of the exemption from the applicant's real estate tax liability. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-93, 39-94; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 681, 2-25-81; Ord. No. 1290, 1-10-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-85. - Amount of exemption. 
The exemption authorized by this division shall be an amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the residential structure, as determined by the city assessor, and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment. 
(Code 1964, § 39-92; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 1290, 1-10-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-86. - Duration of exemption. 
An exemption granted under this division shall commence on July first of the taxable year following completion of the rehabilitation and shall run with the real estate for a period of three (3) years initially, at the amount designated in section 37-85; and then for the next three (3) years at a rate of fifty (50) percent of the amount in section 37-85. This exemption, in whole or in part, shall not exceed six (6) years upon qualifying. 
(Code 1964, § 39-92; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 1290, 1-10-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-87. - Reduced value not to be listed in land book. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed so as to permit the real estate assessor to list upon the land book any reduced value due to the exemption provided in this division. 
(Code 1964, § 39-92; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Secs. 37-88—37-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - EXEMPTION FOR REHABILITATED COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL REAL ESTATE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3221. 
 
Sec. 37-96. - Authorized. 
There is hereby provided an exemption from taxation of real estate, which has been substantially rehabilitated for commercial or industrial use. For the purposes of this section, any real estate shall be deemed to have been substantially rehabilitated when a structure, which is no less than twenty-five (25) years of age or fifteen (15) years of age if located in the city's designated enterprise zones, has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than sixty (60) percent without increasing the total square footage of the structure by more than twenty-five (25) percent. 
(Code 1964, § 39-95; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 1289, 1-10-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-97. - Building permits required. 
No property shall be eligible for the exemption provided by this division, unless the appropriate building permits have been issued prior to the beginning of the new alterations. 
(Code 1964, § 39-97; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 681, 2-25-81; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-98. - Application. 
(a)  A person claiming an exemption pursuant to the provisions of this division shall file an application with the city assessor on such form as the assessor shall prescribe. Such application must be filed within five (5) working days after the building permits referred to in section 37-97 have been issued and prior to any renovations being started; however, for good cause shown, the assessor may extend the filing date and fee for a maximum of twenty-four (24) months. 
(b)  The owner under oath shall sign the application for tax abatement. 
(c)  Only one (1) application per commercial or industrial structure for inclusion in this program shall be approved. 
(d)  All renovations must be completed within twenty-four (24) months from being approved in order to qualify for the exemption. 
(e)  There shall be a non-refundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for processing each application under this section. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-97, 39-98; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 681, 2-25-81; Ord. No. 1289, 1-10-01; Ord. No. 1331, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1470, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-99. - Verification and certification of rehabilitation. 
(a)  When renovations are completed, the property owner, or his agent, must notify the assessor. When notified of the completion, the city assessor shall verify that the rehabilitation indicated on the application filed under this division meets all requirements for the exemption, or that the requirements have not been met. 
(b)  The property must at all times be in full compliance with all Hampton City Codes including, without limitation, the Building Code, the Housing Code, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hampton, and all other rules and regulations which affect or control the occupancy, use and management of the property. Should the director of codes compliance determine that the property is substantially out of compliance with applicable city ordinances, the director of codes compliance shall thereupon give notice to the owner. The owner, having received written notice of ordinance violations, shall be granted thirty (30) days in which to correct said violations or to establish, to the satisfaction of the director of codes compliance, that the citation is in error. If after thirty (30) days have elapsed and the ordinance violation has not been corrected to the satisfaction of the director of codes compliance, the city assessor shall be given written notification to revoke any tax abatement approved under this division. 
(c)  The city assessor's determination of eligible properties as applies to this program shall be final and not subject to appeal. 
(d)  All taxes and assessments due the City of Hampton must be current prior to approval of exemption. 
(e)  If, after investigation, the city assessor determines that the real estate for which an exemption under this division is claimed qualifies, he shall so certify to the city treasurer, who shall deduct the amount of the exemption from the applicant's real estate tax liability. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-97, 39-98; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 681, 2-25-81; Ord. No. 1289, 1-10-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-100. - Amount of exemption. 
The exemption authorized by this division shall be an amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the commercial or industrial structure, as determined by the city assessor, and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment. 
(Code 1964, § 39-96; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 1289, 1-10-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-101. - Duration of exemption. 
An exemption granted under this division shall commence on July first of the taxable year following completion of the rehabilitation or replacement and shall run with the real estate for a period of three (3) years initially, at the amount designated in section 37-100; and then for the next three (3) years at a rate of fifty (50) percent of the amount in section 37-100. This exemption, in whole or in part, shall not exceed six (6) years upon qualifying. 
(Code 1964, § 39-96; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 1289, 1-10-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-102. - Reduced value not to be listed in land book. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed so as to permit the real estate assessor to list upon the landbook any reduced value due to the exemption provided in this division. 
(Code 1964, § 39-96; Ord. No. 644, 12-12-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Secs. 37-103—37-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DEFERRAL OR FREEZE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABLED PERSONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210. 
 
Sec. 37-116. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Affidavit shall mean the real estate tax deferral or freeze affidavit provided for in this division. 
Deferral shall mean a total or partial deferral of real estate taxes assessed on real property inhabited by a taxpayer qualified under the terms of this division. The amount of such taxes so deferred shall become due and payable at a later date in accordance with the provisions of section 37-124 of this division. 
Dwelling shall mean the full-time residence of the person claiming deferral or freeze pursuant to this division. 
Permanently and totally disabled shall mean unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity, which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of a person's life. 
Property shall mean real property and mobile homes as provided in section 37-120. 
Tax freeze shall mean the total exemption of that portion of the real estate tax which represents the increase in such tax since the taxpayer initially applied and qualified for a freeze under this division, so that the taxpayer's real estate tax will be frozen at the amount assessed in the fiscal year following the taxpayer's initial application and continued annual qualification. If, for any year following the initial qualification of a taxpayer for a tax freeze such taxpayer becomes disqualified, any subsequent application for a freeze by such taxpayer shall be treated as an initial application for purposes of determining the tax freeze. No lien shall accrue as a result of the amount certified as exempt under this section. 
Taxable year shall mean the year for which an annual assessment is made and for which deferral or freeze is claimed under this division. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 ) 
State Law reference— Permanent and totally disabled defined, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217.  
Sec. 37-117. - Authorized. 
Real estate tax deferral or freeze is provided for property owners who are eligible according to the terms of this division and who have qualified by meeting the requirements of this division. Persons qualifying for such deferral or freeze are deemed to be bearing an extraordinary real estate tax burden in relation to their income and financial worth. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 )  
Sec. 37-118. - Administration; general authority of commissioner of the revenue. 
(a)  The deferral or freeze provided for in this division shall be administered by the commissioner of the revenue according to the provisions of this division. The commissioner of the revenue is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations, in conformance with the provisions of this division and the laws of the commonwealth enabling this division, including the requirement of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for the deferral or freeze provided for in this division. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue shall make such inquiry as may be reasonably necessary to determine the qualifications and the eligibility of persons seeking deferral or freeze under this division. He may, in addition, require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish the income or financial worth of any applicant for such deferral or freeze. 
(c)  All inquiries made by the commissioner of the revenue and all information supplied by an applicant pursuant to this division shall be deemed confidential and shall not be released to any person other than an employee or officer of the office of the commissioner of the revenue or other persons designated by the commissioner of the revenue, having a need to know such information, unless otherwise ordered by a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 09-0002, 2-11-09; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 )  
Sec. 37-119. - General prerequisites to grant; effect of transfer of dwelling as result of eminent domain and of residency in hospital, nursing home, etc. 
Either the deferral or freeze, but, not both, as provided for in this division shall be granted to eligible persons subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The real estate is owned by, or is partially owned by, and occupied as the sole dwelling of, a person who is either permanently and totally disabled or is not less than sixty-five (65) years of age, as of the last day of the calendar year immediately preceding the taxable year. A dwelling jointly held by a husband and wife shall qualify if either spouse is over sixty-five (65) years of age or is permanently and totally disabled. 
(2)  For the tax freeze program, the total combined income during the calendar year immediately preceding the taxable year, from all sources, of the owner of the dwelling living therein, the owner's or owner's relatives living in the dwelling, and of the owner's nonrelatives living in the dwelling except for bona fide tenants or bona fide paid caregivers of the owner living in the dwelling does not exceed the income qualification cap amount set forth in subsection (9) hereof; provided, that the first seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) of income of each relative, other than spouse, of the owner who is living in the dwelling, and each nonrelative who is not the bona fide tenant or bona fide paid caregiver of an owner living in the dwelling and who does not qualify for the exemption provided by subsection (6) hereof, shall not be included in such total. 
(3)  For the tax deferral program, the total combined income during the calendar year immediately preceding the taxable year, from all sources, of the owner of the dwelling living therein, the owner's or owner's relatives living in the dwelling, and of the owner's nonrelatives living in the dwelling except for bona fide tenants or bona fide paid caregivers of the owner living in the dwelling does not exceed the income qualification cap amount set forth in subsection (9) hereof; provided, that the first seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) of income of each relative, other than spouse, of the owner who is living in the dwelling, and each nonrelative who is not the bona fide tenant or bona fide paid caregiver of an owner living in the dwelling and who does not qualify for the exemption provided by subsection (6) hereof, shall not be included in such total. 
(4)  For the tax freeze program, the net combined financial worth, including equitable interests, as of December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year, of the owners, and of the spouse of any owner, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land not exceeding ten (10) acres upon which it is situated, shall not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). 
(5)  For the tax deferral program, the net combined financial worth, including equitable interests, as of December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year, of the owners, and of the spouse of any owner, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land not exceeding ten (10) acres upon which it is situated, shall not exceed two hundred thousand ($200,000.00). 
(6)  Notwithstanding subsections (2), (3), and (4) of this section, if an owner qualifies for a deferral or freeze under this division, and if the owner can prove by clear and convincing evidence that his physical or mental health has deteriorated to the point that the only alternative to permanently residing in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home or other facility for physical or mental care is to have a person move in and provide care for the owner, and if a person does then move in for that purpose, then none of the income of the person or of the person's spouse shall be counted towards the income limit, provided the owner of the residence has not transferred assets in excess of ten thousand ($10,000.00) without adequate consideration within a three-year period prior to or after the person moves into such residence. 
(7)  If the dwelling of a person who would otherwise be eligible for deferral or freeze under this division is transferred as a result of eminent domain, or threat or imminence thereof, such person shall be entitled to such deferral or freeze for the period of such person's holding title to this property so transferred and also from the date of his taking record title to a dwelling acquired to replace the transferred property. 
(8)  The fact that persons who are otherwise qualified for tax deferral or freeze pursuant to this division are residing in hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes or other facilities for physical or mental care for extended periods of time shall not be construed to mean that the real estate for which tax deferral or freeze is sought does not continue to be the sole dwelling of such persons during such extended periods of other residence, so long as such real estate is not used by or leased to others for consideration. 
(9)  The income qualification cap applicable for deferral or freeze applications based on total combined income for all calendar years prior to 2018 shall be fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The income qualification cap for deferral or freeze applications based on total combined income during calendar year 2018 and every calendar year thereafter shall be determined annually by the commissioner of the revenue and shall be equal to the income qualification cap applicable for the immediately preceding calendar year increased by a percentage equal to the federal social security cost of living adjustment applicable to the year for which income is reported on the application, round up to the nearest thousandth. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1480, 6-20-07; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 09-0002, 2-11-09; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 ; Ord. No. 19-0003 , 4-10-19) 
State Law reference— Amount of exemption, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3211, 58.1-3212.  
Sec. 37-120. - Mobile home as real estate for purposes of division. 
For  the purposes of this division, a mobile home shall be real estate, if the owner's intention that it be permanently affixed is shown by the fact that: 
(1)  It is located on land belonging in whole or in part to the owner of the mobile home, his spouse, parent or child, and is connected to permanent water or sewage lines or facilities; or 
(2)  Whether or not it is located on land belonging to persons described in (1) above, it rests on a permanent foundation, and consists of two (2) or more mobile units which are connected in such a manner that they cannot be towed together on a highway, or consists of a mobile unit and other connected rooms or additions which must be removed before the mobile unit can be towed on a highway. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-121. - Applicant's affidavit and certificate of disability. 
(a)  Annually, before the first day of September each calendar year, a person claiming a deferral or freeze under this division shall file a real estate tax deferral or freeze affidavit with the commissioner of the revenue or the designee of the commissioner of the revenue, for deferral or freeze to be effective in the fiscal year beginning in the calendar year in which the affidavit was received. The commissioner of the revenue may permit a subsequent filing, on or before the fifth day of December of the then current year, if the person is a first-time applicant or a hardship case and good cause is shown. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the commissioner of the revenue shall permit an otherwise eligible person, whose dwelling has been transferred as a result of eminent domain, or threat or imminence thereof, to file the affidavit required by this section within thirty (30) days after such person takes record title to a dwelling acquired to replace the dwelling so transferred. 
(c)  The affidavit required by this section shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue, the name of the owner occupying the dwelling and the names of any related persons living in the dwelling for which deferral or freeze is claimed, their gross income and their total combined net worth. The affidavit shall also include an indication as to whether the person claims the deferral or freeze option, and if deferral, the amount of deferral claimed, not to exceed one hundred (100) percent of the real estate tax liability. 
(d)  If the applicant is under sixty-five (65) years of age, the affidavit required by this section shall have attached thereto a certification by the social security administration, the department of veterans affairs or the railroad retirement board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two (2) medical doctors who are either licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth or are military officers on active duty who practice medicine with the United States Armed Forces, to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled, as defined in section 37-116; however, a certification pursuant to 42 USC 423(d) by the social security administration, so long as the person remains eligible for such social security benefits, shall be deemed to satisfy such definition in section 37-116. The affidavit of at least one of such doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of the applicant by such doctor. The affidavit of one of such doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the civil service commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability, as defined in section 37-116. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 ) 
State Law reference— Application for exemption, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3213.  
Sec. 37-122. - Certification to city treasurer; adjustment of tax records, etc. 
If, after audit and investigation, the commissioner of the revenue determines that a person is qualified for a deferral or freeze under this division, he shall cause such fact to be certified to the city treasurer, who shall deduct the amount of deferral or freeze from the claimant's real estate tax liability and adjust the tax records accordingly. Any remaining tax due shall be billed in equal installments in accordance with the ordinances of the city as to the payment of such bills. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 )  
Sec. 37-123. - Grandfathering of qualified persons under the prior tax exemption program. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision in this division to the contrary, a person qualifying and claiming an exemption as of July 1, 2013, shall be grandfathered into the tax exemption program and shall continue to be eligible to apply annually for the tax exemption program. 
(b)  Such persons grandfathered into the tax exemption program shall be required to adhere to the income limitations and financial worth limitations set forth in the prior tax exemption program and the amount of the tax exemption shall continue as shown on the following schedule: 
Combined Income 	Percent of Tax Relieved 
$0.00 to $25,000.00 	100% 
$25,001.00 to $27,000.00 	75% 
$27,001.00 to $29,000.00 	50% 
$29,001.00 to $31,000.00 	25% 
 
(c)  No lien shall accrue as a result of the amount certified as exempt under this section. However all other requirements and obligations found in this article II shall apply to the individual under this subsection as if expressly set out herein including, but not limited to nullification upon change of status. 
(d)  Any exemption under this section 37-123 shall be nullified if the actual income and financial worth levels exceed the limitations. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1431, 10-11-06; Ord. No. 1479, 6-20-07; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0016, 8-13-14 ; Ord. No. 16-0006 , 3-9-16) 
State Law reference— Amount of exemption, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3211, 58.1-3212.  
Sec. 37-124. - Amount of deferral; payment of deferred taxes. 
(a)  A person qualifying for and claiming deferral under this division shall be relieved of real estate tax liability levied on the qualifying dwelling and land in an amount not to exceed one hundred (100) percent of the liability, the amount to be deferred to be elected by the claimant. 
(b)  The accumulated amount of taxes deferred shall be paid without penalty, to the treasurer of the city, or to the clerk of the circuit court, as the case may be, by the vendor upon the sale of the dwelling, or from the estate of the decedent within one year from the death of the last owner thereof who qualifies for tax deferral under the provisions of this division. Such deferred real estate taxes shall constitute a lien upon the real estate as if they had been assessed without regard to the deferral permitted by this division; provided, however, that such liens shall, to the extent that they exceed in the aggregate ten (10) percent of the price for which such real estate may be sold, be inferior to all other liens of record. 
(c)  The treasurer shall certify and cause unpaid deferred taxes to be recorded in the delinquent tax records and marked as deferred on the second Monday in June of the second year after which such taxes would be due had such taxes not been deferred as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 ) 
State Law reference— Deferral programs, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3216.  
Sec. 37-125. - Nullification upon change in status. 
(a)  Changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of property or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which an affidavit is filed under this division, and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided in this division, shall nullify any relief of real estate tax liability for the remainder of the then-current taxable year, and the taxable year immediately following; provided, however, a change in ownership to a spouse less than sixty-five (65) years of age, or who is not permanently and totally disabled, and when such change resulted solely from the death of his or her qualified spouse, or sale of such property, shall result in a prorated deferral or freeze for the then-current tax year. The proceeds of the sale which would result in the prorated deferral or freeze shall not be included in the computation of net worth or income as provided above. Such prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the deferral or freeze by a fraction wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such deferral or freeze is the numerator and the number twelve (12) is the denominator. Upon nullification as provided herein, the commissioner of the revenue shall so certify to the treasurer, who shall proceed to collect all taxes due and adjust his records accordingly. Also, upon nullification as provided herein for a deferral or freeze, the penalty, as provided in section 37-28, shall be incurred on the next real estate tax installment due date, and the interest as provided in section 37-29 shall be incurred on the first day of the month of the succeeding taxable year following the installment due date when the penalty was incurred. 
(b)  An individual who does not qualify for the deferral or freeze under this article based upon the previous year's income limitations and financial worth limitations, may nonetheless qualify for the current year by filing an affidavit no later than December 5th of the current year that clearly shows a substantial change of circumstances that was not volitional on the part of the individual to become eligible for the deferral or freeze, and will result in income and financial worth levels that are within the limitations of this division. 
Any deferral or freeze under this subsection must be conditioned upon the individual filing another affidavit after the end of the year in which the deferral or freeze was granted, but no later than February 1st showing that the actual income and financial worth levels were within the limitations set by this ordinance. If the actual income and financial worth levels exceeded the limitations, any deferral or freeze shall be nullified for the current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 09-0002, 2-11-09; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 ; Ord. No. 14-0016, 8-13-14 ; Ord. No. 16-0006 , 3-9-16) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3215.  
Sec. 37-126. - False claims. 
Any person falsely claiming a deferral or freeze under this division shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Any relief granted based on false claims shall be nullified in the same manner as section 37-125. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 )  
Sec. 37-127. - When amount of deferral or freeze exceeds the estimated amount by which revenue is reduced due to the program. 
In any tax year in which the estimated amount by which revenue is reduced due to the program as set forth in the budget documents as approved by the city council for the purpose of providing real estate tax deferral and/or freeze under this division is not sufficient to afford the entire deferral and/or freeze allowable under the provisions of this division, the amount of deferral and/or freeze shall be computed as a fraction of that allowable under the provisions of this division, the numerator of the fraction to be the amount of the estimate of revenue reduction due to the program for the tax year and the denominator of the fraction to be the total amount of all allowable deferrals and/or freezes qualified for under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 )  
Sec. 37-128. - Notice of local real estate tax deferral or freeze program for the elderly and disabled. 
The treasurer of the city shall enclose written notice, in each real estate tax bill, of the terms and conditions of any local real estate tax deferral or freeze program established in the city pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210. The commissioner of the revenue and treasurer shall also employ any other reasonable means necessary to notify residents of the city about the terms and conditions of the real estate tax deferral or freeze program for elderly and disabled residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 5-25-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 14-0006, 5-14-14 )  
Sec. 37-129. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-0006 , adopted March 9, 2016, repealed § 37-129, which pertained to implementation of deferral or freeze provisions for certain qualified elderly and disabled persons and derived from Ord. No. 14-0022, adopted September 24, 2014.  
Secs. 37-130—37-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Special assessments for local improvements, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2404 et seq. 
 
Sec. 37-136. - Special assessments; projects permitted; petition. 
In accordance with Article 2, Chapter 24, of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended (§ 15.2-2404, et seq.), the Council of the City of Hampton may approve by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote a project for local improvements of the types specified in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2404, and order that the project be financed through special assessments. The Council shall not approve the project and order that a project be financed through a special assessment until it has received a petition of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the land owners abutting a project in support thereof. 
(Ord. No. 878, 1-13-88; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-137. - Projects; procedures; notices. 
The city can finance only the types of projects set forth in Article 2, Chapter 24, of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950 (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2404 et seq.), as amended, and shall be bound by the procedures, notice requirements, and limitations as set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 878, 1-13-88; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-138. - Payment over ten years; interest. 
The city shall provide that persons, firms or corporations against whom the assessments have been finally made may pay such assessments in equal installments over a ten-year period together with interest on the unpaid balances at a rate not to exceed the rate of the index of the average yield on United States Treasury securities adjusted to a constant maturity of one (1) year as made available by the Federal Reserve Bank at the time the assessment ordinance was adopted. Such installments shall become due at the same time that real estate taxes become due and payable and the amount of each installment, including principal and interest, shall be shown on the tax bill mailed, not later than fourteen (14) days prior to the installment due date, to each such person, firm, or corporation by the treasurer. Such persons, firms, or corporations may elect to prepay any or all installments of principal and interest. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Installment payments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2413.  
Sec. 37-139. - Postponement of payment. 
The council may provide for postponement of the payment of such assessment by certain qualified elderly or permanently and totally disabled landowners until the sale of the property or the death of the last eligible owner. Eligibility requirements for postponement and the procedures to qualify for eligibility shall be governed by the provisions of Division 6, Article II, Chapter 37 of the Code of the City of Hampton (section 37-116, et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-140. - Elizabeth Lake Estates Service District. 
Pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2400, the Elizabeth Lake Estates Service District is hereby created. 
(1)  Defined. The Elizabeth Lake Estates Service District shall consist of all residential property and common areas within the City of Hampton, Virginia, as shown by the plat of Elizabeth Lake Estates, Section One, dated May 22, 1962, and recorded in the Hampton Circuit Court Clerk's Office ("clerk's office"), on June 1, 1962, in Plat Book 4, Page 133; and the plat of Elizabeth Lake Estates, Section Two, dated August 13, 1963, recorded in the clerk's office on September 9, 1963 in Plat Book 5, page 37; and the plat of Elizabeth Lake Estates, Section Three, dated May 28, 1964, recorded in the clerk's office on June 29, 1964, in Plat Book 5, page 73; and revised on April 25, 1966, by a plat recorded in the clerk's office on August 9, 1966 in Plat Book 6, page 9; and the plat of Elizabeth Lake Estates, Section Four, dated July 29, 1964, recorded in the clerk's office on August 12, 1964, in Plat Book 5, page 83; and the plat of Elizabeth Lake Estates, Section Five, dated June 9, 1966, recorded in the clerk's office on October 18, 1966, in Plat Book 6, page 16; and the plat of Elizabeth Lake Estates, Section Six, dated January 2, 1969, recorded in the clerk's office on January 7, 1969, in Plat Book 6, Page 59; and the plat of Elizabeth Lake Estates, Section Seven, dated April 6, 1973, recorded in the clerk's office on July 6, 1973, in Plat Book 6, Page 151; and the plat of Elizabeth Lake Estates, Section Eight, dated October 22, 1981, recorded in the clerk's office on January 19, 1981, in Plat Book 7, Page 91. 
(2)  Purpose, facilities and services. Elizabeth Lake Estates has consistently been recognized as a desirable Hampton neighborhood and an asset to the city. More than two hundred thirty-four thousand (234,000) square feet of Elizabeth Lake Estates common areas bound city streets and such areas are generally accessible to the public. The city believes that the creation of the Elizabeth Lake Estates Service District benefits the public as a whole. The city believes that any benefit that may possibly inure to the Elizabeth Lake Estates Civic Association, itself as a result of the creation of this service district is merely incidental to the public benefits that are derived from the beautification, maintenance, improvement, etc. of the area. The tax levied by this section will provide a uniform and comprehensive method for collection of funds to provide services which generally enhance the public use and enjoyment of the area and the public safety, public convenience and public well-being within the service district. 
(3)  Plan for providing facilities and services within the Elizabeth Lake Estates Service District. The plan for providing such facilities and services shall be for interested entities to present a plan for the services to be rendered in the service district to city council for approval annually. Said plan shall specifically describe the services to be rendered, the cost thereof and the relationship between the service and the benefit to the service district and the public generally. Council shall approve or disapprove the plan and costs thereof and, if approved, appropriate the necessary funds for the services from any available Elizabeth Lake Estates Service District revenues, on an annual basis. The city may enter into agreements with these entities to effectuate the delivery of services in the service district and the transfer of appropriated funds. Entities receiving service district funds shall annually submit a report to city council detailing the use of service district funds which council shall review and evaluate. In addition, entities receiving service district funds shall submit to the City of Hampton, Annual Financial Statements, audited by a licensed certified public accountant, (the auditor), including the auditor's report on compliance with this section as to use and purpose of revenues, expenditures, assets, liability and residual fund balance resulting from monies provided under this ordinance; and, the auditor's report on internal controls over financial reporting and bookkeeping. The financial statements and related reports of the certified public accountants are to be provided to the city's director of finance on or before September 30th of each year. 
Funds collected by the city as a result of this tax shall be used only in accordance with the powers enumerated in § 15.2-2403, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended and as set forth in the plan approved by city council. 
(4)  Benefits. The benefits expected from the provision of such facilities and services within the district are to provide a centralized system for addressing common issues; promote a positive image of Hampton as a desirable and outstanding place to live, protect the waterfront to maintain its viability, improve the security of the neighborhood and residents and, protect and increase property values generally. 
(5)  Tax imposed. There is hereby imposed a tax of six cents ($0.06) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value of real property located in the above-described Elizabeth Lake Estates Service District, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes and fees as may be imposed by law. This tax shall become effective July 1, 2001 and shall continue through June 30, 2002. For the fiscal year July 1, 2002 through June 30, 2003, the tax imposed shall be six cents ($0.06) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value of real property located in the above-described Elizabeth Lake Estates Service District. For the fiscal year July 1, 2003 through June 30, 2004, the tax imposed shall be six cents ($0.06) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value of real property located in the above-described service district. In subsequent fiscal years council shall annually consider the tax to be imposed as a part of the regular budget process. The tax shall be due and payable in two (2) equal installments as follows: one-half (½) on for before December 5 and one-half (½) on or before June 5. 
(6)  Valuation, assessment, and collection generally. Valuation and assessment of real property, timing with respect to valuation, assessment and payment, penalties and interest on delinquencies, abatement in the event a building is razed, destroyed or damaged or in the case of natural disaster, assessment of new construction and all other procedures for and details of the assessment, administration and collection of the tax imposed by this section shall be the same as provided for real estate taxes generally. Taxes collected pursuant to this section shall be so segregated and expended only for the purposes of the Elizabeth Lake Estates Service District. 
(7)  Severability. If any part, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section of the Code is, for any reason, declared to be unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1306, 6-13-01; Ord. No. 1333, 6-26-02; Ord. No. 1354, 6-11-03; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority to create service districts, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2400.  
ARTICLE III. - PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to levy and collect taxes on tangible personal property and machinery and tools, § 2.02a. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-141. - Exemption of certain household goods and personal effects. 
The following classes of household goods and personal effects, when owned and used by an individual or family incident to maintaining an abode, are hereby exempted from taxation: 
(1)  Bicycles. 
(2)  Household and kitchen furniture, including gold and silver plates, plated ware, watches and clocks, sewing machines, refrigerators, automatic refrigerating machinery of any type, vacuum cleaners and all other household machinery, books, firearms and weapons of all kinds. 
(3)  Pianos, organs, and all other musical instruments; phonographs, record players, and records to be used therewith; and radio and television instruments and equipment. 
(4)  Oil paintings, pictures, statuary, curios, articles of virtu and works of art. 
(5)  Diamonds, cameos and other precious stones and all precious metals used as ornaments or jewelry. 
(6)  Sporting and photographic equipment. 
(7)  Clothing and objects of apparel. 
(8)  Antique motor vehicles as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, which may not be used for general transportation purposes. 
(9)  All other tangible personal property used by an individual or a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
(Code 1964, § 39-1; Ord. No. 33; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3504.  
Sec. 37-142. - Filing of return required. 
(a)  Every person owning any taxable tangible personal property in the city on January first of any year shall be assessed on such property for such taxable year and shall file a return thereof with the commissioner of revenue on forms prescribed by the commissioner. Returns for business tangible personal property and machinery and tools shall be filed on or before March first of each year. Returns for all other types of taxable tangible personal property shall be filed on or before February fifteenth of each year. 
(b)  Any person who has filed a personal property return for motor vehicles, trailers, boats or watercraft for which there has been no change in status or situs as hereinafter described, shall not be required to file another personal property return on such vehicles, trailers, boats or watercraft. The annual assessment and taxation of such motor vehicles, trailers, and boats or watercraft shall be based on the most recent personal property return filed by the owner. 
(c)  The owner shall file a new or amended personal property return with the commissioner of revenue, as provided under paragraph (a), when any of the following events occur: 
(1)  A change in ownership due to purchase, acquisition, sale, trade or disposal. 
(2)  A change in the name or address of the person or persons owning or leasing the motor vehicle, trailer, boat or watercraft. 
(3)  A change in the use of the motor vehicle or trailer from personal to business use or vice versa. 
(4)  Any event or occurrence which causes a motor vehicle, trailer, boat or watercraft to acquire or lose situs for taxation. 
(5)  Any other change affecting the assessment or levy of personal property tax on the motor vehicle, trailer, boat or watercraft for which a return was previously filed. 
The new or amended personal property return shall be filed with the commissioner of revenue within thirty (30) days of change in situs or other event identified herein. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the commissioner of revenue from assessing taxable personal property in accordance with this chapter and Title 58.1, Chapter 35, of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1964, § 39-66; Ord. No. 349; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 646, 1-23-80; Ord. No. 679, 1-28-81; Ord. No. 691, 6-24-81; Ord. No. 850, 1-14-87; Ord. No. 1265, 12-8-99; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 13-0019, 9-11-13 ; Ord. No. 15-0015, 5-13-15 ) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3518, 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 37-143. - Filing of depreciation schedules required. 
Every person liable for the payment of tangible personal property tax shall file with the commissioner of revenue true copies of the depreciation schedules required by federal and state authorities which are applicable to the property subject to such tax. Every such person shall submit true copies of the depreciation schedules which most recently have been filed with federal and state authorities, either at the time he files his tangible personal property tax return with the commissioner of revenue or on or before April fifteenth of each year. 
(Code 1964, § 39-66.1; Ord. No. 516; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-144. - Failure to file return or depreciation schedule generally; false statements therein. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article and in addition to any other penalties provided by law, any person who shall wilfully fail or refuse to file a return or a depreciation schedule, as required by sections 37-142, 37-143 and 37-154, or any person who shall knowingly make any false statement in any such return or schedule, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is one thousand dollars $1,000.00 or less, or a Class 1 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Code 1964, § 39-67; Ord. No. 399; Ord. No. 517; Ord. No. 742, 1-26-83; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.1.  
Sec. 37-145. - Penalty for late filing of return. 
Any person failing to file a return required by section 37-142 or 37-154 on or before the date prescribed for such filing may incur a penalty thereon of ten (10) percent of the tax due or the sum of ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, which shall be added to the amount of taxes or levies due from taxpayer; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. 
(Code 1964, § 39-67.1; Ord. No. 626, 7-25-79; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 691, 6-24-81; Ord. No. 742, 1-26-83; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to impose penalties for failure to make required returns, § 6.18. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 37-146. - Assessment upon failure to file return. 
If any taxpayer liable to file a return of any of the subjects of taxation mentioned in section 37-142 or 37-154 neglects or refuses to file the same for any year within the time prescribed, the commissioner of revenue shall, from the best information he can obtain, enter the fair market value of such property and assess the same, as if it had been reported to him, and add the penalty required by section 37-145. 
(Code 1964, § 39-67.2; Ord. No. 626, 7-25-79; Ord. No. 742, 1-26-83; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3519.  
Sec. 37-147. - Assessments by state corporation commission. 
(a)  The assessment by the state corporation commission of the personal property of a public service corporation for the preceding year shall be taken as the assessment of such property for levying taxes and collecting the first installment thereon pursuant to this article, until the regular annual assessment of such property by the commission for the current year is completed as provided by state law. Upon the payment of the final installment of such taxes to the city by any such public service corporation, the total of such taxes for the current year shall be adjusted on the basis of the assessment by the state corporation commission for the current year. 
(b)  The state corporation commission may, upon the application of any public service corporation of the city filed with the commission on or before the fifteenth day of January in any year, amend its assessment for the preceding year by increasing or decreasing the same, by reason of any improvements or additions thereto, or proper deductions therefrom, or other changes affecting the assessment of the property of such corporation within the preceding year, such increases, decreases and changes to be subject to adjustment by the commission until the regular annual assessment of the property of the corporation is completed by the commission. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-61, 39-62; Ord. No. 335; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3917.  
Sec. 37-148. - When tax due and payable. 
(a)  On and after July 1, 1981, all taxes levied on personal property, except as provided under section 37-154, in the city shall become due and payable as follows: 
(1)  The first installment for the taxable period beginning January 1, 1982, and ending December 31, 1982, shall be due and payable on or before June 5, 1982. 
(2)  The second installment for the taxable period beginning January 1, 1982, and ending December 31, 1982, shall be due and payable on or before December 5, 1982. 
(3)  And so on in every year thereafter, so that personal property taxes, shall become due and payable in semiannual installments of one-half (½) of the total tax imposed for a tax year on or before the fifth day of June and one-half (½) on or before the fifth day of December of the calendar year for which the tax was or is imposed. 
(b)  The personal property tax covering the taxable period from July 1, 1981, through December 31, 1981, shall be due and payable on or before December 5, 1981. All provisions of law applicable to the assessment of personal property, levy, payment and collection of taxes for a regular calendar year shall apply, except as herein provided, to such short taxable period. 
(Code 1964, § 39-59; Ord. No. 335; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 691, 6-24-81; Ord. No. 742, 1-26-83; Ord. No. 951, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 37-149. - Tax bills. 
The city treasurer shall, as soon as may be reasonably possible in each year, send by United States mail to each taxpayer assessed with personal property taxes for that year a bill or bills in the form prescribed by the state department of taxation. Except as provided in section 37-149.1 the bill or bills for personal property taxes due on June fifth shall be mailed to the taxpayer not later than May tenth and the bill or bills for personal property taxes due on December fifth shall be mailed to the taxpayer not later than November tenth. 
(Code 1964, § 39-60; Ord. No. 335; Ord. No. 455; Ord. No. 951, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Mailing of tax bills, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3912.  
Sec. 37-149.1. - Repealed.  
Sec. 37-150. - When taxes to be received without penalty and interest. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall commence to receive personal property taxes as soon as he receives copies of the assessments from the commissioner of revenue, which shall be no later than the first of April, and the treasurer shall continue to receive the amount due and payable for the first semiannual installment of one-half (½) of the total tax due for the then current year, or the total amount due, if the taxpayer desires, up to and including the fifth day of June of each year, without penalty or interest. The treasurer shall also continue to receive the second semiannual installment, except as provided under section 37-154, of the remaining one-half (½) of the total tax due for the then current year up to and including the fifth day of December of each year, without penalty or interest. 
(b)  The personal property tax covering the taxable period from July 1, 1981, through December 31, 1981, shall be received as follows: The treasurer shall commence to receive such taxes as soon as he receives copies of the assessments from the commissioner of revenue, which shall be no later than the first day of September, and the treasurer shall continue to receive the amount due and payable for the single installment of such taxable period, up to and including the fifth day of December, without penalty and interest. 
(Code 1964, § 39-63; Ord. No. 335; Ord. No. 456; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 691, 6-24-81; Ord. No. 742, 1-26-83; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-151. - Penalty on delinquencies. 
(a)  Any person failing to pay the first installment of personal property taxes on or before the fifth day of June or the second installment, except as provided under section 37-151.1 or 37-154, of such levies on or before the fifth day of December of the assessment year shall incur a penalty thereon of ten (10) percent of the tax due, which shall be added to the amount of taxes or levies due from such taxpayer; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. Such penalty when so assessed shall become a part of the tax. 
(b)  Any person failing to pay the single installment of personal property levies for the taxable period beginning July 1, 1981, and ending December 31, 1981, on or before the fifth day of December, 1981, shall incur a penalty thereon of ten (10) percent or the sum of ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, which shall be added to the amount of taxes or levies due from such taxpayer; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. Such penalty when so assessed shall become a part of the tax. 
(Code 1964, § 39-64; Ord. No. 339; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 691, 6-24-81; Ord. No. 707, 12-16-81; Ord. No. 742, 1-26-83; Ord. No. 783, 9-12-84; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to impose penalties for nonpayment of taxes, § 6.18. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 37-151.1. - Omitted taxes and levies. 
If the commissioner of the revenue ascertains that any local tax has not been assessed for any tax year of the three (3) preceding tax years or that the same has been assessed at less than the law required for any one (1) or more of such years, or that the taxes for any cause have not been realized, the commissioner of the revenue shall list and assess the same with taxes at the rate or rates prescribed for that year, adding thereto penalty and interest at the rate provided under Code of Virginia §§ 58.3916 and 58.1-3918. Interest may be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the first day following the due date in the year in which such taxes should have been paid and shall accrue thereon from such date until payment; provided, if such assessment was necessitated through no fault of the taxpayer, such penalty and interest shall accrue after thirty (30) days from such date of assessment until payment. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3903.  
Sec. 37-152. - Interest on delinquencies. 
(a)  Interest, at the rate of one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of nine and six-tenths (9.6) percent per month or portion of a month, from the first day of January of the year next following the assessment year shall be collected upon the principal and penalties of all personal property taxes and levies then remaining unpaid, which penalty and interest shall be collected and accounted for by the officers charged with the duty of collecting such taxes or levies, along with the principal sum thereof. 
(b)  For purposes of computing interest on any unpaid taxes due in the short year commencing July 1, 1981, and ending December 31, 1981, the beginning date shall be the first day of January of the year next following the assessment year. 
(Code 1964, § 39-65; Ord. No. 335; Ord. No. 442; Ord. No. 449; Ord. No. 639, 11-14-79; Ord. No. 666, 8-27-80; Ord. No. 691, 6-24-81; Ord. No. 742, 1-26-83; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 37-153. - How payments credited. 
Pursuant to § 58.1-3913 of the Code of Virginia, the city treasurer shall credit any payment of personal property taxes against the most delinquent account, the collection of which is not subject to a defense of an applicable statute of limitations. 
(Code 1964, § 39-65.1; Ord. No. 690, 6-24-81; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3913.  
Sec. 37-154. - Special provisions relating to tax on motor vehicles, trailers and boats. 
(a)  Every person owning any motor vehicle, trailer or boat which has acquired a situs within the city after January first of any year shall be taxed on such property for the balance of the tax year. Such tax shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis and, for the purposes of pro-ration, a period of more than one-half (½) of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of less than one-half (½) of a month shall not be counted. When any motor vehicle, trailer or boat loses its situs within the city after January first or after the day on which it acquires a situs (hereinafter referred to as "situs day"), the owner shall, from that time, be relieved from tax and receive a refund of the appropriate amount of tax already paid, pro-rated on a monthly basis. When any person sells or otherwise transfers title to a motor vehicle, trailer or boat with a situs in the city after January first or the situs day, the tax shall be relieved, pro-rated on a monthly basis, and the appropriate tax already paid shall be refunded. When any person, after January first or the situs day, acquires a motor vehicle, trailer or boat with a situs in the city, the tax shall be assessed on the motor vehicle, trailer or boat for the portion of the tax year during which the new owner owns the motor vehicle, trailer or boat, and has a situs within the city. 
(b)  The owner of any motor vehicle, trailer or boat acquiring situs within the city or which has its title transferred on January first shall file a return thereof with the commissioner of revenue in accordance with section 37-142. When any motor vehicle, trailer or boat acquires situs or has its title transferred after January first, a return shall be filed by the owner with the commissioner of revenue within thirty (30) days of the date on which situs is acquired or title transferred. The owner of any motor vehicle, trailer or boat acquiring situs within the city or to whom title is transferred after January first shall, within ten (10) days thereof, report the sale or transfer to the commissioner of revenue. 
(c)  Taxes on any motor vehicle, trailer or boat which acquires situs within the city or has its title transferred after January first and on or before October first of any year shall be paid on or before December fifth of the same year. Taxes on any motor vehicle, trailer or boat which acquires situs within the city or has its title transferred after October first of any year shall be paid on or before December fifth of the same year, provided the tax bills are mailed on or before November sixteenth of that year. In the event the tax bills are mailed after November sixteenth, taxes shall be paid within two (2) weeks after the tax bills are mailed. 
(d)  Any person failing to pay the single installment of personal property taxes for the current tax year, on or before the due date as provided above, shall incur a penalty thereon of ten (10) percent which shall be added to the amount of taxes or levies due from such taxpayer. Such penalty when so assessed shall become a part of the tax. 
(e)  An exemption from this tax and any penalties arising therefrom shall be granted for any tax share or portion thereof during which the property is legally assessed by another jurisdiction and proof is presented to the commissioner of revenue indicating that such tax on the assessed property was paid. 
(f)  All provisions of law applicable to the assessment of personal property, levy, payment and collection of taxes for a regular calendar year shall apply, except as herein provided. 
(g)  Motor vehicles, trailers and boats coming into the city from January 2, 1983, through January 31, 1983, shall be construed, for purposes of this article, to have acquired a situs for taxation in the city on February 1, 1983. 
(Ord. No. 742, 1-26-83; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority of above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3516.  
Sec. 37-155. - Certain operators of marinas or boat storage places to file lists of owners of boats. 
Every person operating in this city a marina or boat storage place which accommodates more than four (4) boats shall, on or before February 1 of each year, upon the request of the commissioner of revenue, file with the commissioner a list giving the name and address of the owner and operator, if such is available, and the name and number of each boat physically located and normally kept at the marina or boat storage place as of the preceding January 1. The list shall be divided into the following three (3) categories: (i) watercraft which are eighteen (18) feet and over; (ii) watercraft which are under eighteen (18) feet and motorized; and (iii) watercraft which are under eighteen (18) feet and nonmotorized. Violators of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 836, 9-10-86; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3902.  
Sec. 37-155.01. - Apartment house, office building, shopping center, trailer camp, trailer court, marina, or airport owners or operators to file lists of tenants. 
Every person owning or operating any apartment house or any office building or shopping center or any trailer camp or trailer court or marina or privately owned or operated airport in the city shall, on or before February 1 of each year, upon request of the commissioner of the revenue, file with the commissioner of the revenues a list giving the name and address of every tenant of such apartment house, office building, shopping center, trailer camp, or trailer court, and the name and address of every person renting space in a marina for waterborne craft and at a privately owned or operated airport for airborne craft as of the preceding January 1. Any person failing to comply with this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3901.  
Sec. 37-155.1. - Personal property tax relief; amount of reimbursement. 
In accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3523 et. seq., and subject to the limitations stated therein, the amount of reimbursement to taxpayers beginning calendar tax year 2006 shall be: 
(1)  One hundred (100) percent of the reimbursable amount for qualifying vehicles used for non-business purposes with a value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less; and 
(2)  The reimbursable amount for qualifying vehicles used for non-business purposes with a value of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be based on the application of the remaining Personal Property Tax Relief Act (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3523 et seq.) reimbursement from the Commonwealth of Virginia to the projected personal property tax book value for each tax year. 
Reimbursable amount means the value of a qualifying vehicle up to the first twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) of value multiplied by the effective tax rate adopted annually. 
(Ord. No. 1402, 5-11-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Tangible personal property relief, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3524.  
DIVISION 2. - OTHER CLASSIFICATION OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Other classifications of tangible personal property for taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3506. 
 
[Subdivision] A. - Motor Vehicles Specially Equipped to Provide Transportation for Physically Handicapped Individuals 
 
Sec. 37-156. - Definitions. 
When used in this division the phrase "motor vehicles specially equipped to provide transportation for physically handicapped individuals" refers to motor vehicles adapted with any of the following devices: 
(1)  Power door operators. 
(2)  Hand controls. 
(3)  Lifts or ramps for wheelchairs or scooters. 
(4)  Special restraints systems for wheelchairs. 
(5)  Raised door and roof to allow wheelchair entry. 
(6)  Special steering devices such as but not limited to "tri-pins" or "V-grips." 
(7)  Driving aids such as but not limited to touchpads, low effort power steering, power steering back up, power parking brake or electronic directional signals. 
(8)  Roll cages. 
(Ord. No. 1010, 5-1-91; Ord. No. 1481, 7-18-07; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Permanently and totally disabled defined, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3506.3.  
Sec. 37-157. - Authorized. 
There is hereby established a special classification for motor vehicles specially equipped to provide transportation for physically handicapped individuals. In any year, the council may levy a tax on the property enumerated in this division at different rates from the tax levied on other tangible personal property. The rate of tax and the rates of assessment shall not exceed that applicable to the general class of tangible personal property. 
(Ord. No. 1010, 5-1-91; Ord. No. 1481, 7-18-07; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-158. - Application. 
A person seeking special classification of a vehicle authorized pursuant to this division shall file an application with the commissioner of revenue on such forms as the commissioner shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 1010, 5-1-91; Ord. No. 1481, 7-18-07; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3506.  
Sec. 37-159. - General prerequisites to grant; filing process. 
(a)  The special classification provided for in this division shall be granted if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The motor vehicle must be specially equipped to provide transportation for physically handicapped individuals and must have situs in this city. 
(2)  Applicant must be legal owner of the vehicle. 
(3)  Applicant must file or have filed a current personal property application for vehicle license and tax return. 
(4)  Applicant must complete and file for approval a certification form with the office of the commissioner of revenue. 
(5)  Vehicle must be appraised by the office of the commissioner of revenue. 
(6)  Applicant must complete the filing process each year prior to February 15. 
(b)  The applicant may apply for the special classification for more than one (1) vehicle. 
(c)  The applicant must notify the office of the commissioner of revenue in writing upon termination of eligibility for the special classification. 
(Ord. No. 1010, 5-1-91; Ord. No. 1481, 7-18-07; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-160. - Duration. 
The applicant must complete the filing process each year for recertification, otherwise the special class certification will automatically be removed. 
(Ord. No. 1010, 5-1-91; Ord. No. 1481, 7-18-07; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
[Subdivision] B. - Motor Vehicles Owned and Regularly Used by Disabled Veterans[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for this subdivision, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3506, 46.2-100. 
 
Sec. 37-161. - Definitions. 
When used in this division, the phrase "disabled veterans" shall mean any veteran who has either lost, or lost the use of one (1) or both legs, or an arm or a hand, or who is blind or who is permanently and totally disabled as certified by the department of veterans services. 
(Ord. No. 1481, 7-18-07; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-162. - Authorized. 
There is hereby established a separate classification for motor vehicles owned and regularly used by disabled veterans. In any year, the council may levy a tax on the property enumerated in this division at different rates from the tax levied on other tangible personal property. The rate of tax and the rates of assessment shall not exceed that applicable to the general class of tangible personal property. 
(Ord. No. 1481, 7-18-07; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-163. - Qualification. 
(a)  In order to qualify, the veteran shall provide a written statement to the commissioner of revenue from the department of veterans services that the veteran has been so designated or classified by the department of veterans services as to meet the requirements of this division, and that his disability is service-connected. For purposes of this division, a person is blind if he meets the provisions of Virginia Code § 46.2-739, as amended. 
(b)  A qualifying disabled veteran may have no more than one (1) motor vehicle assessed pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1481, 7-18-07; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
[Subdivision] C. - Separate Classification of Machinery and Tools Used Directly in the Manufacture of Precision Investment Castings[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3508.3. 
 
Sec. 37-164. - Authorized. 
There is hereby established a separate classification for machinery and tools used directly in the manufacture of precision investment castings. In any year, the council may levy a tax on the property enumerated in this division at different rates from the tax levied on other tangible personal property. The rate of tax and the rates of assessment shall not exceed that applicable to the general class of tangible personal property. 
(Ord. No. 09-0013, 9-9-09, eff. 7-1-09)  
Sec. 37-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 37-166. - Levied; rate; etc. 
There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed, a general retail sales tax, at the rate of one (1) percent, to provide revenue for the general fund of the city. The rate of the tax shall be added to the rate of the state retail sales tax imposed by chapter 6, title 58.1, of the Code of Virginia (Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq.) and shall be subject to all the provisions of such chapter, all amendments thereof and the rules and regulations published with respect thereto, except that no discount under § 58.1-622 of the Code of Virginia shall be allowed on the tax levied by this section. 
(Code 1964, § 39-51; Ord. No. 187, § 1; Ord. No. 190; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605.  
Sec. 37-167. - Exemption for fuel oil. 
Fuel oil used for domestic consumption and delivered to residential customers is exempt from the one (1) percent tax imposed in section 37-166. 
(Ord. No. 791, 1-23-85; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for exemptions listed, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-609.13.  
Secs. 37-168—37-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Virginia Bank Franchise Tax Act, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq. 
 
Sec. 37-181. - "Bank" defined. 
For the purpose of this article, the word "bank" shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in § 58.1-1201 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1956, § 21-15; Code 1964, § 39-28; Ord. No. 77; Ord. No. 99; Ord. No. 123; Ord. No. 652, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-182. - Levied; amount. 
For the calendar year commencing January 1, 1980, and each calendar year thereafter, there is hereby levied against each bank located in the city a tax at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the bank's net capital, as defined in § 58.1-1205 of the Code of Virginia. If any bank located in the city has one (1) or more offices located in any other political subdivision the tax shall be apportioned as provided in § 58.1-1211 of the Code of Virginia. 
Any bank which did not operate for the entire twelve-month period preceding the January 1 assessment date, shall be entitled to a prorated tax rate as follows as provided in § 58.1-1204.1 of the Code of Virginia: 
(1)  Transacting business as of March 31 of the preceding year, no proration shall be available and the tax rate shall be one dollar ($1.00) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of net capital. 
(2)  Transacting business as of June 30 of the preceding year but not before April 1, the tax rate shall be seventy-five cents ($0.75) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of net capital. 
(3)  Transacting business as of September 30 of the preceding year but not before July 1, the tax rate shall be fifty cents ($0.50) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of net capital. 
(4)  Transacting business as of December 31 of the preceding year but not before October 1, the tax rate shall be twenty-five cents ($0.25) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of net capital 
"Transacting business" shall mean accepting deposits from customers in the regular course of doing business. A bank shall be eligible for the prorated tax rate provided for hereunder with respect to the first return it is required to file after accepting deposits; provided, that a bank shall not be eligible for the prorated tax rate if it was organized or created as part of a reorganization with the meaning of § 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Code 1956, § 21-16; Code 1964, § 39-29; Ord. No. 77; Ord. No. 99; Ord. No. 123; Ord. No. 151; Ord. No. 182; Ord. No. 618, 5-23-79; Ord. No. 652, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1208.  
Sec. 37-183. - Bank's return and report. 
Each bank located within the city shall deliver to the commissioner of revenue the return and the report which are required by §§ 58.1-1207 and 58.1-1212 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1958, § 21-17; Code 1964, § 39-30; Ord. No. 77; Ord. No. 99; Ord. No. 123; Ord. No. 652, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-184. - Payment. 
Every bank located in the city shall, on or before the first day of June in each year, pay into the city treasury the tax assessed under this article and the city treasurer shall give to such bank paying such taxes an authenticated receipt. 
(Code 1956, § 21-19; Code 1964, § 39-32; Ord. No. 77; Ord. No. 99; Ord. No. 123; Ord. No. 652, 3-26-80; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-185. - Failure or neglect of bank to comply with article. 
Any bank which shall fail or neglect to comply with any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty of five (5) percent of the tax due, which penalty shall be recovered, upon motion, after five (5) days' notice, in the circuit court of the city. The motion shall be in the name of the city and shall be presented by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Penalty with respect to state tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1216.  
Secs. 37-186—37-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITY SERVICES[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference— Utility tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - TAX ON PURCHASERS OF ELECTRIC AND NATURAL GAS UTILITY SERVICES 
 
Sec. 37-201. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
All other classes of consumers means a consumer of natural gas or electric utility service provided to property used primarily for purposes other than commercial, industrial or residential as classified by the utility service provider. 
CCF means a volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
Commercial consumer means a consumer of natural gas or electric utility service provided to property used primarily for commercial purposes as classified by the utility service provider. 
Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas services. 
Electric utility means a public utility authorized to furnish electric service to consumers in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Gas utility means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service to consumers in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Industrial consumer means a consumer of natural gas or electric utility service provided to property used primarily for industrial purposes as classified by the utility service provider. 
kWh (kilowatt hours) means one thousand (1,000) watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric service provider to a consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Code of Virginia, § 56-594, as amended, it means the kilowatt hours supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kilowatt hours generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
Person means an individual, partnership or limited liability partnership, company or limited liability company, corporation, or any other legal entity. 
Pipeline distribution company means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a consumer for purposes of furnishing heat, light or power. 
Provider of billing services shall have the same meaning as "service provider." 
Residential consumer means a consumer of natural gas or electric utility service provided to property used primarily for residential purposes as classified by the utility service provider. 
Service provider means every person who delivers and/or bills for utility service to a consumer. 
Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
Utility service means the provision of electricity and natural gas for consumption by consumers. 
(Ord. No. 1286, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-202. - Electric consumer utility tax levied; amount. 
In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax, on a "per meter" basis, on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider in the following classes, as defined by the service provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers. Such tax shall be one dollar forty cents ($1.40) plus the rate of $0.014953 on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider not to exceed three dollars ($3.00) per month. 
(2)  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be two dollars twenty-nine cents ($2.29) plus the rate of $0.013953 on each of the first two thousand seven hundred three (2,703) kWh delivered monthly to commercial consumers by a service provider, and $0.003321 on each kWh delivered thereafter, not to exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per month. 
(3)  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be two dollars twenty-nine cents ($2.29) plus the rate of $0.015498 on each of the first two thousand four hundred thirty-three (2,433) kWh delivered monthly to industrial consumers by a service provider, and $0.004835 on each kWh delivered thereafter, not to exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per month. 
(4)  All other classes of consumers. Such tax shall be two dollars twenty-nine cents ($2.29) plus the rate of $0.015498 on each of the first two thousand four hundred thirty-three (2,433) kWh delivered monthly to all other consumers by a service provider, and $0.004835 on each kWh delivered thereafter, not to exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per month. 
(Ord. No. 1286, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-203. - Natural gas consumer utility tax levied; amount. 
In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax, on a "per meter" basis, on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities, classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814(J), as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers. Such tax shall one dollar ninety-eight ($1.98) plus the rate of $0.191 on each CCF delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider not to exceed two dollars forty cents ($2.40) per month. 
(2)  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be two dollars seventy-eight cents ($2.78) plus the rate of $0.135199 on each of the first one hundred thirty (130) CCFs delivered monthly to commercial consumers by a service provider, and $0.032578 on each CCF thereafter, not to exceed sixty-five dollars ($65.00) per month. 
(3)  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be two dollars seventy-eight cents ($2.78) plus the rate of $0.135199 on each of the first one hundred thirty (130) CCFs delivered monthly to industrial consumers by a service provider, and $0.032578 on each CCF thereafter, not to exceed sixty-five dollars ($65.00) per month. 
(4)  All other classes of consumers. Such tax shall be two dollars seventy-eight cents ($2.78) plus the rate of $0.135199 on each of the first one hundred thirty (130) CCFs delivered monthly to all other consumers by a service provider, and $0.032578 on each CCF thereafter, not to exceed sixty-five dollars ($65.00) per month. 
(Ord. No. 1286, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-204. - Exemptions. 
The United States of America, diplomatic personnel exempted by the laws of the United States, the state and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and the authorities and agencies thereof, are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this division with respect to the purchase of utility services used by such governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1286, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-205. - Duty of service provider to bill, collect and remit tax. 
(a)  The service provider shall (i) bill the consumer utility tax to all consumers who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers utility services, and (ii) report and remit the same to the commissioner of the revenue on or before the last day of the succeeding month of collection. Until the consumer pays the tax to such service provider, the tax shall constitute a debt of the consumer to the locality. Upon payment by the consumer to the service provider, the tax shall constitute a debt of the service provider to the locality, and the service provider shall hold such receipts in trust as a fiduciary for and on behalf of the city. 
(b)  If any consumer receives and pays for utility services but refuses to pay the consumer utility tax stated on the bill, the service provider shall notify the commissioner of the revenue in writing of the name and address of each such consumer and the amount of delinquent taxes owed by that consumer within forty-five (45) days after the failure of the consumer to pay the tax. It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to assess taxes reported by the service provider as unpaid under this division against the consumer, together with a penalty of five (5) percent of the delinquent tax owed but not less than one dollar ($1.00). These assessments shall be turned over to the city treasurer, who shall collect the taxes and penalties in the same manner as other delinquent taxes are collected. 
(c)  If any consumer fails to pay the entire bill issued by a service provider, including the consumer utility tax, the service provider shall follow its normal collection procedures with respect to the charge for utility service and the tax, and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof shall (i) apportion the net amount collected between the charge for the utility service and the tax and (ii) report and remit the tax portion to the commissioner of the revenue. After the consumer pays the tax to the service provider, the taxes shall be deemed to be held in trust by such service provider until reported and remitted to the commissioner of the revenue. Delinquent taxes determined uncollectible by the service provider shall be reported, assessed and collection attempted as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  All remittances received by the commissioner of the revenue shall be promptly turned over to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1286, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-206. - Service provider records. 
Each and every service provider shall keep complete and accurate service and accounting records using generally accepted accounting principles and practices, which records shall indicate the consumption utilized by each consumer, the dates of such consumption, the date of billing and payment for utility services provided, and the amount of all billings and payments of the consumer utility taxes imposed pursuant to this division. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by and access provided to duly authorized agents of the city during the city's normal business hours for a period of four (4) years from the date such record was created; and such agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as the records are inspected. 
(Ord. No. 1286, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-207. - Computation tax for bills not on monthly basis. 
Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this division if submitted twelve (12) times per year of approximately one (1) month each. The tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately sixty (60) days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the kWh or CCF reflected on the bill will be divided by two (2); (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth in this division; (iii) the tax determined by step (ii) shall be multiplied by two (2) which shall equal the applicable tax; however, (iv) the tax calculated in step (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "not to exceed" amount. 
(Ord. No. 1286, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-208. - Duties of city treasurer. 
The city treasurer shall be charged with the duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied under this division. 
(Ord. No. 1286, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-209. - Powers of the commissioner of the revenue. 
The commissioner of the revenue may prescribe forms for the filing of any report or the payment of any funds set forth in this division and may make and establish rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this division, to help carry out the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1286, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-210. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who willfully fails to bill, collect, remit or truthfully account for and pay over to the city treasurer the consumer utility tax as provided in this division, or who willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax, or the billing, collection or remittance thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who willfully fails to bill, collect, remit or truthfully account for and pay over to the city treasurer the consumer utility tax as provided in this division, or who willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax, or the billing, collection or remittance thereof, shall, in addition to all other penalty provided by law, be liable to the city for a penalty in an amount equal to such tax. 
(c)  The term "person" as used in this section specifically includes any officer, agent and employee of any person as defined in this division who is under a duty to perform on behalf of that person the act in respect of which the violation occurs and who (i) had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt as set forth herein and (ii) had authority to prevent such failure or attempt. 
(d)  A criminal conviction pursuant to this section shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as otherwise provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1286, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-211. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this division, within the time and in the amount specified in this division, there shall be added to such tax by the commissioner of revenue a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent, if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) percent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate, with a minimum penalty of ten dollars ($10.00), but in no event shall the penalty exceed the amount of the tax assessable. In addition, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum may be computed and collected upon the taxes and penalty beginning from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Secs. 37-212—37-213. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TAX ON PURCHASERS OF LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE 
 
Sec. 37-214. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this division, shall, for the purposes of this division, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial or industrial. The phrase "commercial or industrial" shall include, in addition to the normal word usage, buildings having a central telephone switchboard furnishing telephone service to two (2) or more dwelling units. 
Purchaser. The word "purchaser" shall include every person who purchases local exchange telephone service. 
Seller. The word "seller" shall include every person, whether a public service corporation or a municipality or private corporation or not, who sells or furnishes local exchange telephone service. 
(Ord. No. 1287, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-215. - Levied, amount. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, upon each and every purchaser of a local exchange telephone service, a tax for general purposes in the following amounts: 
(1)  On purchasers of local exchange telephone service for residential purposes, the tax shall be in the amount of twenty (20) percent of the charge (exclusive of any federal or state tax thereon) made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to such residential telephone service; provided, however, that in any case where a monthly bill submitted by the seller for residential purposes shall exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00), there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(2)  On purchasers of local exchange telephone service for commercial or industrial purposes, the tax shall be in the amount of twenty (20) percent of the charge (exclusive of any federal or state tax thereon) made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to such commercial or industrial telephone service; provided, however, that in any case where a monthly bill submitted by the seller for commercial or industrial purposes shall exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(3)  On purchasers of local telecommunication service at a rate equal to ten (10) percent of the monthly gross charged to a consumer of local mobile telecommunication and shall not be applicable to any amount so charged in excess of thirty dollars ($30.00) per month for each mobile service consumer. This tax shall take effect September 1, 1994, and shall be included on bills sent to consumers on or after that date. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, bills shall be considered monthly bills if submitted twelve (12) times annually for a period of approximately one month or portion thereof. In case bills are submitted by any seller for two (2) months' service, there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) for local exchange telephone service rendered for residential purposes; six hundred dollars ($600.00) for local exchange telephone service rendered for commercial or industrial services. In the event such bills are rendered on a basis other than one month or two (2) months, the tax imposed hereby shall be computed pro rata as if such bill was rendered on a monthly basis, with the rates and the maximums named herein applied. 
(Ord. No. 1287, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-216. - Applicability generally. 
The tax imposed and levied by this division on purchasers with respect to local exchange telephone services shall apply to all charges made for local telephone exchange service, except as follows: 
(1)  The total amount of the guaranteed charge on each bill rendered for semipublic coin box telephone service shall be included in the basis for the tax with respect to the purchaser of such service, but no other tax shall be imposed on telephone service paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones. 
(2)  With respect to flat rate and flat message rate service, the tax shall apply only to the amount payable for local area service and shall not apply to any specific charge for calls to points outside the city or to any general charge or rate differential payable for the privilege of calling points outside the city. 
(3)  Where purchasers of telephone service are charged on a message rate basis, the tax shall apply only to the basic charge for such service and shall not apply to any charge for additional message units. 
(Ord. No. 1287, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-217. - Exemptions. 
The United States of America, diplomatic personnel exempted by the laws of the United States, the state and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and the authorities and agencies thereof, are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this division with respect to the purchase of local exchange telephone services used by such governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1287, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-218. - Computation when seller collects charges periodically. 
In all cases where the seller collects the price for local exchange telephone service in stated periods, the tax imposed and levied by this division shall be computed on the amount of purchase during the month or period according to each bill rendered, provided the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Ord. No. 1287, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-219. - Duty of seller to collect, report and remit. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller, in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city, to collect from the purchaser, for use of the city, the taxes imposed and levied by this division, at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for the service. The taxes so collected during each calendar month or billing period shall be reported and paid by each seller to the commissioner of the revenue on or before the last day of the succeeding month of collection. Such report shall include the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay such tax. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue may extend, for good cause shown, the time of filing a return required to be filed by the provisions of this section; provided, however, that no such extension shall exceed a period of ninety (90) days. 
(c)  All remittances received hereunder by the commissioner of the revenue shall be promptly turned over to the treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1287, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-220. - Seller's records. 
Each seller of local exchange telephone service shall keep complete records showing all purchases of such service in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof and the date of payment thereof and the amount of tax imposed under this division. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during regular business hours on business days, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof, during such times, as they may desire. 
(Ord. No. 1287, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-221. - Duties of city treasurer. 
The city treasurer shall be charged with the duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied under this division. 
(Ord. No. 1287, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-222. - Powers of the commissioner of the revenue. 
The commissioner of the revenue may prescribe forms for the filing of any report or the payment of any funds set forth in this division and may make and establish rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this division, to help carry out the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1287, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-223. - Failure of purchaser to pay; violations of division by seller. 
Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed or levied by this division and any seller violating the provisions of this division, and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this division, shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction for such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of such tax as provided in this division 
(Ord. No. 1287, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-224. - Additional tax on telephone service to establish and maintain an e-911 emergency telephone system. 
(a)  In addition to any tax heretofore imposed and levied by this division, there shall be further imposed and levied upon all purchasers of local exchange telephone service in the city a monthly tax of thirty-nine cents ($0.39) per telephone line from December 1, 1985, through February 28, 1987, twenty-four cents ($0.24) per telephone line from March 1, 1987 through June 30, 1993, and one dollar and forty-four cents ($1.44) per telephone line from July 1, 1993, through June 30, 1997, two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per telephone line from July 1, 1997 through September 30, 2003, and two dollars and sixty cents ($2.60) per telephone line on and after October 1, 2003. Each telephone line having a separate telephone or trunk line shall be considered a separate line. 
(b)  Each and every seller of local exchange telephone service shall be allowed three (3) percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction in submitting the return and paying the amount due by it. 
(c)  All taxes collected pursuant to this section shall first be used to defray the costs of establishing an enhanced 911 (E-911) emergency telephone system as defined in this section. After the costs of establishing the E-911 system have been met, all taxes collected pursuant to this section shall be used to defray the costs of maintaining the system. All taxes collected pursuant to this section shall be kept separate from any other funds collected by the treasurer. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, an "E-911" system means a telephone service which utilizes a computerized system to automatically route emergency telephone calls placed by dialing the digits "911" to the proper public safety answering point serving the jurisdiction from which the emergency telephone call was placed. An E-911 system includes selective routing of telephone calls, automatic telephone number identification, and automatic location identification performed by computers and other ancillary control center communications equipment. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, "public safety answering point" means a communications facility operated on a twenty-four-hour basis which receives E-911 calls from persons in an E-911 service area and which may, as appropriate, directly dispatch public safety services or extend, transfer, or relay E-911 calls to appropriate public safety agencies. 
(f)  For the purposes of this section, "public safety agency" means a functional division of a public agency which provides fire-fighting, police, medical, or other emergency services or a private entity which provides such services on a voluntary basis. 
(g)  For the purposes of this section, a "trunk" means a line that connects an on-premises telephone system to a telephone company central office. 
This section shall be effective and the change applied to billing cycles on and after October 1, 2003. The commissioner of the revenue is directed, pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3812, to provide written notice immediately after adoption of this ordinance by certified mail to the registered agent of the service providers that are required to collect this tax. 
(Ord. No. 1287, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1351, 5-14-03; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-225. - Public rights-of-way use fee. 
(a)  That notwithstanding any other provision of law, including its Charter or any other ordinance or resolution, franchise or provision of law heretofore adopted, the City of Hampton hereby imposes a public rights-of-way use fee provided for in § 56-468.1 of the Code of Virginia, effective July 1, 2001. 
(b)  The calculation, collection and remittance of said fee by certified providers of local exchange telephone service within the city shall commence as of the fiscal year starting July 1, 2001, in accordance with the provisions of § 56-468.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  That the fees generated by this division will be used exclusively for capital improvement projects throughout the City of Hampton. 
(Ord. No. 1298, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
ARTICLE VII. - TAX ON FOOD AND BEVERAGES SOLD BY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Food establishments, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Food and beverage tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840 et seq. 
 
Sec. 37-226. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have, for the purposes of this article, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cater. The furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
Collector. The commissioner of revenue or designee. 
Commissioner. The commissioner of revenue and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspector or other employees. 
Food. All food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
Food establishment. Any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the city, including, but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, coliseum, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
Meal. Meal shall mean any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
Purchaser. Any person who purchases food or food products or both. 
Seller. Any person who sells food or food products or both. 
(Code 1964, § 39-115; Ord. No. 566, 4-17-78; Ord. No. 699, 7-22-81; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1282, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-227. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, in addition to all other taxes, fees and charges of every kind now or hereafter imposed by law, upon all food and beverages sold in the city in or from a food establishment a tax equal to seven and one-half (7.5) percent of the charge, one-half cent or more being treated as one cent ($0.01). 
(Code 1964, § 39-116; Ord. No. 566, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 936, 5-10-89; Ord. No. 1085, 5-12-93; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1274, 5-10-00; Ord. No. 1282, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 1295, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 1313, 7-11-01; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 12-0023, 5-9-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-0023 states that this ordinance shall be effective and the charges applied by the City of Hampton, Virginia, on or after July 1, 2012. 
Charter reference— Authority of city to levy and collect taxes on purchase of meals at restaurants, § 2.02a. 
State Law reference— Utility tax authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840.  
Sec. 37-228. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Factory-prepacked donuts, ice cream, candy, gum, nuts, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and items of essentially the same nature; 
(2)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a "bulk sale" shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on premises consumption (e.g., a whole cake, or a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
(3)  Alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers. 
(4)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children. 
(5)  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. § 2012, as amended except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and nonfactory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (c)(3), (4) and (5) herein below. 
(b)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(c)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees. 
(3)  Food and beverages for use or consumption and which is paid for directly by the Commonwealth, any political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the United States. 
(4)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof. 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private nonprofit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)  Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, not exceeding three (3) times per calendar year, by a nonprofit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for nonprofit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(7)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(Code 1964, § 39-117; Ord. No. 566, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1282, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-228.1. - Gratuities and service charges. 
(a)  Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided, in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
(b)  For periods prior to July 1, 2006, an amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser is a part of the selling price of the food and beverage and is subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(c)  For periods commencing on or after July 1, 2006, an amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, which does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the selling price of the food and beverages, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, is not subject to the tax imposed by this article; however, any portion of such mandatory gratuity, tip or service charge that exceeds twenty percent (20%) that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser is subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-229. - Collection. 
(a)  Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this article from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made, whether such payment is made in cash or on credit by means of a credit card or otherwise; provided, however, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the Department for the Blind and Vision Impaired and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. 
(b)  The seller shall separately state the amount charged for food and beverages. 
(c)  The taxes collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the seller collecting the same until remitted as provided in this article. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-119, 39-120; Ord. No. 566, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1282, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-230. - Reports and remittances generally. 
The seller collecting any tax as provided in this article shall make out a report, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount collected for food and beverages and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver such report to the commissioner of revenue, with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the twentieth day of each month covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. If the remittance is by check or money order, the same shall be made payable to the treasurer of the city; and all remittances received hereunder together with copies of the reports received hereunder, by the commissioner of revenue shall be turned over to the city treasurer within fifteen (15) days of their receipt. 
(Code 1964, § 39-121; Ord. No. 566, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 778, 8-22-84; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-231. - Preservation of records. 
It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the city the taxes imposed by this article to keep and to preserve for a period of five (5) years records showing all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. The commissioner of the revenue or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 39-124; Ord. No. 566, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-231.1. - Requirement of bond or letter of credit; authority of the commissioner. 
(a)  The commissioner may require all new food establishments, as defined in section 37-226, to post a bond with corporate surety simultaneously with the procurement of their initial business license to insure faithful performance of the seller's duties to the city as to food and beverage taxes collected and held by the seller. The bond, including the corporate surety thereon, shall be in a form deemed satisfactory by the city attorney. The amount for the bond shall be equal to the food and beverage taxes to be collected on estimated gross receipts for one quarter of operation, or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), whichever is greater. 
(b)  The commissioner may require any food establishment which has been delinquent for two or more months during any twelve (12) month period to post a bond with corporate surety in accordance with the provision set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue is authorized to develop, implement and utilize such forms, regulations and procedures as may be useful and expedient in implementing this section. The commissioner may accept a cash bond, or an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of the required bond, provided that the letter of credit has been reviewed and approved by the city attorney. 
(d)  Any seller who has posted a bond with a corporate surety, or a cash bond in lieu thereof, or an irrevocable letter of credit, and has a satisfactory remittance record, may apply in writing to the commissioner of the revenue seeking to be released from the bond requirement. A satisfactory remittance record requires that the applicant is current on all tax assessments and has paid timely all food and beverage taxes required by this article for a period of twelve (12) months consecutively. 
(Ord. No. 1073, 12-19-92; Ord. No. 1076, 1-27-93; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 12-0032, 6-13-12) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1125.  
Sec. 37-232. - Duty of collector going out of business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1964, § 39-125; Ord. No. 566, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-233. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the commissioner of revenue a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent, if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) percent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate, with a minimum penalty of ten dollars ($10.00), but in no event shall the penalty exceed the amount of the tax assessable. In addition, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum may be computed and collected upon the taxes and penalty beginning from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Code 1964, § 39-122; Ord. No. 566, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-234. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
(a)  If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the reports and remittances mentioned in this article, the commissioner of revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of revenue procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalties provided for by this article and shall notify such person, by mail sent to his last known address, of the total amount of such tax and interest and penalties, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten (10) days from the date of such notice. The commissioner of revenue shall notify the treasurer of the assessment of any tax and penalties under this section within five (5) days of the expiration of the ten-day period hereinabove provided. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a food establishment in the city and liable for the collection of the tax levied by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make, within the time provided by this article, the reports or remittances required in this article. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall have the power and the duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied hereunder and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury for the city. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-123, 39-126; Ord. No. 566, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 778, 8-22-84; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-235. - Food establishment not to advertise that it will pay or absorb tax. 
A person operating a food establishment shall not advertise, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that he will absorb or pay all or any part of the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1964, § 39-118; Ord. No. 566, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-236. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any corporate, partnership or limited liability company officer who willfully fails to pay, collect, or truthfully account for and pay over any local admission, transient occupancy, food and beverage, or daily rental property tax administered by the commissioner of revenue or other authorized officer, or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be liable for a penalty of the amount of the tax evaded or not paid, collected, or accounted for and paid over, to be assessed and collected in the same manner as such taxes are assessed and collected. 
(c)  The term "corporate partnership or limited liability company officer," as used in this section means an officer or employee of a corporation, or a member, or employee of a partnership or member, manager or employee of a limited liability company who, as such officer, employee, member or manager, is under a duty to perform on behalf of the corporation, partnership or limited liability company the act in respect of which the violation occurs and who (i) had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt as set forth herein and (ii) had authority to prevent such failure or attempt. 
(d)  Any corporate or partnership officer as defined in this section and in Virginia Code § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for and pay over any local admission, transient occupancy, food and beverage, daily rental property or cigarette taxes administered by the commissioner of the revenue or other authorized officer, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for and pay over such tax, and any such officer or person who willfully evades or attempts to evade any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties proved by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(e)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 39-127; Ord. No. 566, 4-12-78; Ord. No. 1206, 2-25-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Wrongful use of collections, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3833(C); liability of corporate officer, etc. for tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906; willful failure to collect tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3907.  
Secs. 37-237—37-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - TRANSIENT LODGING TAX AND HOTEL FEE[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-0009, adopted May 8, 2013, amended the title of Art. VIII to read as herein set out. Article VIII was formerly entitled "Transient Lodging Tax." 
State Law reference— Transient lodging tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840 et seq. 
 
Sec. 37-251. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following respective meanings, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hotel: Any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, rooming house or other lodging place within the city offering lodging, for compensation, to any transient. 
Hotel Fee : Any flat tax levied on transient lodging pursuant to Code of Virginia § 58.1-3840, as it may be amended from time to time. 
Lodging: Space or room furnished any transient, including the cost of all meals, food and other services when furnished with such space or room for a unit price. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, society, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate or receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination or group of individuals acting as a unit. 
Transient: Any person who, for a period of not more than ninety (90) consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging at any hotel. 
(Ord. No. 314; Code 1964, § 39-81; Ord. No. 1238, 2-10-99; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 17-0004 , 5-10-17; Ord. No. 19-0004 , 5-8-19)  
Sec. 37-252. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, on each transient, a tax equivalent to eight (8) percent of the total amount paid for lodging, by or for any transient, to any hotel, plus a Hotel Fee of two dollars ($2.00) for each night per room of lodging at any hotel. 
(Code 1964, § 39-82; Ord. No. 314; Ord. No. 858, 5-12-87; Ord. No. 1118, 5-11-94; Ord. No. 1296, 5-9-01; Ord. No. 1403, 6-8-05; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 13-0009, 5-8-13 ; Ord. No. 19-0004 , 5-8-19) 
State Law reference— Lodging tax authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840.  
Sec. 37-253. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be payable under this article in any of the following instances: 
(1)  On charges for lodging paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for the aged. 
(2)  Lodging which is paid for directly by the Commonwealth, any political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the United States. 
(3)  Effective July 1, 2006, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the tax imposed on transient room rentals pursuant to this article shall be imposed only for the occupancy of any room or space that is suitable or intended for occupancy of transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 39-89; Ord. No. 314; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Scope of transient occupancy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3843.  
Sec. 37-254. - Collection. 
Every person receiving any payment for lodging with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax so imposed from the transient on whom such tax is levied or from the person paying for such lodging at the time payment for such lodging is made. The taxes required to be collected under this section shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 39-83; Ord. No. 314; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-255. - Reports and remittances generally. 
The person collecting any tax imposed by this article shall make out report thereof, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of lodging charges collected and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver such report to the commissioner of revenue, with a remittance of such tax. Such report and remittance shall be made on or before the twentieth day of each month covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. All remittances received hereunder by the commissioner of revenue shall be promptly turned over to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1964, § 39-84; Ord. No. 314; Ord. No. 778, 8-22-84; Ord. No. 1222, 7-15-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-256. - Collector's records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and to preserve for a period of five (5) years, such suitable records as may be necessary to determine and show accurately all lodging charges taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. The commissioner of the revenue or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 39-87; Ord. No. 314; Ord. No. 1222, 7-15-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-257. - Duty of collector going out of business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or dispose of his business, he shall notify the commissioner of revenue of such fact and any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable on the date such person ceases to operate or disposes of his business and such person, having made a report through such date and having paid the tax due through such date, shall be relieved of any liability for the collection of such taxes thereafter. Otherwise, such person shall be liable for such taxes through the succeeding collection date. 
(Code 1964, § 39-88; Ord. No. 314; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-258. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the commissioner of revenue a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent, if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) percent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate, with a minimum penalty of ten dollars ($10.00), but in no event shall the penalty exceed the amount of tax assessable. In addition, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum may be computed and collected on the tax and penalty beginning from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Code 1964, § 39-85; Ord. No. 314; Ord. No. 1222, 7-15-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-259. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
(a)  If any person shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the reports and remittances required in this article, the commissioner of revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax, and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person such tax, penalty and interest as are provided for in this article, and shall notify such person, by mail sent to his last known address, of the amount of such tax, interest and penalty; and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten (10) days from the date of the mailing of such notice. The commissioner of revenue shall notify the treasurer of the assessment of any tax and penalties under this section within five (5) days of the expiration of the ten-day payment period hereinabove provided. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a hotel in the city, liable for the collection of the tax levied by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make, within the time provided by this article, the reports or remittances required in this article. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall have the power and the duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied hereunder and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury for the city. 
(Code 1964, § 39-86; Ord. No. 314; Ord. No. 778, 8-22-84; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-260. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and each violation or failure shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction for such violation shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(b)  Any corporate, partnership or limited liability company officer who willfully fails to pay, collect, or truthfully account for and pay over any local admission, transient occupancy, food and beverage, or daily rental property tax administered by the commissioner of revenue or other authorized officer, or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be liable for a penalty of the amount of the tax evaded or not paid, collected, or accounted for and paid over, to be assessed and collected in the same manner as such taxes are assessed and collected. 
(c)  The term "corporate partnership or limited liability company officer," as used in this section means an officer or employee of a corporation, or a member, or employee of a partnership or member, manager or employee of a limited liability company who, as such officer, employee, member or manager, is under a duty to perform on behalf of the corporation, partnership or limited liability company the act in respect of which the violation occurs and who (i) had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt as set forth herein and (ii) had authority to prevent such failure or attempt. 
(d)  Any corporate or partnership officer as defined in this section and in Virginia Code § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for and pay over any local admission, transient occupancy, food and beverage, daily rental property or cigarette taxes administered by the commissioner of the revenue or other authorized officer, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for and pay over such tax, and any such officer or person who willfully evades or attempts to evade any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties proved by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(e)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 39-90; Ord. No. 314; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Wrongful use of collections, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3833(C); liability of corporate officer, etc. for tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906; willful failure to collect tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3907.  
Secs. 37-261—37-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ADMISSIONS TAX[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to levy and collect taxes on admission charges for public amusements, entertainment, etc., § 2.02a. 
 
Sec. 37-276. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Admission charge: The charge made for admission to any amusement or entertainment, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, including a charge made for season tickets, whether obtained by contributions or subscription, a cover charge or a charge made for the use of seats or tables, reserved or otherwise, and similar accommodations in the city. When a person is admitted free and a service charge is made, the service charge shall be considered a charge for admission. 
Place of amusement or entertainment: Any place in the city wherein or whereat any of the following are located, conducted, performed, exhibited and operated and for which an admission charge is made: circuses, carnivals, menageries, moving picture shows, fairs, shows and exhibitions of all kinds; dances, baseball, basketball, football, wrestling, boxing and sports of all kinds; swimming pools; concerts, and theatrical, vaudeville, dramatic, operatic and musical performances and performances similar thereto; lectures, talks, library readings and performances similar thereto; such attractions as merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, roller coasters, leap-the-dips and the like; and all other public amusements, performances and exhibitions not specifically named herein. 
Sporting event: Organized league and tournament play of a game involving athletic activity pursuant to a set form and body of rules. 
(Code 1964, § 39-68; Ord. No. 347; Ord. No. 519; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Classification of vents to which admission is charged, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3817.  
Sec. 37-277. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby imposed and levied a tax in the amount of ten (10) percent of any admission charge to any place of amusement or entertainment, where the admission charge is thirty-five cents ($0.35) or any amount in excess thereof which shall be collected from each person who pays an admission charge of thirty-five cents ($0.35) or more to any place of amusement or entertainment, one-half (½) cent or more being treated as one cent ($0.01); provided however, that there is hereby imposed and levied a tax in the amount of ten (10) percent of any admission charge to the Hampton Coliseum and the American Theatre. 
(Code 1964, § 39-69; Ord. No. 347; Ord. No. 692, 6-24-81; Ord. No. 935, 5-10-89; Ord. No. 1209, 5-13-98; Ord. No. 1275, 5-10-00; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Admission tax authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840.  
Sec. 37-278. - Exception if admission charge is thirty-four cents or less. 
Where the admission charge is thirty-four cents ($0.34) or less, no tax shall be payable under this article, except as provided in section 37-277. Amounts paid for admission by season tickets or subscription shall be exempt only if the amount to be charged the holder or subscriber for a single admission is thirty-four cents ($0.34) or less. 
(Code 1964, § 39-77; Ord. No. 347; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-278.1. - Exemptions. 
There shall be no tax on any admission charges for the following: 
(a)  Admissions charged to attend any event, the gross receipts of which go wholly to charitable purpose or purposes. 
(b)  Admissions charged to participants in order to participate in sporting events. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-279. - Repealed.  
Sec. 37-280. - Collection. 
(a)  Every person receiving any payment for admission to any place of amusement or entertainment on which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax from the person making an admission payment, at the time of the payment of such admission. If tickets or cards of admission are issued, the tax shall be collected at the time of the issuance of such tickets or cards. The taxes required to be collected hereunder shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect the same until remitted as provided in this article. 
(b)  The commissioner of revenue, with the approval of the city manager, is hereby authorized to establish a bracket system for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. Any person collecting such tax in accordance with such approved bracket system shall be relieved of any liabilities under this article when such funds are duly paid to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1964, § 39-70; Ord. No. 347; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-281. - Reports and remittances generally. 
The person collecting any tax imposed by this article shall make out a report, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of admission charges collected, exclusive of the federal tax thereon, and the tax from the admissions for which he is liable, and shall sign and deliver the same to the commissioner of revenue, with a remittance of such tax. Such report and remittance shall be made on or before the twentieth day of each month covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. If the remittance is by check or money order, the same shall be made payable to the treasurer of the city. All remittances received hereunder, together with copies of the reports received hereunder, by the commissioner of revenue shall be promptly turned over to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1964, § 39-71; Ord. No. 347; Ord. No. 778, 8-22-84; Ord. No. 1221, 7-15-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-282. - Reports, remittances and deposits by temporary or transitory places of amusement or entertainment. 
(a)  Whenever any place of amusement or entertainment of a temporary or transitory nature makes an admission charge which is subject to the tax levied by this article, the commissioner of revenue may require the report and remittance of such tax to be made on the day following its collection, or on the day following the conclusion of a series of performances or exhibitions, or at such other reasonable time or times as he shall determine, and failure to comply with any such requirement of the commissioner of revenue as to the report and remittance of the tax so required shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Before any temporary or transient place of amusement or entertainment mentioned in subsection (a) above shall begin operation, and before any license shall be issued therefor, if a license is required, the person operating the same shall deposit with the city treasurer a sum of money, to be estimated by the commissioner of revenue, sufficient to cover the tax required to be collected by such person under the provisions of this article, as security for the collection of such tax and payment thereof to the city. At the conclusion of such temporary or transient operation in the city, such person shall file with the commissioner of revenue the report required by this article and pay the tax collected to the city. Upon such report being filed and payment being made, the city treasurer shall refund the deposit made under this section. Should any such person fail to file such report and pay such tax collected within five (5) days from the termination of the operation of such amusement or entertainment, the commissioner of revenue may thereupon assess such person and such tax at the amount of such deposit and the city treasurer shall retain such deposit in full payment of the tax collected by and due the city by such person. 
(Code 1964, § 39-76; Ord. No. 347; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-283. - Collector's records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and to preserve for a period of five (5) years such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax he may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the city to include records showing all admission charges taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each admission, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. The commissioner of the revenue or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 39-74; Ord. No. 347; Ord. No. 1221, 7-15-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-284. - Duty of collector going out of business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall quit business or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable to the city under this article shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1964, § 39-75; Ord. No. 347; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-285. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the commissioner of the revenue a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent, if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) percent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate, with a minimum penalty of ten dollars ($10.00), but in no event shall the penalty exceed the amount of the tax assessable. In addition, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum may be computed and collected upon the taxes and penalty beginning from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Code 1964, § 39-72; Ord. No. 347; Ord. No. 351; Ord. No. 1221, 7-15-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-286. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
(a)  If any person shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed by this article or to make, within the prescribed time, any report and remittance required by this article, the commissioner of revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalties provided for by this article and shall notify such person by mail of the total amount of such tax and interest and penalties; and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten (10) days from the date of such notice. The commissioner of revenue shall notify the treasurer of the assessment of any tax and penalties under this section within five (5) days of the expiration of the ten (10) day payment period hereinabove provided. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a place of amusement in the city, liable for the collection of the tax levied by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make, within the time provided by this article, the report or remittances required in this article. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall have the power and the duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied hereunder and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury for the city. 
(Code 1964, § 39-73; Ord. No. 347; Ord. No. 778, 8-22-84; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-287. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and each such violation or failure shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction for such violation shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax, interest and penalties as provided in this article. 
(b)  Any corporate, partnership or limited liability company officer who willfully fails to pay, collect, or truthfully account for and pay over any local admission, transient occupancy, food and beverage, or daily rental property tax administered by the commissioner of revenue or other authorized officer, or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be liable for a penalty of the amount of the tax evaded or not paid, collected, or accounted for and paid over, to be assessed and collected in the same manner as such taxes are assessed and collected. 
(c)  The term "corporate partnership or limited liability company officer," as used in this section means an officer or employee of a corporation, or a member, or employee of a partnership or member, manager or employee of a limited liability company who, as such officer, employee, member or manager, is under a duty to perform on behalf of the corporation, partnership or limited liability company the act in respect of which the violation occurs and who (i) had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt as set forth herein and (ii) had authority to prevent such failure or attempt. 
(d)  Any corporate or partnership officer as defined in this section and in Virginia Code § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for and pay over any local admission, transient occupancy, food and beverage, daily rental property or cigarette taxes administered by the commissioner of the revenue or other authorized officer, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for and pay over such tax, and any such officer or person who willfully evades or attempts to evade any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties proved by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(e)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 39-80; Ord. No. 347; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Wrongful use of collections, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3833(C); liability of corporate officer, etc. for tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906; willful failure to collect tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3907.  
Secs. 37-288—37-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - CIGARETTE TAX[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to levy cigarette tax and permitted provisions of ordinance providing for administration and enforcement of such tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3830, 58.1-3832. 
 
Sec. 37-301. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer: Every manufacturer, jobber, wholesale dealer or other person who supplies a seller with cigarettes. 
Mill: A unit of monetary value equal to 1/1 ,000; U.S. dollar ( 1/10 of $0.01). 
Package: Every package, box, can or other container of any cigarettes, irrespective of the material from which such container is made, to which the internal revenue stamp of the United States Government is required to be affixed by and under federal statutes and regulations, and in which retail sales of such cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, society, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of individuals. 
Purchaser: Every person to whom title to any cigarettes is transferred by a seller within the corporate limits of the city. 
Sale: Every act or transaction, irrespective of the method or means employed, including the use of vending machines and other mechanical devices, whereby title to any cigarettes shall be transferred from the seller to any other person within the corporate limits of the city. 
Seller: Every person who transfers title to any cigarettes or in whose place of business title to any cigarettes is transferred, within the corporate limits of the city, for any purpose other than resale. 
Stamp: A small gummed piece of paper or decalcomania to be sold by the city treasurer and to be affixed to every package of cigarettes sold at retail in the city and also any insignia or symbols printed by a meter machine upon any such package under the authorization of the commissioner of revenue. 
(Code 1964, § 39-35; Ord. No. 125, § 1; Ord. No. 1325, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-302. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby levied and imposed by the city, upon each and every sale of cigarettes, a tax equivalent to forty-two and one-half (42.5) mills per cigarette sold within the city, the amount of such tax to be paid by the seller, if not previously paid, in the manner and at the time provided for in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 39-36; Ord. No. 125, § 2; Ord. No. 283; Ord. No. 299; Ord. No. 775, 6-27-84; Ord. No. 859, 5-12-87; Ord. No. 932, 5-11-88; Ord. No. 934, 5-10-89; Ord. No. 1044, 5-13-92; Ord. No. 1117, 5-11-94; Ord. No. 1325, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1353, 5-28-03; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 11-0004, 5-11-11; Ord. No. 12-0022, 5-9-12; Ord. No. 15-0013, 5-13-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-0022, adopted May 9, 2012, states: This ordinance shall be effective and the charges applied by the City of Hampton, VA, on or after July 1, 2012. 
State Law reference— Cigarette tax authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840.  
Sec. 37-303. - Method of payment. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall be paid by affixing or causing to be affixed a stamp or stamps, of the proper denominational or face value, to each and every package of cigarettes sold within the city, in the manner and at the time or times provided for in this article. Every dealer and every seller in the city shall have the right to buy such stamps from the city treasurer and to affix the same to packages of cigarettes as provided in this article. 
(b)  The commissioner of revenue may permit the payment in advance of the tax levied and imposed by this article by the method of placing imprints of the stamps upon original packages by the use of meter machines, in lieu of the method of paying such tax by the purchase and affixing of gummed stamps, and may prescribe and enforce the necessary regulations setting forth the method to be employed and the condition to be observed in the use of such meter machines. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-37, 39-43; Ord. No. 125, §§ 3, 8; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-304. - Preparation and sale of stamps generally. 
For the purpose of making stamps available for use, the commissioner of revenue shall prescribe, prepare and furnish to the city treasurer, and the city treasurer shall sell, stamps of such denominations and in such quantities as may be necessary for the payment of the taxes imposed by this article. In the sale of such stamps, the city treasurer shall allow a discount of five (5) percent of the denominational or face value thereof to cover the costs which will be incurred in affixing the stamps to packages of cigarettes. In the event the printing by an authorized meter machine is used in lieu of gummed stamps, there shall be allowed a discount of six (6) percent of the denominational or face value of the imprints of such stamps so printed by such meter machine to cover the costs incurred in printing such imprints. 
(Code 1964, § 39-41; Ord. No. 125, § 6; Ord. No. 284; Ord. No. 302; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-305. - General duties of dealers and sellers with respect to stamps. 
(a)  Every local dealer in cigarettes is hereby required and it shall be his duty to purchase such stamps, at the office of the city treasurer, as shall be necessary to pay the tax levied and imposed by this article, and to affix or cause to be affixed a stamp or stamps of the monetary value prescribed by this article to each package of cigarettes prior to delivery or furnishing of such cigarettes to any seller. Nothing herein contained shall preclude any dealer from using a stamp meter machine in lieu of gummed stamps to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Every seller shall examine each package of cigarettes prior to exposing the same for sale, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such package has the proper stamps affixed thereto or imprinted thereon, as provided by this article. If upon such examination, unstamped or improperly stamped packages of cigarettes are discovered, the seller, where such cigarettes were obtained from a local dealer, shall immediately notify such dealer, and upon such notification, such dealer shall forthwith either affix to or imprint upon such unstamped or improperly stamped packages the proper amount of stamps, or shall replace such packages with others to which stamps have been properly affixed or imprinted thereon. 
(c)  Should a seller obtain or acquire possession of, from any person other than a local dealer, any unstamped or improperly stamped cigarettes, such seller shall forthwith, before selling or offering or exposing such cigarettes for sale in the city, purchase and affix or cause to be affixed to such packages of cigarettes the proper stamps, or the markings of a meter machine, covering the tax imposed by this article. 
(d)  In the event any seller elects to purchase and affix stamps or imprints of a meter machine, before offering cigarettes for sale, any local dealer delivering and furnishing cigarettes to such seller shall not be required to purchase and affix such stamps or imprints to such cigarettes so sold or furnished; provided that, any such local dealer shall, on the day following the day of such delivery and furnishing, file with the commissioner of revenue a copy of the delivery memorandum showing the name and address of the seller and the quantity and type of cigarettes so delivered and furnished. 
(Code 1964, §§ 39-39, 39-40; Ord. No. 125, §§ 4, 5; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-306. - Visibility of stamps or meter markings. 
Stamps or the printed markings of a meter machine shall be placed upon each package of cigarettes in such manner as to be readily visible to purchaser. 
(Code 1964, § 39-39; Ord. No. 125, § 4; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-307. - Altering design of stamps. 
The commissioner of revenue may, from time to time, and as often as he may deem advisable, provide for the issuance and exclusive use of stamps of a new design and forbid the use of stamps of any other design. 
(Code 1964, § 39-42; Ord. No. 125, § 7; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-308. - Refund for unused stamps or meter imprints. 
(a)  Should any person, after acquiring from the city treasurer any stamps provided for in this article, cease to be engaged in a business necessitating the use thereof, or should any such stamps become mutilated and unfit for use, other than by cancellation as provided in this article, such person shall be entitled to a refund of the denominational or face amount of any stamps so acquired and not used by him, less five (5) percent of the denominational or face amount thereof, upon presenting such stamps to the commissioner of revenue and furnishing the commissioner of revenue with an affidavit showing, to his satisfaction, that such stamps were acquired by such person and have not in any manner been used and the reason for requesting such refund. In the case of any authorized meter machine, should any imprints of such machine theretofore paid for not be used, such person shall, upon furnishing the commissioner of revenue with a similar affidavit, be entitled to a refund of the denominational or face amount thereof, less six (6) percent of the denominational or face amount of such imprints of such machine not so used. 
(b)  All refunds for unused and mutilated stamps and for nonuse of imprints of stamps by meter machines provided for under this section are hereby authorized to be made on vouchers approved by the commissioner of revenue and, when made, the same shall be charged against the sums collected for the sale of such stamps and for the use of such imprints. 
(Code 1964, § 39-44; Ord. No. 125, § 9; Ord. No. 285; Ord. No. 303; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-309. - Seizure and sale of unstamped cigarettes. 
Whenever the commissioner of revenue shall discover any cigarettes which are subject to the tax imposed by this article and upon which the tax has not been paid or upon which stamps have not been affixed or evidence of such tax shown thereon by the printed markings of an authorized meter machine, as in this article required, the commissioner of revenue, upon proper notice, is hereby authorized and empowered to forthwith seize and take possession of such cigarettes, which shall thereupon be deemed to be forfeited to the city, and he may, within a reasonable time thereafter, after written notice posted at the front door of the Court House of the city, at least five (5) days before the date of sale, or published in some newspaper having general circulation in the city at least five (5) days before the date of sale, sell such forfeited cigarettes at the time and place designated in such notice and, from the proceeds of such sale, shall collect the tax due thereon, together with a penalty of fifty (50) percent thereof and the costs incurred in such proceedings and pay the balance, if any, of such proceeds to the person in whose possession such forfeited cigarettes were found. Such seizure and sale shall not be deemed to relieve any person from any penalty provided for the violation of the provisions of this article. All monies collected under the provisions of this section shall be paid to the city treasurer and treated as other taxes collected under this article. 
(Code 1964, § 39-46; Ord. No. 125, § 10; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3832(6).  
Sec. 37-310. - Dealers' and sellers' records generally. 
It shall be the duty of every local dealer and seller to maintain and keep, for a period of two (2) years, such records of cigarettes sold and delivered by him as may be required by the commissioner of revenue and to make all such records available for examination by such commissioner of revenue, upon demand, at any and all reasonable times. 
(Code 1964, § 39-38; Ord. No. 125, § 13; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-311. - Rules and regulations for enforcement and administration of article; examination of books, records, etc. 
(a)  The commissioner of revenue is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the method and means to be used in the cancellation of the aforesaid stamps and to any and all other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The commissioner of revenue may examine books, records, invoices, papers and any and all cigarettes in and upon any premises where the same are placed, stored, sold, offered for sale or displayed for sale by a seller. 
(Code 1964, § 39-48; Ord. No. 125, § 14; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-312. - Tax is in addition to other taxes. 
The tax levied and imposed by this article shall be in addition to all other taxes of every kind levied and imposed by any other ordinance or law. 
(Code 1964, § 39-49; Ord. No. 125, § 15; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-313. - Violations of article—Generally. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Conviction and punishment for such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment of any tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  The term "corporate partnership or limited liability company officer," as used in this section means an officer or employee of a corporation, or a member, or employee of a partnership or member, manager or employee of a limited liability company who, as such officer, employee, member or manager, is under a duty to perform on behalf of the corporation, partnership or limited liability company the act in respect of which the violation occurs and who (i) had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt as set forth herein and (ii) had authority to prevent such failure or attempt. 
(c)  Any corporate or partnership officer as defined in this section and in Virginia Code § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for and pay over any local admission, transient occupancy, food and beverage, daily rental property or cigarette taxes administered by the commissioner of the revenue or other authorized officer, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for and pay over such tax, and any such officer or person who willfully evades or attempts to evade any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties proved by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Wrongful use of collections, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3833(C); liability of corporate officer, etc. for tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906; willful failure to collect tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3907.  
Sec. 37-314. - Same—Prohibited acts enumerated. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person: 
(1)  To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof; or for any dealer or seller, with intent to violate any provision of this article, to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed upon him under the provisions of this article or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which the commissioner of revenue may issue under this article. 
(2)  To falsely or fraudulently make, forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp or the printed markings of any meter machine or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp or printed markings of a meter machine or to knowingly and wilfully alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps or printed markings of a meter machine. 
(3)  To sell any cigarettes upon which the tax imposed by this article has not been paid and upon which evidence of payment thereof is not shown on each package of cigarettes. 
(4)  To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which cigarettes, for which the tax imposed has been theretofore paid, have been removed. 
(5)  To remove from any package any stamp or the printed markings of a meter machine with intent to use or cause the same to be used after the same have already been used or to buy, sell or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps or printed markings of a meter machine to any person or to reuse any stamp or printed markings of a meter machine which had theretofore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed by this article or, except as to the city treasurer, to sell or offer to sell any stamps or printed markings of a meter machine provided for in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 39-47; Ord. No. 125, § 11; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-315. - Same—Presumption of violation by seller. 
In the event any package of cigarettes is found in the possession of a seller, without the proper stamps being affixed thereto or without authorized printed markings of a meter machine thereon, and the seller shall be unable to submit evidence establishing that he received such package within the immediately preceding forty-eight (48) hours and that he has not offered the same for sale, the presumption shall be that such package is being kept by such seller in violation of the provisions of this article and shall subject him to the penalties provided for such violation. 
(Code 1964, § 39-45; Ord. No. 125, § 12; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Secs. 37-316—37-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - RECORDATION TAX[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
State Law reference— City recordation tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-814. 
 
Sec. 37-331. - Levied; amount; collection generally. 
There is hereby imposed a recordation tax on the first recordation of each taxable instrument in the city of the amount of one-third ( 1/3 ) of the amount of the state recordation tax, as authorized by article 1 of chapter 38 of title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3800 et seq.), excepting such instruments as are exempted by § 58.1-3800 of the Code of Virginia, which tax shall be collected by the clerk of the circuit court for the city and paid monthly to the treasurer of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 39-15; Ord. No. 30, § 1; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1383, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-814.  
Sec. 37-332. - Compensation of clerk of circuit court for collecting. 
Pursuant to § 58.1-3803 of the Code of Virginia, the compensation of the clerk of the circuit court for the services rendered pursuant to section 37-331 shall be as is set forth in the annual budget of the city as supplemental salary of the clerk and, in addition thereto, five (5) percent of all recordation taxes collected and paid over pursuant to section 37-331. 
(Code 1964, § 39-16; Ord. No. 30, § 1; Ord. No. 298; Ord. No. 997, 2-27-91; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Secs. 37-333, 37-334. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - SHORT-TERM RENTAL TAX 
 
Sec. 37-335. - Levied; amount. 
Pursuant to § 58.1-3510.1 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby assessed and imposed on every person engaged in the short-term rental business a tax of one (1) percent on the gross proceeds of such business. Such tax shall be in addition to the tax levied pursuant to § 58.1-605 of the Code of Virginia. For purposes of this section, "gross proceeds" means the total amount charged to each person for the rental of daily rental property, excluding any state and local sales tax paid pursuant to the Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 950, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy short-term rental tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3907.  
Sec. 37-336. - Daily rental property; defined. 
For purposes of this section, "daily rental property" means all tangible personal property held for rental and owned by a person engaged in the short-term rental business, except trailers, as defined in § 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, and other tangible personal property required to be licensed or registered with the department of motor vehicles, department of game and inland fisheries, or the department of aviation. 
(Ord. No. 950, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-337. - Short-term rental business; defined. 
A person is engaged in the short-term rental business if not less than eighty (80) percent of the gross rental receipts of such business in any year are from transactions involving rental periods of ninety-two (92) consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessor. "Affiliated" for purposes of this section shall mean any common ownership interest in excess of five (5) percent of any officers or partners in common with the lessor and lessee. For purposes of this test, (1) any rental to a person affiliated with the lessor shall be treated as rental receipts but shall not qualify for purposes of the eighty (80) percent requirement, and (2) any rental of personal property which also involves the provision of personal services for the operation of the personal property rented shall not be treated as gross receipts from rental. For purposes of this section, the delivery and installation of tangible personal property shall not mean operation. 
(Ord. No. 950, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-337.1. - Short-term rental tax; defined. 
For purposes of this article short-term rental tax and daily rental property tax are the same. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-338. - Taxation of rental property that is not daily rental property. 
Except for daily rental vehicles, rental property that is not daily rental property shall be classified for taxation pursuant to § 58.1-3503 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 950, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-339. - Collection, return and remittance of tax. 
Every person engaged in the short-term rental business shall collect the rental tax from the lessee of the daily rental property at the time of the rental. The lessor of the daily rental property shall transmit a quarterly return to the commissioner of revenue, indicating the gross proceeds derived from the short-term rental business. The commissioner of the revenue shall assess the tax due, and the treasurer shall collect the daily rental property tax as is due for the quarter. The quarterly returns and payment of tax shall be filed with the commissioner of revenue on or before the 20th day of each of the months of April, July, October, and January, representing, respectively, the gross proceeds and taxes collected during the preceding quarters ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31. The return shall be upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of revenue may require, showing the amount of gross receipts and the tax required to be collected. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 950, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-339.1. - Preservation of records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by the article to keep and to preserve for a period of five (5) years such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax he may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the city to include records showing all short-term rental charges taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. The commissioner of revenue or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1223, 7-15-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-340. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, or remit taxes. 
If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the returns and remittances required in this article, the commissioner of revenue shall proceed in such manner as the commissioner may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base the commissioner's estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of revenue shall procure such facts and information as the commissioner is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such return and remittance, the commissioner shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax, penalty, and interest provided for by this article and shall notify such person, by mail, sent to the person's last known place of address, of the total amount of such tax, penalty, and interest, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten (10) days from the date of such notice. In the event such tax is not paid within ten (10) days from the date of the notice, the Treasurer shall proceed to collect same in accordance with chapter 39 of title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 950, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-341. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
(a)  If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be imposed, in addition to other penalties provided herein, a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of six (6) percent if the failure is for not more than one (1) month, with an additional six (6) percent for each additional month, or fraction thereof, during which the failure continues, not to exceed thirty (30) percent in the aggregate. In no case, however, shall the penalty be less than ten dollars ($10.00) and such minimum penalty shall apply whether or not any tax is due for the period for which such return was required. If such failure is due to providential or other good cause shown to the satisfaction of the commissioner, such return with or without remittance may be accepted exclusive of penalties. 
(b)  All penalties and interest imposed by this section shall be payable by the dealer and collectable by the commissioner in the same manner as if they were a part of the tax imposed. 
(c)  In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the tax may be assessed against the person required to collect such tax. 
(Ord. No. 950, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1223, 7-15-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-635, 58.1-636.  
Sec. 37-342. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected or assessed on (1) rentals by the Commonwealth, any political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the United States; (2) assessed on any rental meeting the provisions of Code of Virginia §§ 58.1-609.1-58.1-609.11; (3) otherwise qualifying rentals that do not leave the premises of the person engaged in the short-term rental business; or (4) any rental of durable medical equipment as defined in subdivision 10 of § 58.1-609.10 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 950, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-343. - Renter's certificate of registration. 
Every person engaging in the business of short-term rental of tangible personal property shall file an application for a certificate of registration with the commissioner of revenue. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the commissioner of revenue and shall set forth the name under which the applicant intends to operate the rental business, the location and such other information as the commissioner may require. 
Each applicant shall sign the application as owner of the rental business. If the rental business is owned by an association, partnership, or corporation, the application shall be signed by a member, partner, executive officer or other person specifically authorized by the association, partnership, or corporation to sign. 
Upon approval of the application by the commissioner of revenue, a certificate of registration shall be issued. The certificate shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the place of business for which it is issued. 
The certificate is not assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and the place of business designated. 
(Ord. No. 950, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-344. - Criminal penalties for violation of article. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Provided, however, if the amount of tax due and unpaid for any quarterly installment exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), any person failing to remit payment when due shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 950, 10-11-89; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-344.1. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any corporate, partnership or limited liability company officer who willfully fails to pay, collect, or truthfully account for and pay over any local admission, transient occupancy, food and beverage, or daily rental property tax administered by the commissioner of revenue or other authorized officer, or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be liable for a penalty of the amount of the tax evaded or not paid, collected, or accounted for and paid over, to be assessed and collected in the same manner as such taxes are assessed and collected. 
(b)  The term "corporate partnership or limited liability company officer," as used in this section means an officer or employee of a corporation, or a member, or employee of a partnership or member, manager or employee of a limited liability company who, as such officer, employee, member or manager, is under a duty to perform on behalf of the corporation, partnership or limited liability company the act in respect of which the violation occurs and who (i) had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt as set forth herein and (ii) had authority to prevent such failure or attempt. 
(c)  Any corporate or partnership officer as defined in this section and in Virginia Code § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for and pay over any local admission, transient occupancy, food and beverage, daily rental property or cigarette taxes administered by the commissioner of the revenue or other authorized officer, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for and pay over such tax, and any such officer or person who willfully evades or attempts to evade any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties proved by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07) 
State Law reference— Wrongful use of collections, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3833(C); liability of corporate officer, etc. for tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906; willful failure to collect tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3907.  
ARTICLE XIII. - TAX ON PURCHASERS OF CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Cross reference— Cable television, Ch. 9.1. 
 
Sec. 37-345. - Levied; amount. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, upon each and every purchaser of cable television service inside the corporate limits of the city, a tax in the amount of seven (7) percent of the charge for cable service made by the seller thereof against the purchaser. 
(b)  Cable television service furnished in the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed a utility service. 
(Ord. No. 1086, 5-12-93; Ord. No. 1324, 5-8-02; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-346. - Applicability generally. 
The tax imposed and levied under this article on purchasers with respect to cable television services shall apply to all charges made for cable television services, except any charge made for a remote control tuning device. 
(Ord. No. 1086, 5-12-93; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-347. - Exemptions. 
The United States of America, the State of Virginia and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this article with respect to the purchase of cable television service used by such governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1086, 5-12-93; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-348. - Duty of seller to collect and remit; seller's reports. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller of cable television service, in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the city, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax imposed and levied by this article at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for the service. The tax collected during such calendar month shall be reported and remitted by the seller to the commissioner of the revenue on or before the twentieth day of each month covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding calendar month. At the same time, the seller shall report the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay such tax. The required reports shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  All remittances received hereunder by the commissioner of the revenue shall be promptly turned over to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1086, 5-12-93; Ord. No. 1218, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-349. - Seller's records. 
Each and every seller of cable television service shall keep and preserve for a period of five (5) years records showing all purchases of such service in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof and the amount of tax imposed under this article. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Ord. No. 1086, 5-12-93; Ord. No. 1218, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-350. - Violation of article by seller. 
Any seller violating the provisions of this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1086, 5-12-93; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-351. - General duty of treasurer to collect. 
The city treasurer shall be charged with the power and the duty of collecting the tax levied and imposed under this article and shall cause the same to be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1086, 5-12-93; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-352. - Assessment and collection of delinquencies. 
It shall be the duty of the commissioner of revenue to assess taxes reported by the seller to be unpaid under this article against the purchaser, together with a penalty in the amount of five (5) percent, if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) percent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate, with a minimum penalty of two dollars ($2.00). These assessments shall be turned over to the city treasurer, who shall collect the taxes and penalty in the same manner as other delinquent taxes are collected. 
(Ord. No. 1086, 5-12-93; Ord. No. 1218, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-353. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
(a)  If the seller, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the commissioner of revenue a penalty in the amount of five (5) percent, if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) percent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate, with a minimum penalty of two dollars ($2.00). 
(b)  In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the tax shall be assessed against the seller required to collect such tax. 
(Ord. No. 1218, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Secs. 37-354—37-399. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - LOCAL TECHNOLOGY ZONES[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
State Law reference— Local technology zones, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3850. 
 
Sec. 37-400. - Purpose and intent. 
The city finds that the creation of three (3) local technology zones, with incentives for economic growth, as authorized by § 58.1-3850 of the Code of Virginia, will foster the development, maintenance and expansion of commercial and industrial businesses engaged in technological research and design and those using technologically advanced products to the benefit of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience through the enhancement of public revenues and the creation of employment opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1343, 2-12-03; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-401. - Administration. 
This article shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or designee. The city manager in consultation with the commissioner of the revenue shall determine and publish the procedures for obtaining the benefits created by this article and shall be further responsible for determining whether a business is a qualified technology business or a qualified zone resident and, when necessary, shall interpret the extent and boundaries of the technology zones as set out in section 37-403 below. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-402. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings subscribed below, unless clearly indicated to the contrary: 
Base year means the calendar year preceding the first calendar year of each five-year qualification period a business firm requests technology zone incentives. 
Business firm means any corporation, partnership, electing small business (subchapter S) corporation, limited liability company or sole proprietorship authorized to conduct business in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
The term "business firm" does not include organizations which are exempt from state income tax on all income except unrelated business taxable income as defined in the Federal Internal Revenue Code, section 512; nor does it include homeowners associations as defined in the Federal Internal Revenue Code, section 528. 
Capitalized investment is the original total capitalized costs, excluding capitalized interest, of real and personal property. Real and personal property acquired through capital leases may be included. 
Employee of a zone establishment means a person who is on the payroll of the firm's establishment within the technology zone and is required to report to work in the technology zone. 
Equivalent full-time employee means an employee who works a minimum of twenty (20) hours per week can be combined with another employee that works a minimum of twenty (20) hours a week to equal one (1) full-time employee. Seasonal, temporary, leased or contract labor employees, or employees whose job function is shifted from an existing location in the city to a business firm located in the technology zone shall not qualify as equivalent full-time employees. 
Existing business means one that was actively engaged in the conduct of trade or business in the city prior to an area being designated as a technology zone. 
Full-time employee means an employee who is employed in a job for an indefinite duration at a business firm located in a technology zone and is required either (i) to work a minimum of thirty-five (35) hours per week for the entire normal year, in which the normal year must consist of forty-eight (48) weeks, or (ii) work a minimum of thirty-five (35) hours per week for a portion of the calendar year in which the employee was hired in a job by the firm. Seasonal, temporary, leased or contract labor employees, or employees whose job function is shifted from an existing location in the city to a business firm located in the technology zone shall not qualify as fulltime employees. 
Net capitalized investment is equal to the prior calendar year total cost plus current calendar year acquisitions less current calendar year dispositions. 
New business means a business not previously conducted in the city and that begins operation in a technology zone after the technology zone was designated. 
Qualified technology business means a technology business that has met the qualifications set forth in section 37-404. 
Qualified zone resident means an owner or tenant of real property located in the technology zone who expands or rehabilitates such property to facilitate the conduct of a qualified technology business by such owner or tenant within the technology zone. 
Reporting to work means that the only physical location of the employee's workstation is within the technology zone and the full-time employee physically reports to the technology zone workstation on a regular basis. 
Technology business means a business firm engaged in the activities of research, development, or manufacture of commodities used in factory automation, biotechnology, chemicals, computer hardware, computer software, defense, energy, environmental, manufacturing equipment, advanced materials, medical, pharmaceuticals, photonics, subassemblies and components, test and measurement, telecommunications, and transportation. 
In no case will the use of computers or telecommunication services used by a business firm in its administrative operations qualify the business firm as a technology business. 
Telecommunications shall mean internet, e-mail or similar services, but shall exclude voice telephone and facsimile communications except for the examples listed above for the definition of a qualified technology business. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1262, 10-27-99; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-403. - Boundaries of technology zones. 
There are hereby created three (3) local technology zones within the city, to be named "The Downtown Technology Zone", "The Hampton Roads Center Technology Zone" and "The netcenter Technology Zone." The boundaries of the zones are respectively inside of an area circumscribed by a line described as follows: 
(1)  For the Downtown Technology Zone, starting at a point in the city at the center of the intersection of Settler's Landing Road and LaSalle Avenue; thence north on LaSalle to the railroad right-of-way; thence northwest on the railroad right-of-way to Maplewood; thence north on Maplewood to Back River; thence southeast on Back River to Heffelfinger; thence northeasterly on Heffelfinger to North Armistead Avenue; thence northwesterly on North Armistead to Interstate 64; thence along Interstate 64 east, across Hampton River to Tyler Street; thence westerly on Tyler Street to Mariner's Cove; thence northerly on Mariner's Cove to Settler's Landing Road; thence westerly on Settler's Landing Road to the midpoint of the Hampton River; thence southwesterly on the midpoint of the Hampton River to the midpoint of Salter's Creek; thence westerly on the midpoint of Salter's Creek to Whiting Street; thence westerly to Armistead Street; thence north to Settler's Landing Road; thence westerly to LaSalle Avenue which is the point of beginning. (This Technology Zone became effective on July 1, 1998 and expires June 30, 2008). 
(2)  For the Hampton Roads Center Technology Zone, starting at a point in the city at the center of the intersection of Mercury Boulevard and Interstate 64; thence along Interstate 64 west to the city boundary between the City of Hampton and the City of Newport News; thence northwesterly along said city boundary line to Saunders Road; thence easterly on Saunders Road to Big Bethel Road; thence north on Big Bethel Road to Semple Farm Road; thence easterly on Semple Farm Road to North Armistead Avenue; thence southerly on North Armistead Avenue to Mercury Boulevard; thence westerly on Mercury Boulevard to Interstate 64 which is the beginning point. (This Technology Zone became effective on July 1, 1998 and expires June 30, 2008). 
(3)  For the Netcenter Technology Zone, starting at a point in the city at the center of the intersection of Mercury Boulevard and Orcutt Avenue thence west approximately one thousand seven hundred sixty (1,760) feet to the Newmarket Creek and the City of Hampton Corporate limits, thence north approximately one thousand seven hundred eighty-six (1,786) feet to the northern boundary of the Net Center parking lot, thence east approximately one thousand one hundred six (1,106) to the centerline of Kennedy Drive, thence south approximately one thousand one hundred forty-two (1,142) feet to the southwest corner of the church parcel, thence east approximately two hundred ninety-three (293) to the centerline of Orcutt Avenue, thence south approximately two hundred forty-one (241) feet to the centerline of West Mercury Boulevard. This Technology Zone will become effective on March 1, 2003 and expire February 29, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1262, 10-27-99; Ord. No. 1343, 2-12-03; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-404. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Existing business. For an existing business to become a qualified technology business the firm must increase the average number of full-time employees in the technology zone by ten (10) percent over the base year, or the average increase over the base year must constitute at least three (3) net new full-time employees to the city whichever is greater. Wages paid to the minimum threshold number of full-time employees needed to qualify must be equal to twice the federal minimum wage rate. In addition, the firm must make an added capital investment in the technology zone, which investment may be established by the capitalized cost of personal property or real estate owned for the operation of the qualified technology business. 
(i)  For an existing business located in the Downtown Hampton Technology Zone, the added capital investment must be at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(ii)  For an existing business located in the Hampton Roads Center Technology Zone, the added capital investment must be at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). 
(b)  New business: 
(i)  For a new business firm to become a qualified technology business the firm must create a minimum average of three (3) full-time jobs and make an investment of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) if located in the Downtown Hampton Technology Zone. 
(ii)  If a new business firm locates in the Hampton Roads Center Technology Zone, the technology business must create a minimum average of fifty (50) full-time jobs and make a minimum investment of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). 
(c)  Existing and new business: 
(i)  For both technology zones, the added capital investment shall be established by the value of personal property or real estate owned for the operation of the qualified technology business. Such assets owned by a business firm which are moved into a technology zone from another location within the City of Hampton shall not be included in the determination of the added capital investment. 
(ii)  Wages paid to the minimum threshold number of full-time employees needed to qualify must be equal to twice the federal minimum qualifying wage rate. 
(iii)  To retain qualifying status, a business firm must maintain the minimum qualifying employment and investment levels for each year for which incentives are requested. 
(iv)  All business firms which have completed a five-year incentive period and seek to qualify for a second five-year incentive period shall be treated as an existing business for qualification purposes, and must meet the minimum job creation and investment criteria. 
(d)  Exceptions: 
(i)  For each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of net new capital investment placed in the downtown technology zones above the minimum threshold of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the investment can be substituted for one full-time employee. 
(ii)  For each additional full-time or equivalent full-time employee hired to work in a technology zone above the minimum employment threshold of three (3) full-time employees or ten (10) percent, whichever is greater, the increase in full-time employment above the threshold can substitute ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) worth of capital investment. Wages paid to employees, or stated above in this section, must be at least twice the minimum federal wage rate. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1262, 10-27-99; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-405. - Technology zone incentive package. 
(a)  Rebate of city fees. Qualified technology business shall receive a rebate of fees for building permits and renovation permits, conditional use permits, plumbing permits, electrical permits, sign permits, sewer connection fees, and zoning ordinance fees. The fees identified will only be rebated if the qualified zone resident can demonstrate that one hundred (100) percent of the cost of new construction, expansion, or rehabilitation is to house or accommodate a qualified technology business. 
(b)  Reduction in business license tax. Qualified technology businesses may receive a five-year reduction of business license fees to the extent of only those gross receipts derived from qualifying, activities. The reduction shall be calculated on the tax for qualifying gross receipts at an amount equal to eighty (80) percent in year one, sixty (60) percent in year two, forty (40) percent in year three, twenty (20) percent in year four, and twenty (20) percent in year five. 
(c)  Capital investment grants: 
(i)  There is hereby established a five-year grant provided to qualified technology businesses. The grant will be based solely on the net increase in capital investment made within the technology zone. The five-year capital investment grant will be calculated on the qualifying increase, net of any dispositions, in business personal property, real estate, and machinery and tools taxes paid by a qualified technology business. The grant will be equal to eighty (80) percent of the fractional net increase in year one, sixty (60) percent in year two, forty (40) percent in year three, twenty (20) percent in year four, and twenty (20) percent in year five. 
(ii)  Grants will be administered through the City of Hampton Economic Development Authority. The technology zone administrator is responsible for requesting budget appropriations from the city to the authority to meet anticipated grants. 
(iii)  Regarding capital investments acquired through capital leases, taxes paid on such items shall be eligible for the capital investment grant incentives only when the grant recipient directly pays to the City of Hampton applicable taxes for these items. 
(d)  For the purposes of calculating incentives, business license reductions and capital investment grants shall be calculated based on calendar year tax payments. The first year for which such incentives are calculated in each five-year incentive period shall be the first full calendar year following the year for which a business firm is first certified as a qualified technology business. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1262, 10-27-99; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 12-0039, 12-12-12)  
Sec. 37-406. - Certification procedure. 
(a)  A business firm seeking to obtain the benefits provided under the technology zone program must make an application to the technology zone administrator for certification as a qualified technology business. All applications shall be submitted annually to the commissioner of the revenue no later than June thirtieth and will be processed within sixty (60) days of the submission. Applications received after June thirtieth will not be eligible to receive technology zone incentives. 
(b)  Applications submitted for initial certification of either a new or existing business must be submitted no later than June thirtieth of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the business first became eligible to be a qualified technology business. Applications received after June thirtieth will not be eligible to receive technology zone incentives. 
(c)  The administrator will investigate and verify that each applicant is in compliance with the technology zone qualifications. 
(d)  After a business has been certified as a qualified technology business by the technology zone administrator, the business firm must annually submit an application prior to June thirtieth, indicating the number of full-time employees employed by the firm and the amount of license tax, real estate, business personal property, and/or machinery and tools taxes paid by the business firm during the incentive period. Applications must be signed by an official representative of the business firm authorized to sign on the firm's behalf. 
(e)  Qualified technology zone residents making investments of fifteen million dollars ($15,000,000.00) and creating fifty (50) jobs shall be allowed a capital investment grant in a percentage amount determined by agreement between the Hampton Economic Development Authority and the qualified technology zone resident, provided such percentage amount shall not exceed the percentage amount received by all other qualified technology zone businesses. 
(f)  An existing Hampton business firm shall not qualify for the Hampton Technology Zone Program by reorganizing or changing its form in a manner that does not alter the basis of the business firm's assets or result in a taxable event. 
(g)  If a qualified technology business fails to pay in full the taxes imposed by the city by the due date, this will result in the forfeiture of the investment grant for that year upon a finding by the administrator that the tax account has been delinquent for sixty (60) days. 
(h)  If a qualified technology business files for bankruptcy during the five-year incentive period, this will result in the forfeiture of any portion remaining of the investment grant. 
(i)  In the event that the qualifying average number of full-time employees falls below the threshold amount of a net increase to the city of at least ten (10) percent or an average increase of at least three (3) net new full-time employees, whichever is greater, or the added investment dollars drop below the required threshold, the business firm will forfeit any portion remaining of the investment grant. 
(j)  All qualified technology businesses must maintain their presence within the city for a period of up to five (5) years after receiving technology zone incentives. If a qualified business firm leaves during the initial five-year incentive period and conducts business outside the city, the qualified business firm will be required to repay the total amount of benefits received. A business must sign an agreement to this effect before receiving benefits. 
(k)  If a qualified business leaves the city to conduct business in another location within five (5) years of completing the five-year incentive period, the business firm will be required to repay the city a prorated amount. The proration will be based on the number of years the firm stayed after the fifth and final year of receiving technology zone incentives. For example, if a qualified business firm leaves during the sixth through the tenth year of receiving technology zone incentives, the qualified business will be required to repay a prorated amount equal to the following: 
6th year —The firm must repay eighty (80) percent of the total benefits received. 
7th year —The firm must repay sixty (60) percent of the total benefits received. 
8th year —The firm must repay forty (40) percent of the total benefits received. 
9th year —The firm must repay twenty (20) percent of the total benefits received. 
10th year —The firm must repay twenty (20) percent of the total benefits received. 
(l)  A business firm may qualify for one (1) additional five-year incentive period provided the necessary job creation and investment criteria are met during the life of the technology zone. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1262, 10-27-99; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 12-0039, 12-12-12)  
Sec. 37-407. - Nonwaiver. 
Unless expressly stated herein, this article shall not be construed to waive the requirement of any ordinance, regulation or policy of the city, including, but not limited to, those ordinances, regulations and policies that require permits and approvals for land use and construction. Additionally, unless stated otherwise herein, nothing in this article shall be construed as waiving the right of the city to enforce its ordinances, regulations or policies or to collect any taxes, fees, fines, penalties or interest imposed by law on a qualified technology business or qualified zone resident or upon real or personal property owned or leased by a qualified technology business or qualified zone resident. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-408. - Restrictions. 
No qualified technology business or qualified zone resident may apply for or receive a tax or fee exemption under this article on the basis of a building permit issued or construction commenced prior to the establishment of the technology zone in which the property lies. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-409. - Confidentiality. 
To the extent permitted under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act (Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq.), confidential business records shall be safeguarded from disclosure. The technology zone administrator may establish verification procedures with the commissioner of the revenue for the city, which will ensure that all required taxes have been paid, but that all privacy concerns and rights are protected. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-410. - Zoning ordinance not affected. 
This article is an economic development incentive and is not a zoning change. Nothing herein shall be construed to affect any provision or requirement of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-411. - Education and promotion. 
The technology zone administrator shall develop programs to educate the public and potential businesses of the benefits of the technology zone. 
(Ord. No. 1217, 6-24-98; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
Sec. 37-412. - Effective dates. 
This article shall be effective on July 1, 1998, and shall terminate on June 30, 2008, pursuant to the ten-year limitation on local technology zones required by Virginia Code, section 58.1-3850. 
(Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-07)  
ARTICLE XV. - LICENSE FEES ON CERTAIN BOATS SUBJECT TO PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX 
 
Sec. 37-413. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases shall have meanings ascribed to them by the following subsections of this section. 
(1)  City waters. Waters within the territorial limits of the City of Hampton. 
(2)  Boats. Privately owned motorized pleasure boats and watercraft used for recreational purposes only and privately owned non-motorized pleasure boats used for recreational purposes only, twenty (20) feet in length and over. 
(3)  Operate. To captain, man, or be a passenger aboard a boat, or to tow by motor vehicle a boat to or from a pier, dock, landing, or wharf. 
(Ord. No. 15-0015, 5-13-15)  
Sec. 37-414. - Purpose. 
The burden resulting from the operation and storage of boats in and on the city waters is a regular and recurring expense of the city. Pursuant to the authority set forth in Virginia Code section 15.2-1125, a license on the privilege of operating or owning a boat for recreational purposes in the city is imposed together with a license fee. This license fee will generate revenue to defray the costs of proper local government management of the city waters used for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 15-0015, 5-13-15)  
Sec. 37-415. - License fee; situs; requirement thereof; violations; penalty. 
(a)  A license fee as set forth in section 37-416 is imposed on every boat, which is normally operated, docked, stored, or kept within city limits over one hundred eighty (180) days. If it cannot be determined where such boat is normally operated, docked, stored, or kept, the situs for the purpose of imposing this license fee shall be the domicile of its owner. The commissioner of the revenue shall determine the applicability of this section and the treasurer shall bill and collect the license fee assessed. Every owner of a boat normally operated, docked, stored or kept within city limits shall pay a license fee on or before December fifth (5th) of the preceding license year, or within ten (10) days of purchasing such boat, or within thirty (30) days of moving situs of the boat to the city, whichever is sooner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, dock, store, or keep a boat within the city without having paid the license fee therefore. The failure or refusal of an owner or operator of any boat subject to a license fee imposed by this article, who shall not have first paid the license fee by December fifth (5th) under this article for such license year, shall constitute a class four (4) misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 15-0015, 5-13-15)  
Sec. 37-416. - Amount of fee—Generally. 
(a)  Amount of fee. The license fee imposed by this article on all boats that have situs in the city as described in this article for any portion of the year between January first (1st) and June thirtieth (30th) shall be as follows: 
(1)  For motorized boats under sixteen (16) feet in length, twenty dollars ($20.00); 
(2)  For motorized boats sixteen (16) feet to less than twenty (20) feet in length, forty dollars ($40.00); 
(3)  For boats twenty (20) feet to less than forty (40) feet in length, seventy-five dollars ($75.00); and 
(4)  For boats forty (40) feet in length and over, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(b)  Means for computing fees. The four (4) watercraft size categories used by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries shall be used for computing license fees imposed by this section. 
(c)  Burden of proof. The applicant for a license shall bear the burden of proof that the boat for which the license is sought is entitled, by length, to be licensed for the amount tendered by the applicant to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 15-0015, 5-13-15)  
Sec. 37-417. - Boats exempt from license fee. 
(a)  The license fees imposed by this article shall not apply to boats on which the city is prohibited from imposing a tax by federal law or the laws of the commonwealth. 
(b)  Boats or watercraft weighing less than five (5) tons and boats or watercraft weighing five (5) tons or more, used for business purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 15-0015, 5-13-15)  
Sec. 37-418. - Invoice for license fee and payment. 
(a)  A license fee will be set by the commissioner of the revenue and charged to such boat. The city treasurer shall mail the taxpayer a bill for the license fee for the current and each subsequent year. The license fee shall be listed as a separate item on each year's annual personal property tax bill, which payment shall be due on or before December fifth (5th) of the preceding year for which the license is purchased, or as indicated on the bill. 
(b)  Upon payment to the treasurer of the license fee prescribed by this article and in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this article, the city treasurer shall mark the treasurer's records that a license fee has been paid on the applicant's boat for which the fee was charged. 
(Ord. No. 15-0015, 5-13-15)  
Sec. 37-419. - Refund of license fee. 
(a)  Any person paying a license fee on a boat under the requirements of this article shall be entitled to a refund upon furnishing proof, by affidavit or otherwise, deemed satisfactory to the commissioner of the revenue that such license is no longer required under this article. No refund shall be made after January 15th of such year. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall issue to any person entitled to receive the refund provided for in this section a certificate showing such person to be entitled to a refund of the amount stated in such certificate and the treasurer shall forward a copy of such certificate to the director of finance authorizing a refund to the person and in the amount set forth in such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 15-0015, 5-13-15)  
Sec. 37-420. - Authorization of the city treasurer. 
The city treasurer, in consultation with the city manager, shall enter into a formal agreement with the commissioner of the Virginia Department of the Motor Vehicles (DMV) to withhold state license registration unless and until an applicant for such registration shall have paid all Hampton personal property taxes and license fees imposed upon boats which have been assessed or are assessable against the applicant by the city. The city treasurer shall submit to DMV the documentation necessary to promptly and regularly indicate all who are delinquent in the payment of personal property taxes and boat license fees. 
(Ord. No. 15-0015, 5-13-15)  
Sec. 37-421. - Reports required. 
The city treasurer shall provide the director of finance with such data and reports as are requested regarding the collection rate for personal property taxes under the DMV STOPS program. 
(Ord. No. 15-0015, 5-13-15)  
Chapter 38 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21; disorderly conduct in public conveyances, § 24-12; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 34. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 38-1—38-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate taxicabs, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2015, 46.2-310. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-16. - Definitions. 
Unless it appears from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Certificate. The word "certificate" shall mean a certificate of public convenience and necessity granted under this article to a person in the business of operating taxicabs. 
Cruise; cruising. The words "cruise" and "cruising" shall mean the movement of unengaged taxicabs over the public streets of the city in search of prospective passengers for hire. This definition shall not apply to a taxicab proceeding to answer a call for taxicab service or a taxicab proceeding, by the most direct route, after having discharged a passenger, to the garage where such taxicab is housed or to the unoccupied taxicab stand nearest the place of discharge of the passenger. 
Driver. The word "driver" shall mean any person in charge of or operating a taxicab. 
Owner. The word "owner" as applied to a public vehicle, means the person who holds the legal title to the public vehicle and who holds the certificate of public convenience and necessity for the public vehicle or, in the event the public vehicle is the subject of an agreement pursuant to section 38-63 of this chapter for the lease thereof, with the right of immediate right of possession vested in the lessee, the lessee shall be deemed the owner for the purposes of this chapter, except, that when the rent paid by the lessee includes charges for services of any nature, provided by the lessor or when the lease does not provide that the title shall pass to the lessee upon payment of the rent stipulated, the lessor shall be regarded as the owner of the public vehicle. 
Public vehicle. The words "public vehicle" shall mean a taxicab for which a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Street. The word "street" shall mean any street, alley, avenue, main, public place or highway within the city. 
Taxicab. The word "taxicab" shall mean any motor-driven vehicle used for the transportation, for hire or reward, of passengers upon the streets of the city, whether operated continually for such purpose or only occasionally, except buses being operated under franchise and over fixed routes and between fixed termini. 
Taximeter. The word "taximeter" shall mean and include any mechanical instrument or device or any electronic instrument or device approved by the chief of police and which meets all applicable specifications of the National Bureau of Standards, by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically or electronically calculated and on which such charge is plainly indicated. 
(Code 1956, § 22-1; Code 1964, § 40-1; Ord. No. 49; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-17. - Application of and compliance with chapter, violations and penalty. 
(a)  The operation of public vehicles within the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, in the city any public vehicle, unless the conditions, regulations and restrictions prescribed in this chapter are complied with. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  In addition to any penalty prescribed by this code, upon the violation of any provision of this article, the city manager may revoke or suspend the license issued under chapter 18.1 of this Code to the owner or operator of the taxicab involved. 
(Code 1956, § 22-28; Code 1964, § 40-22; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 38-17.1. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager or his designee is authorized and directed to make and enforce administrative and procedural rules and regulations not in conflict with the provisions of the state law or any provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city, as deemed proper to regulate the operation of taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-18. - Insurance or bond. 
(a)  Taxicabs shall not be operated or nor shall any certificate of public convenience and necessity or a business license be issued therefor, unless and until the owner has filed with the Virginia State Corporation Commission and the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles, for each vehicle operated, evidence of a liability insurance policy, issued by a liability insurance company authorized to do business in Virginia, providing for coverage of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to or death of any one person and in the sum of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to or death of more than one person in any one accident, and no less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for injury, death or damage caused by or arising out of the operation of such vehicle, and until a certificate that the same has been so filed or a copy of such policy has been filed with the city's risk manager. The city's risk manager shall notify the commissioner of the revenue in writing following his receipt of the required evidence of insurance. 
(b)  In lieu of the insurance policy required by subsection (a) above, the owner may deposit with the city attorney and the city's risk manager a bond, of a surety company authorized to do business in Virginia, running to the city and indemnifying persons who may be injured or whose property may be damaged by the operation of such public vehicle, in the same amounts required for such insurance policy, and conditioned that action may be brought thereon by any person so damaged against such surety company for the amount of such damage, up to the amount named therein. 
(c)  In lieu of the insurance or bond provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above, the owner may provide a program of self-insurance alone or in combination with insurance in the minimum amounts as set forth in subsection (a) above. All owners shall maintain, as a minimum, net assets equivalent to any self-insurance and self-insured retentions. In lieu of maintaining such minimum net assets, an owner may provide cash, securities or a line of credit acceptable to the city's risk manager and the city attorney. A minimum of twenty-one (21) vehicles must be registered to the self-insured owner in the State of Virginia. All such self-insurance shall obligate the owner to pay any final judgment for damages sustained by any person who may be injured or whose property may be damaged by the operation of such public vehicle in such amounts as provided in subsection (a) and likewise conditioned in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
(d)  The insurance policy or certificate, the bond and the program of self-insurance provided for in this section shall be submitted to and subject to approval of the city manager prior to the issuance or renewal of a business license for each public vehicle pursuant to chapter 18.1 of this Code. 
(e)  The policy of insurance, bond or program of self-insurance provided for in this section shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the same, or the owner of the public vehicle, if there is no such company, to give not less than thirty (30) days' notice in writing to the city manager before cancellation or amendment thereof. 
(f)  The certificate of public convenience and necessity and license for the operation of a taxicab shall expire upon the lapse or termination of the insurance policy, bond or self-insurance provided for in this section, subject to reinstatement upon compliance with the provisions of this section, but such cancellation shall not relieve the insurer or guarantor of liability for any injury or damage happening before such cancellation becomes effective. In the event of such lapse or termination, the owner of the public vehicle shall notify the chief of police in writing within five (5) days of such lapse or termination and as of the date of such lapse or termination, the public vehicle shall not be operated. 
(g)  Owners of public vehicles for which certificates of public convenience and necessity were issued prior to July 1, 2010 shall comply with the provisions of this section on or before July 1, 2011. 
(Code 1956, § 22-4; Code 1964, § 40-2; Ord. No. 353; Ord. No. 472; Ord. No. 737, 12-8-82; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-18.1. - Business address. 
Public vehicle owners shall maintain a physical place of business within the City of Hampton and provide such address and any change thereof to the chief of police or his designee. 
Owners of public vehicles for which certificates of public convenience and necessity were issued prior to July 1, 2010 shall comply with the provisions of this section on or before July 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-18.2. - Dispatching service required. 
Public vehicle owners shall provide a dispatching service making taxicab services available twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week from its physical place of business within the City of Hampton. 
Owners of public vehicles for which certificates of public convenience and necessity were issued prior to July 1, 2010 shall comply with the provisions of this section on or before July 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-18.3. - Business telephones required. 
Public vehicle owners shall have City of Hampton telephone numbers which shall be listed in the local phone directory where they can be reached at all times. 
Owners of public vehicles for which certificates of public convenience and necessity were issued prior to July 1, 2010 shall comply with the provisions of this section on or before July 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-18.4. - Business plan required. 
Public vehicle owners shall file with the chief of police once every five (5) years a business plan addressing the provision of taxicab services by such owner. 
Owners of public vehicles for which certificates of public convenience and necessity were issued prior to July 1, 2010 shall comply with the provisions of this section on or before July 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-19. - General vehicle requirements. 
(a)  Every taxicab for which a certificate is issued under this article shall be of the enclosed or sedan type, with four (4) doors, at least two (2) seats and of not less than five (5) passenger capacity. 
(b)  Every taxicab for which a certificate is issued subsequent to July 1, 2010 under this article shall be no more than seven (7) model years of age. 
(c)  No taxicab shall be placed in operation as a public vehicle, unless and until the same is found by the chief of police or designee, as he may deem necessary to make or cause to be made, to be in proper physical condition to render safe, adequate and proper public service and so as not to be a menace to the safety of the patrons or the general public. 
(d)  All public vehicles shall at all times be kept in proper physical condition to the satisfaction of the chief of police or designee, so as to render safe, adequate and proper public service and so as not to be a menace to the safety of the patrons or the general public. 
(e)  Every public vehicle in service within the city shall be equipped with a standard speedometer properly installed, maintained in good working order and exposed to view. No taxicab shall be operated in taxicab service while the speedometer is out of repair or disconnected. 
(f)  All public vehicles operated in the city shall be equipped with a taximeter. Whenever any public vehicle is engaged, there shall be conspicuously displayed an identification light connected to the taximeter, which shall show light when the taximeter is in operation. All taximeters shall be kept accurate and in proper condition and repair and sufficiently lighted so that the figures thereon shall be plainly visible to the passengers. 
(g)  Owners of public vehicles for which certificates of public convenience and necessity were issued prior to July 1, 2010 shall have until July 1, 2011 to comply with the provisions of this section, excluding subsection (b). 
(Code 1956, § 22-5; Code 1964, § 40-5; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-19.1. - Minimum number of taxicabs and trips. 
An owner of taxicabs for which no certificates of public convenience and necessity have been issued by the city until after July 1, 2010, must within twelve (12) months after certificates have been issued to such owner own and operate a minimum of five (5) taxicabs and demonstrate to the chief of police that each taxicab generates a minimum of ten (10) trips per day. Taxicabs for which such certificates have been issued by the city must be in service and operating within one hundred twenty (120) days after certificate issuance. 
(Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-20. - Identification of vehicles, limitations on advertising. 
(a)  Every public vehicle shall bear, on the outside and on at least two (2) sides thereof, the name of the owner, in painted characters not less than two (2) inches high and plainly visible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet. On two (2) sides and the back of the vehicle, the owner's cab number shall be painted in characters three (3) inches high and plainly visible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet. 
(b)  No person shall use the term "taxi" or "taxicab" in any advertising or hold himself out as a taxicab or public vehicle, or represent himself to be such by means of advertisements, signs, trade names or otherwise, unless he has previously thereto complied with the conditions, regulations and restrictions prescribed by this chapter. 
(c)  The color scheme of the vehicle(s) of a holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under this chapter shall not be substantially similar to the color scheme of a different certificate holder and all such color schemes shall be approved by the chief of police. 
(Code 1956, § 22-7; Code 1964, § 40-6; Ord. No. 1335, 8-14-02; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0017, adopted June 9, 2010, effective July 1, 2010, repealed § 38-21, which pertained to speedometer and derived from Code 1956, § 22-18; Code 1964, § 40-7.  
Sec. 38-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0017, adopted June 9, 2010, effective July 1, 2010, repealed § 38-22, which pertained to radio equipment and derived from Code 1956, § 22-19; Code 1964, § 40-8.  
Sec. 38-23. - Maintenance of vehicles and equipment. 
Every taxicab for which a certificate is issued under this article and the equipment therein shall be maintained in good order and repair when in operation. 
(Code 1956, § 22-3; Code 1964, § 40-4; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-24. - Inspection of vehicle and equipment therein, correction of defects, fee. 
Each public vehicle and the equipment therein within the city may be inspected by the chief of police, or his designee, at any time. If any such vehicle is found to be in an unsafe, unfit or unclean condition, the owner thereof shall be notified at once that such vehicle shall not be operated thereafter until such defective or unclean condition has been remedied. Each public vehicle and the equipment therein within the city shall be inspected by the chief of police, or his designee at least once in each six (6) months, and the chief of police, or his designee shall collect a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each said inspection. 
(Code 1956, § 22-2; Code 1964, § 40-3; Ord. No. 10-0016, 5-12-10; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-25. - Attendance of driver. 
Every taxicab, while in operation for the solicitation or transportation of passengers, shall be attended by the driver at all times, except when such driver is actually engaged in loading and unloading. 
(Code 1956, § 22-6; Code 1964, § 40-19; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-26. - Acceptance and completion of calls. 
(a)  Public vehicle owners and drivers shall accept calls in the order of their receipt, regardless of from which part of the city the calls are made and regardless of the destination of the passenger, if such destination is within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any public vehicle to fail or refuse to complete accepted calls as promptly as possible. 
(Code 1956, § 22-23; Code 1964, §§ 40-13, 40-16; Ord. No. 49; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-27. - Refusal of passengers. 
Drivers of public vehicles may refuse to carry passengers, unless the legal fare is prepaid, but no driver shall otherwise refuse to carry a person anywhere within the city, unless previously engaged or such driver fears for their personal safety. 
(Code 1956, § 22-22; Code 1964, § 40-14; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-28. - Duty of driver to take shortest practicable route. 
The driver of every taxicab, while transporting a passenger, shall operate the same over the shortest practicable route from the place of the beginning of the trip to the place of destination. 
(Ord. No. 49; Code 1964, § 40-15; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-29. - Carrying more than one passenger. 
Not more than one passenger shall be transported at one time by a taxicab, without the consent of the person first engaging the vehicle. 
(Code 1956, § 22-9; Code 1964, § 40-17; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-30. - Carrying nonpaying passengers. 
No nonpaying passenger shall be transported by a taxicab with a paying passenger, except bona fide officers or employees of the taxicab owner or a police officer engaged in the performance of his duty and unable to obtain other means of transportation. 
(Code 1956, § 22-10; Code 1964, § 40-18; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-31. - Unlawful calls. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any improper, misleading, false or unauthorized call to the owner or operator of a taxicab. 
(Code 1956, § 22-25; Code 1964, § 40-21; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-32. - Record and report of calls. 
(a)  Every taxicab owner shall keep, or cause to be kept, a clear, neat, accurate record of the origin and destination of all calls and trips made by taxicabs and it shall be the duty of all drivers and employees of the owner to report such calls and trips. Such record shall show the time of beginning and end of the call or trip and the fares collected therefor. Entries shall be made into such record at the beginning and ending of each call or trip made. Such records shall be available at all times for inspection and use by the department of public safety, for official purposes only, and shall be preserved for a period of not less than six (6) months. 
(b)  In connection with the reports and records provided for in this section, no person shall knowingly make a record of a fictitious call or use any fictitious name in reporting a bona fide call or trip, nor shall a fictitious or false address of the point of origin or destination be knowingly reported. 
(Code 1956, § 22-26; Code 1964, §§ 40-9, 40-10; Ord. No. 49; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-33. - Report of injured passengers. 
Any injured person transported for a fare or otherwise by a taxicab within the city shall be reported immediately to the nearest police officer and to the office of the chief of police. 
(Code 1956, § 22-27; Code 1964, § 40-11; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-34. - Parking or standing on streets. 
No taxicab, while awaiting engagement, shall be parked or kept standing on any of the streets of the city, except in a taxicab stand assigned to the owner thereof pursuant to division 6 of this article. 
(Code 1956, § 22-15; Code 1964, § 40-77; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-35. - Soliciting patronage on streets or public property. 
No person shall solicit patronage for any taxicab by word, signal or otherwise on any public street or public property in the city, other than at such stands as are designated and assigned pursuant to division 6 of this article. 
(Code 1956, § 22-17; Code 1964, § 40-78; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-36. - Sleeping in parked cab. 
No driver of any taxicab shall sleep in his vehicle or permit any other person to sleep therein while such vehicle is parked on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1956, § 22-20; Code 1964, § 40-12; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-37. - Cruising prohibited. 
Drivers of taxicabs shall not cruise seeking employment. 
(Code 1956, § 22-16; Code 1964, § 40-20; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Secs. 38-38—38-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 
 
Sec. 38-46. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any taxicab within the city, unless a certificate of public convenience and necessity therefore has been issued to the owner thereof. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, taxicabs operating under a lawful certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the City of Newport News and obtaining the approval of the Chief of Police for the City of Hampton of compliance with the minimum requirements of article Il of this chapter and the driver thereof having a valid taxicab driver's license issued by the City of Newport News may pick up and deliver passengers within the City of Hampton, but only under the express conditions that such pickup is under contract or has been prearranged and the taxicab has a manifest indicating such contract or arrangement. 
(c)  No person shall use the term "taxi" or "taxicab" in any advertising or hold himself out as a taxi or taxicab operator, or represent himself to be such by means of advertisements, signs, trade names or otherwise unless he has previously thereto complied with the conditions, regulations and restrictions prescribed by this chapter. 
(d)  No license for the operation of a taxicab shall be issued pursuant to chapter 18.1 of this Code, unless the owner has obtained a valid certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
(Code 1956, § 22-29; Code 1964, § 40-23; Ord. No. 1332, 6-12-02; Ord. No. 1336, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0017, adopted June 9, 2010, effective July 1, 2010, repealed § 38-47, which pertained to prerequisite to issuance of license and derived from Code 1956, § 22-30; Code 1964, § 40-24.  
Sec. 38-47.1. - Fee. 
(a)  The annual fee for a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) which fee shall be due and payable to the chief of police upon issuance of the initial certificate and on or before January 1 st of each year thereafter. 
There shall be no proration of the fee for the initial certificate. The annual fee for certificates of public convenience and necessity issued prior to July 1, 2010 shall be due and payable to the chief of police on or before January 1, 2011 and on or before January 1 of each year thereafter. 
(b)  In the event any certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under this article shall be lost or destroyed, the certificate holder may make application for and obtain a duplicate thereof, upon furnishing information of such fact, by affidavit or otherwise, satisfactory to the chief of police or his designee and upon the payment of a fee of two dollars ($2.00) for each duplicate certificate. 
(Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-48. - Application. 
Application for a certificate required by this division shall be made by the owner or proposed owner of the taxicab to the chief of police, upon forms provided therefore by the city. Such application shall furnish the following information on the oath of the applicant: 
(1)  The full name and the home and business address and phone numbers of the applicant. 
(2)  The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business. 
(3)  A business plan detailing the financial status and responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  The name and address of any person lending money or furnishing capital to the applicant, where the operation or proposed operation is to be financed wholly or in part by means of borrowed money or capital in any form furnished by any person other than the owner. 
(5)  The number, age, make and model of vehicles, showing the seating capacity, design and color scheme of each. 
(6)  The character and location of the depots and terminals to be used, if any, and specifics regarding dispatch of vehicles. 
(7)  Each conviction of, or plea of guilty by, the applicant for the violation of any criminal law, whether such violation was of a city ordinance, state law or federal law. 
(8)  The specific experiences of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire. 
(9)  All facts or circumstances upon which the applicant bases his belief that public convenience and necessity require the granting of his application. 
(Code 1956, § 22-31; Code 1964, § 40-25; Ord. No. 08-0020, 10-22-08; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-49. - Investigation of applicant. 
When a certificate is applied for under this division, it shall be the duty of the chief of police, to promptly make or cause to be made an investigation as to the information contained in the application and the qualifications of the applicant to conduct a taxicab business. In the case of a corporate applicant, the fitness of the officers, directors and stockholders shall be investigated. The chief of police shall make a written record of his findings. 
(Code 1956, § 22-32; Code 1964, § 40-26; Ord. No. 08-0020, 10-22-08; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-50. - Determination of public convenience and necessity. 
(a)  The chief of police shall also determine whether the public convenience and necessity require the operation of the taxicab for which application for a certificate has been filed under this division. In making this determination, the following shall be considered: 
(1)  The adequacy, efficiency and safety of existing taxicab service and other forms of transportation for passengers. 
(2)  The probable permanence and quality of the services offered by the applicant. 
(3)  The financial ability, character, qualifications and responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  The number and character of vehicles and the character and location of the depots and terminals proposed to be used. 
(5)  The fact that no depots and no terminals are proposed to be used. 
(6)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire in taxicabs. 
(b)  The burden shall be upon the applicant for a certificate under this division to establish the existence of public convenience and necessity for the operation of the taxicab designated in his application and of all other facts required for the granting of the application. 
(c)  To assist him in making a finding as to whether public convenience and necessity require the operation of the taxicabs for which an application has been filed, the chief of police, upon receipt of an application for a certificate, shall provide each certificate-holder with an opportunity to express an opinion about the application. He shall notify each certificate-holder that an application for a certificate has been filed. The certificate-holder may submit his opinion in writing within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice to him. 
(Code 1956, §§ 22-33, 22-35; Code 1964, §§ 40-27, 40-29; Ord. No. 834, 7-9-86; Ord. No. 08-0020, 10-22-08; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-51. - Issuance or refusal generally. 
(a)  When an application is filed under this division, the chief of police shall act thereon with reasonable promptness, either granting or refusing the certificate. 
(b)  The chief of police may grant a certificate, as applied for under this division, or grant a certificate for a lesser number of vehicles than that specified in the application, or deny the application in the exercise of a sound discretion, after a consideration of the factors prescribed in section 38-50. 
(c)  Upon determination by the chief of police that any application under this division should be granted, a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued to the applicant by the chief of police, or his duly authorized agent. 
(Code 1956, §§ 22-34, 22-36, 22-37; Code 1964, §§ 40-28, 40-30, 40-31; Ord. No. 08-0020, 10-22-08; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-52. - Notice and statement of grounds upon refusal. 
In case an application under this article is refused, the chief of police shall forthwith transmit written notice of such refusal to the applicant, by certified mail, directed to the address shown upon the application. 
(Code 1956, § 22-40; Code 1964, § 40-34; Ord. No. 08-0020, 10-22-08; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-53. - Appeal from refusal. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days after the notice of refusal provided for in section 38-52 has been mailed to him, the applicant for the certificate may appeal to the city manager from the action of the chief of police. 
(b)  The appeal provided for in this section shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and received in the office of the city manager no later than ten (10) days after the notice of refusal has been mailed. 
(c)  The city manager shall issue his final decision in writing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written appeal of the application and mail the decision to the applicant. No new application by the same person, or by another for his use, shall be filed within one (1) year from such final action. 
(Code 1956, § 22-41; Code 1964, § 40-35; Ord. No. 08-0020, 10-22-08; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-54. - Contents. 
Every certificate issued under this division shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner. 
(2)  The age, make and model of the vehicle the operation of which is authorized by the certificate. 
(3)  The date of issuance. 
(4)  The fact that the certificate is being issued subject to the provisions of this article and all other laws and ordinances governing the operation of taxicabs in the city. 
(Code 1956, § 22-39; Code 1964, § 40-33; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-55. - Term. 
Every certificate issued under this division shall be valid from the day of issuance until revoked or suspended. 
(Code 1956, § 22-38; Code 1964, § 40-32; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-56. - Transfer. 
No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be used for any public vehicle other than that public vehicle for which it was issued nor shall such certificate of public convenience and necessity be transferred from one person to another except, that a vehicle may be substituted for a worn out or obsolete vehicle upon notice given in writing to that effect to the chief of police. 
(Code 1956, § 22-42; Code 1964, § 40-36; Ord. No. 08-0020, 10-22-08; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-57. - Substitution of equipment for that described in certificate. 
No equipment shall be substituted for that described in the certificate issued under this division, unless it has been inspected and approved by the chief of police and the substitution or addition has been endorsed on the certificate by him. 
(Code 1956, § 22-48; Code 1964, § 40-42; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-58. - Revocation or suspension grounds and notice. 
Any certificate issued under this division may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police upon the failure of the certificate holder to comply with any provision of this chapter or any federal, state or local law. The chief of police shall provide thirty (30) days' advance written notice of any proposed revocation to the certificate holder by certified mail to the address on the certificate. 
(Code 1956, § 22-43; Code 1964, § 40-37; Ord. No. 08-0020, 10-22-08; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-59. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0017, adopted June 9, 2010, repealed § 38-59, which pertained to revocation or suspension—Notice and derived from Code 1956, § 22-44; Code 1964, § 40-38; Ord. No. 08-0020, adopted Oct. 22, 2008.  
Sec. 38-60. - Period of suspension. 
Any certificate suspended under this division shall be suspended for not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days. 
(Code 1956, § 22-46; Code 1964, § 40-40; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-61. - Appeal. 
An appeal from any order of the chief of police revoking or suspending any certificate under this division may be taken in the same manner and by the same method as is set forth in section 38-53. 
(Code 1956, § 22-45; Code 1964, § 40-39; Ord. No. 08-0020, 10-22-08; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-62. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-0017, adopted June 9, 2010, repealed § 38-62, which pertained to Revocation or suspension—Renewal after revocation and derived from Code 1956, § 22-47; Code 1964, § 40-41.  
Sec. 38-63. - Lease agreements. 
(a)  All lease agreements between owners and lessees of public vehicles shall contain a provision stating that the lease agreement does not create or intend any vested rights in the owners or lessees of public vehicles, which are superior to any amendment of Chapter 38 of the Code of the City of Hampton, Virginia, or any provision thereof, which may be adopted by the Council of the City of Hampton. All lease agreements between owners and lessees of public vehicles shall be submitted to the city attorney's office for review prior to the execution of such agreements. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to amend Chapter 38 of the Code of the City of Hampton, Virginia, or any provision thereof, and no vested rights in the owners or lessees of public vehicles, which are superior to the city's rights to amend such chapter or any provision thereof, are created or intended by lease agreements between owners and lessees of public vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 961, 2-28-90; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Secs. 38-64—38-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TAXICAB DRIVER'S PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-0010, adopted March 26, 2008, amended the title of Div. 3 to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion, Div. 3 was entitled, "Driver's Permit." See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to license taxicab drivers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310. 
 
Sec. 38-76. - Required. 
No person shall drive or operate a taxicab within the city, unless he has a current and valid "taxicab driver's permit" issued under the provisions of this division, which permit (i) shall be in addition to any driver's or other license required of such person by law, and (ii) authorizes the holder to operate any taxicab in the city for which a current certificate has been issued by the city. 
(Code 1956, § 22-49; Code 1964, § 40-43; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Sec. 38-77. - Application generally. 
Application for a taxicab driver's permit shall be made to the chief of police in writing on forms prescribed by the chief of police, under oath and shall show the following: 
(1)  The full name of the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant's present address. 
(3)  The applicant's age, sex, race, height and weight and the color of his eyes and hair. 
(4)  The place of birth of the applicant and whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States. 
(5)  Places of previous residence and employment of the applicant for the past five (5) years. 
(6)  Whether or not the applicant has good hearing and good eyesight. 
(7)  Whether or not the applicant is in good physical condition. 
(8)  Whether or not the applicant uses, or has used within the past five (5) years, intoxicating liquors, drugs or any other form of narcotic and, if so, to what extent. 
(9)  Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of, plead guilty to or entered the plea of nolo contendere to the violation of any city, state, federal or other criminal law and, if so, the number of times and the kind of offenses and such other information as may be required by the chief of police. 
(10)  Whether or not the applicant has previously been employed or licensed as a driver or chauffeur and, if so, whether or not his license or permit has ever been revoked or suspended for any reason. 
(11)  What experience, if any, the applicant has had in the operation of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1956, § 22-50; Code 1964, § 40-44; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Sec. 38-77.1. - Applicant's qualifications 
No taxicab driver's permit shall be issued by the chief of police to an applicant if: 
(1)  The applicant has ever used a taxicab for illegal purposes. 
(2)  The applicant has any physical or mental infirmity which might render such driver unfit for the operation of a taxicab. 
(3)  The applicant's current privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked. 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past five (5) years. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude within the past three (3) years. 
(6)  The applicant has been convicted in any court of driving under the influence of alcohol or other self-administered drug within the past three (3) years. 
(7)  The applicant has been convicted in any court of a violation of any federal, state or city law regulating the ownership or operation of taxicabs within the past three (3) years. 
(8)  The applicant has been convicted in any court of three (3) or more moving violations of the motor vehicle codes of any city or state, or a combination thereof, within the past twelve (12) months. 
(9)  The applicant has been convicted in any court two or more times of driving any motor vehicle in a reckless manner within a twelve-month period. 
(10)  The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(11)  The applicant does not possess a valid and current Virginia driver's license to drive a motor vehicle on the highways of the Commonwealth. 
(12)  The applicant has provided false information on the application that is material to the chief of police's determination to issue or not issue a taxicab driver's permit, or the applicant has been denied a taxicab driver's permit within the past three (3) years based on having provided false information on a previous application. 
(13)  Information and records obtained by the chief of police through the application investigation process indicates that the applicant is not qualified to obtain a taxicab driver's permit. 
(14)  The applicant is required to register or has registered as a sex offender in any state or by the federal government. 
(Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Sec. 38-78. - Investigation of facts stated in application. 
The chief of police or his designee shall promptly make, or cause to be made, an investigation of the facts stated in an application for a permit under this division and he shall make a written memorandum of his findings, which shall be kept on file in his office for a period of two (2) years from the date of the application. 
(Code 1956, § 22-51; Code 1964, § 40-45; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Sec. 38-79. - Applicant to be fingerprinted. 
Each applicant for a permit under this division shall apply for his permit in person and have his fingerprints taken, which fingerprints shall constitute a part of his application. 
(Code 1956, § 22-52; Code 1964, § 40-46)  
Sec. 38-80. - Photograph of applicant. 
Each applicant for a permit under this division shall file with his application two (2) recent photographs of himself of a size designated by the chief of police, one of which shall be attached to and become a part of the application, the other to be attached to the permit, if issued, as provided in section 38-84. 
(Code 1956, § 22-54; Code 1964, § 40-48; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Sec. 38-81. - Medical examination of applicant. 
The chief of police may require a medical examination of an applicant for a permit under this division. 
(Code 1956, § 22-53; Code 1964, § 40-47; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Sec. 38-82. - Fees. 
Applicants and permittees under this division shall pay the following fees: 
(1)  For each permit issued ..... $50.00 
(2)  For each renewal of a permit ..... 40.00 
All such fees shall be paid to the city treasurer for the use of the general fund thereof. 
(Code 1956, § 22-55; Code 1964, § 40-49; Ord. No. 829, 5-28-86; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08; Ord. No. 10-0016, 5-12-10, eff. 7-1-10)  
Sec. 38-83. - Issuance or refusal. 
If the chief of police finds that the applicant for a permit under this division is duly qualified and of good moral character, he shall issue him a permit. If the chief of police is not satisfied of the qualifications and fitness of the applicant to operate a taxicab upon the streets of the city, he shall refuse to issue such permit. 
(Code 1956, § 22-56; Code 1964, § 40-50; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Sec. 38-84. - Contents. 
Every permit issued under this division shall bear a number and shall contain the name, home address and business address of the person to whom it is issued and the name of his employer. In addition, one of the photographs of the permittee filed pursuant to section 38-80 shall be attached to the permit in such a manner that no other photograph can be substituted therefor without probability of detection. 
(Code 1956, §§ 22-54, 22-57; Code 1964, §§ 40-48, 40-51)  
Sec. 38-85. - Term. 
All permits issued under this division shall be valid for twelve (12) calendar months following issuance. 
(Code 1956, § 22-60; Code 1964, § 40-54; Ord. No. 09-0001, 2-11-09)  
Sec. 38-86. - Posting. 
Every permit issued under this division shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab being operated by the holder thereof. 
(Code 1956, § 22-58; Code 1964, § 40-52)  
Sec. 38-87. - Not transferable. 
No permit issued under this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1956, § 22-59; Code 1964, § 40-53)  
Sec. 38-88. - Surrender required upon conviction of certain crimes. 
Any permit issued under this division shall immediately become void and shall be immediately surrendered by the permittee upon his conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a felony. 
(Code 1956, § 22-61; Code 1964, § 40-55; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Sec. 38-89. - Suspension or revocation—Generally. 
(a)  A taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be revoked by the chief of police after reasonable notice to the driver and subject to the provisions of section 38-92 of this division, if: 
(1)  The permit holder uses a taxicab for illegal purposes. 
(2)  The permit holder has any physical or mental infirmity for a period of more than ninety (90) days which renders such driver unfit for the operation of a taxicab; 
(3)  The permit holder's privilege to operate a motor vehicle has been revoked. 
(4)  The permit holder has been convicted in any court of a felony since issuance of the taxicab driver's permit. 
(5)  The permit holder has been convicted in any court of driving under the influence of alcohol or other self-administered drug. 
(6)  The permit holder has been convicted in any court of two (2) violations within a twelve-month period, or three (3) or more violations at any time, of any city or state code provisions, or a combination thereof, regulating the ownership or operation of taxicabs. 
(7)  The permit holder has been convicted in any court of three (3) or more moving violations within a twelve-month period of the motor vehicle codes of any city or state, or a combination thereof. 
(8)  The permit holder does not possess a valid and current Virginia driver's license to drive a motor vehicle on the highways of the Commonwealth. 
(9)  The permit holder provided false information on the application that is material to the chief of police's determination to issue or not issue a taxicab driver's permit. 
(10)  The permit holder's taxicab driver's permit has been suspended a second time for the same cause or a third time for any cause in the last twelve (12) months. 
(11)  The permit holder registers or is required to be registered as a sex offender in any state or by the federal government. 
(b)  A taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be suspended by the chief of police for the periods indicated, after reasonable notice to the driver and subject to the provisions of section 38-92 of this division, 
(1)  If the permit holder has any physical or mental infirmity which renders such driver unfit for the operation of a taxicab, his permit may be suspended for an indefinite period until proof is provided by the driver that such infirmity has been corrected, except that if the period of infirmity lasts longer than ninety (90) days, the taxicab driver's permit shall be revoked by the chief of police. 
(2)  If the permit holder has been convicted in any court of a violation of any city or state code provisions regulating the ownership or operation of taxicabs, his permit shall be suspended for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
(3)  If the permit holder fails to post the taxicab driver's permit card as provided in this division, his permit shall be suspended for a period not to exceed seven (7) days. 
(c)  In the event of the suspension or revocation of such taxicab driver's permit, the taxicab driver's permit shall be forthwith surrendered to the chief of police. In case of suspension, the taxicab driver's permit shall be returned to the driver at the expiration of the period of suspension. In the case of revocation, the driver may reapply to the chief of police for a taxicab driver's permit at any time after the expiration of one (1) year from the date of revocation, or at the expiration of any period of revocation, whichever occurs later. 
(Code 1956, § 22-62; Code 1964, § 40-56; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Sec. 38-90. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-0010, adopted March 26, 2008, repealed § 38-90, which pertained to suspension or revocation upon application of interested party. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 38-91. - Suspension or revocation—Reissuance after revocation. 
No person whose taxicab driver's permit has been revoked shall again be issued such a permit except upon application to the chief of police pursuant to section 38-77 and 38-77.1 of this division. 
(Code 1956, § 22-64; Code 1964, § 40-58; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Sec. 38-92. - Appeals from refusal, suspension or revocation. 
An appeal shall lie to the city manager or his designee from a decision of the chief of police refusing, revoking, suspending or failing to renew a taxicab driver's permit as provided in this division. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the city manager or his designee within ten (10) days after such adverse action on forms prescribed by the chief of police. 
The city manager or his designee shall respond to the appellant in writing within ten (10) days after receipt by his office of the written appeal. The city manager's or his designee's response must either grant the relief requested or schedule a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of his response in order to afford the appellant an opportunity to be heard in the matter. A decision by the city manager or his designee shall be communicated to the appellant in writing within ten (10) days after the hearing. The decision of the city manager or his designee shall be final; no further appeals are authorized or provided. 
(Code 1956, § 22-66; Code 1964, § 40-60; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Sec. 38-93. - Records to be kept. 
There shall be kept in the office of the chief of police a complete record of all drivers' permits issued under this division and of all renewals, suspensions or revocations thereof for a period of two (2) years from the date of the application, renewal, suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1956, § 22-65; Code 1964, § 40-59; Ord. No. 08-0010, 3-26-08)  
Secs. 38-94—38-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TAXIMETERS 
 
Sec. 38-106. - Required. 
All taxicabs operating on the streets of the city shall be equipped with a taximeter of a type approved by the director of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 49; Code 1964, § 40-64)  
Sec. 38-107. - Sealing required. 
No person shall operate or permit to be operated any taxicab equipped with a taximeter pursuant to the provisions of this division, unless the taximeter has been installed and sealed by a state certified technician with the official designated seal and verified by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 49; Code 1964, § 40-69; Ord. No. 15-0016, 5-27-15 )  
Sec. 38-108. - Visibility. 
Taximeters installed in taxicabs pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be so placed in the taxicab that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be well lighted and readily visible to a passenger riding in such taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 49; Code 1964, § 40-68)  
Sec. 38-109. - Display of flag. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a taxicab, while transporting a passenger, to display the flag or other device attached to a taximeter installed pursuant to the provisions of this division in such position as to denote that such vehicle is for hire, or is not employed, or to have such flag or other attached device in such position as to prevent such taximeter from operating. It shall be unlawful for any driver to throw such a flag or other attached device of a taximeter in a position which causes such taximeter to record, when such vehicle is not actually employed, or to fail to throw such a flag or device on the taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every service. 
(Ord. No. 49; Code 1964, § 40-71)  
Sec. 38-110. - Maintenance. 
It shall be the duty of every owner operating a taxicab to keep the taximeter installed in such taxicab pursuant to the provisions of this division in proper mechanical condition, so that such taximeter will, at all times, correctly and accurately indicate the correct charge for the distance traveled or for the distance traveled plus waiting time. 
(Ord. No. 49; Code 1964, § 40-66)  
Sec. 38-111. - Inspection and correction of defects. 
A taximeter installed in a taxicab pursuant to the provisions of this division shall, at all reasonable times, be subject to inspection by an inspector designated by the director of public safety. Such inspector, on his own authority or upon complaint of any person, may inspect, or cause to be inspected, any taximeter used on any vehicle operated in the city, and upon the discovery of any inaccuracy in such taximeter, remove or cause to be removed such vehicle equipped with such taximeter from the streets of the city until such time as the taximeter has been correctly adjusted and approved by the inspector, or until such taximeter has been replaced in the taxicab by a proper taximeter. 
(Ord. No. 49; Code 1964, § 40-67)  
Sec. 38-112. - Breaking or tampering with seal; operating cab when seal broken. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, or tamper with, the seal on a taximeter installed in a taxicab pursuant to this division or to operate a taxicab while such seal is broken. 
(Ord. No. 49; Code 1964, § 40-70)  
Sec. 38-113. - Unlawful manipulation of meter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manipulate a taximeter required by this division in such manner as to cause the meter to inaccurately measure the distance traveled by the taxicab to which it is attached. 
(Ord. No. 49; Code 1964, § 40-70)  
Secs. 38-114—38-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FARES 
 
Sec. 38-126. - To be determined by taximeters. 
The fares charged and collected for service by taxicabs, for transportation of passengers or waiting time, within the corporate limits of the city shall be determined exclusively by taximeters meeting the requirements of division 4 of this article, regardless of destination. 
(Code 1964, § 40-65; Ord. No. 49; Ord. No. 74; Ord. No. 490)  
Sec. 38-127. - General rates prescribed; charging different rates, discounts. 
(a)  The schedule of rates set out in this section shall be charged and collected for the transportation of passengers by a taxicab operating under a certificate granted pursuant to this article. No different rate shall at any time be charged or collected for such services except for such discounts as are granted to certain qualifying elderly or handicapped citizens and Medicaid recipients by certificate holders who have applied for and received approval from the chief of police to charge a specified discounted rate to such individuals or groups. 
(b)  The rates to be charged and collected for services by taxicabs within the corporate limits of the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first one-seventh ( 1/7 ) mile ..... $2.75 
(2)  For each additional one-seventh ( 1/7 ) mile or fraction thereof ..... 0.30 
(Code 1964, § 40-61; Ord. No. 49; Ord. No. 74; Ord. No. 195; Ord. No. 321; Ord. No. 404; Ord. No. 423; Ord. No. 490; Ord. No. 633, 10-10-79; Ord. No. 677, 1-14-81; Ord. No. 797, 5-1-85; Ord. No. 1105, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1280, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 1381, 9-22-04; Ord. No. 12-0034, 7-11-12; Ord. No. 13-0007, 5-8-13 )  
Sec. 38-128. - Charge when cab dismissed. 
If any person, after a taxicab has responded to a call in any part of the city, dismisses such taxicab for insufficient cause, the operator of the taxicab shall be entitled to the minimum charge provided by section 38-127. 
(Code 1964; § 40-75; Ord. No. 49)  
Sec. 38-129. - Charge for waiting time. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, waiting time shall include the time when a taxicab is stopped or moving at a speed less than ten (10) miles per hour, and time consumed waiting for a passenger, beginning five (5) minutes after the time of arrival. No charge shall be made for mileage while waiting time is being charged. 
(b)  For each minute of waiting time, a charge of thirty cents ($0.30) may be made. 
(Code 1964, § 40-62; Ord. No. 49; Ord. No. 74; Ord. No. 196; Ord. No. 320; Ord. No. 490; Ord. No. 633, 10-10-79; Ord. No. 1105, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1280, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 12-0034, 7-11-12)  
Sec. 38-130. - Charge for transportation of trunks and baggage. 
A charge of fifty cents ($0.50) may be made for transportation, by a taxicab, of a truck or baggage other than ordinary handbags; provided, that such charge for transporting a trunk shall include only the loading of the trunk in the taxicab at the curb, and the unloading of the trunk from the taxicab to the curb, at the point of destination. 
(Code 1964, § 40-63; Ord. No. 40; Ord. No. 74)  
Sec. 38-131. - Posting and exhibition. 
The rates and fares in effect and charged for taxicab service, whether for within the limits of the city or not, shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place inside of the vehicle at all times and shall be exhibited to any person demanding it. 
(Code 1956, § 22-8; Code 1964, § 40-72)  
Sec. 38-132. - Division among passengers. 
(a)  If the hirer of a taxicab consents to another passenger occupying the taxicab with him, the passenger first arriving at his destination shall pay in accordance with the meter charge, whereupon the driver of the car shall immediately clear his meter and set the same for immediate operation for the next passenger, who shall pay the meter charge upon arrival at his destination. The same method shall be followed for each succeeding passenger. 
(b)  When two (2) or more passengers are bona fidely traveling together to the same destination, the charge shall be the same as if the taxicab was hired by one passenger. 
(Ord. No. 49; Code 1964, § 40-76)  
Sec. 38-133. - Receipt for payment. 
The driver of a taxicab shall, upon request, deliver to the person paying the fare a legible receipt, showing the charge and amount of fare paid, the date of payment and the names of the owner and driver of the taxicab and the city license number thereof. 
(Code 1956, § 22-21; Code 1964, § 40-73)  
Sec. 38-134. - Failure to pay. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to engage or ride in any taxicab without paying the legal fare therefor. 
(Code 1956, § 22-24; Code 1964, § 40-74)  
Secs. 38-135—38-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - TAXICAB STANDS 
 
Sec. 38-141. - Designation. 
Upon written application to the chief of police and after a report by him to the city manager, the city manager may designate and assign, to any holder of a certificate under this article, stands for taxicabs at such places within the city as will best serve the convenience and necessity of the general public. Such application shall state the location of the desired stand and the number of vehicle spaces which the applicant desires to occupy. No such application shall be granted unless the abutting property owner is notified and given an opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 1956, § 22-11; Code 1964, § 40-79; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-142. - Fees. 
(a)  The following fees shall be paid for each taxicab stand designated under this division: 
(1)  For the first vehicle space: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. 
(2)  For each additional vehicle space on the same stand: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. 
Such fees shall be submitted with the application for the designation and shall be paid to the city treasurer upon approval of the application. Such fees may be prorated semiannually. 
(b)  Should any application for a taxicab stand be refused, the fee submitted with the application shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Code 1956, § 22-12; Code 1964, § 40-80; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-143. - Marking. 
Taxicab stands designated as provided in this division shall be plainly marked. 
(Code 1956, § 22-13; Code 1964, § 40-81; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 38-144. - Not assignable. 
Taxicab stands designated as provided in this division shall be nonassignable. 
(Code 1956, § 22-14; Code 1964, § 40-82; Ord. No. 10-0017, 6-9-10)  
DIVISION 7. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-0034, adopted July 11, 2012, repealed Div. 7, §§ 38-145—38-150, which pertained to fuel surcharge and derived from Ord. No. 1408, adopted Sept. 28, 2005. 
 
Sec. 38-145—38-150. - Reserved.  
Chapter 39 - WATER SUPPLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the public water supply and service is furnished in the city by the City of Newport News. 
Cross reference— Plumbing permit fees, § 9-45; water supply for food establishments, § 15-32; water supply at itinerant restaurants, § 15-110; water supply for mobile home parks, § 20-44; stormwater management, Ch. 33.1; water supply for subdivisions, § 35-80; water supply for public swimming pools, § 36-8. 
State Law reference— Public water supply, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167 et seq. 
 
Sec. 39-1. - Individual systems to comply with state regulations. 
The installation, maintenance and operation of any individual water supply system in the city shall comply with all applicable regulations of the state board of health.  
Chapter 40 - WEAPONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinances paralleling state misdemeanor statutes, § 2.01c. 
Cross reference— License tax on pistol dealers, § 18-84. 
State Law reference— Local control of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-915. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 40-1. - Carrying concealed weapons. 
(a)  If any person carries about his person, hidden from common observation, (i) any pistol, revolver, or other weapon designed or intended to propel a missile of any kind by action of an explosion of any combustible material; (ii) any dirk, bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, machete, razor, slingshot, spring stick, metal knucks, or blackjack; (iii) any flailing instrument consisting of two (2) or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to swing freely, which may be known as a nun chahka, nun chuck, nunchaku, shuriken, or fighting chain; (iv) any disc, of whatever configuration, having at least two (2) points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart; or (v) any weapon of like kind as those enumerated in this subsection, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. For the purpose of this section, a weapon shall be deemed to be hidden from common observation when it is observable but is of such deceptive appearance as to disguise the weapon's true nature. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any person while in his own place of abode or the curtilage thereof. 
Except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308(J1), this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person while in his own place of business; 
(2)  Any law-enforcement officer, wherever such law-enforcement officer may travel in the commonwealth; 
(3)  Any regularly enrolled member of a target shooting organization who is at, or going to or from, an established shooting range, provided that the weapons are unloaded and securely wrapped while being transported; 
(4)  Any regularly enrolled member of a weapons collecting organization who is at, or going to or from, a bona fide weapons exhibition, provided that the weapons are unloaded and securely wrapped while being transported; 
(5)  Any person carrying such weapons between his place of abode and a place of purchase or repair, provided the weapons are unloaded and securely wrapped while being transported; 
(6)  Any person actually engaged in lawful hunting, as authorized by the board of game and inland fisheries, under inclement weather conditions necessitating temporary protection of his firearm from those conditions, provided that possession of a handgun while engaged in lawful hunting shall not be construed as hunting with a handgun if the person hunting is carrying a valid concealed handgun permit; and 
(7)  Any state police officer retired from the department of state police, any local law-enforcement officer, auxiliary police officer or animal control officer retired from a police department or sheriff's office within the commonwealth, any special agent retired from the state corporation commission or the alcoholic beverage control board, any game warden retired from the department of game and inland fisheries, and any Virginia Marine Police officer retired from the Law Enforcement Division of the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, other than an officer or agent terminated for cause, (i) with a service-related disability; (ii) following at least fifteen (15) years of service with any such law-enforcement agency, board or any combination thereof; or (iii) who has reached fifty-five (55) years of age, provided such officer carries with him written proof of consultation with and favorable review of the need to carry a concealed handgun issued by the chief law-enforcement officer of the last such agency from which the officer retired or, in the case of special agents, issued by the state corporation commission or the alcoholic beverage control board. A copy of the proof of consultation and favorable review shall be forwarded by the chief or the board to the department of state police for entry into the Virginia Criminal Information Network. The chief law-enforcement officer shall not without cause withhold such written proof if the retired law-enforcement officer otherwise meets the requirements of this section. 
For purposes of applying the reciprocity provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308(P), any person granted the privilege to carry a concealed handgun pursuant to this subdivision, while carrying the proof of consultation and favorable review required, shall be deemed to have been issued a concealed handgun permit. 
(c)  This section shall also not apply to any of the following individuals while in the discharge of their official duties, or while in transit to or from such duties: 
(1)  Carriers of the United States mail; 
(2)  Officers or guards of any state correctional institution; 
(3)  Conservators of the peace, except that the following conservators of the peace shall not be permitted to carry a concealed handgun without obtaining a permit as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308(D): (a) notaries public; (b) registrars; (c) drivers, operators or other persons in charge of any motor vehicle carrier of passengers for hire; or (d) commissioners in chancery; 
(4)  Noncustodial employees of the department of corrections designated to carry weapons by the director of the department of corrections pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 53.1-29; and 
(5)  Harbormaster of the City of Hopewell. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-52; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions and authority of circuit court to issue permit to carry concealed weapon, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.  
Sec. 40-2. - Throwing missiles. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to throw any missile of any kind at any person or property, with the intent to injure any person or property. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-54; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 40-3. - Sale, delivery, etc., of blackjacks, metal knucks, switchblade knives or similar weapons. 
If any person sells or barters, or exhibits for sale or for barter, or gives or furnishes, or causes to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, or has in his possession, or under his control, with the intent of selling, bartering, giving or furnishing, any blackjack, brass or metal knucks, any disc of whatever configuration having at least two (2) points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, or like weapons, such person shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. The having in one's possession of any such weapon shall be prima facie evidence, except in the case of a conservator of the peace, of his intent to sell, barter, give or furnish the same. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-55; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-311.  
Sec. 40-4. - Selling or furnishing certain weapons to minors. 
If any person sells, barters, gives or furnishes, or causes to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, to any minor a dirk, switchblade knife or bowie knife, having good cause to believe him to be a minor, such person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-56; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 771, 4-11-84; Ord. No. 1107, 10-13-93; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-309(A).  
Sec. 40-5. - Investigation and fee imposed on applicants for concealed handgun permits. 
Any resident of the city (or any member of the United States Armed Forces whose domicile is the city) twenty-one (21) years of age or older may apply in writing to the clerk of the circuit court for a permit to carry a concealed handgun. The application shall be made on a form that complies with the requirements of applicable state law. Pursuant to applicable state law, the court shall consult with either the sheriff or the police division of the city and receive a report from the Central Criminal Records Exchange detailing the applicant's criminal background, if any. A fee of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be collected for processing the application, as permitted by applicable state law. Any person denied a permit to carry a concealed weapon may present a petition for review in accordance with the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1147, 8-9-95; Ord. No. 1190, 7-9-97; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 12-0033, 7-11-12) 
State Law reference— Concealed handgun permits, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308; authority to require fingerprinting of applicants for concealed handgun permit, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-915.3.  
Secs. 40-6—40-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIREARMS AND PNEUMATIC GUNS 
 
Sec. 40-15. - Definitions. 
Firearm. Any weapon that will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel single or multiple projectiles by the action of an explosion of a combustible material. 
Pneumatic gun. Any implement, designed as a gun that will expel a BB or a pellet by action of pneumatic pressure. This term includes a paintball gun that expels by action of pneumatic pressure plastic balls filled with paint for the purpose of marking the point of impact, but does not include a pneumatic nail gun or other tool when used for its intended purpose. 
(Ord. No. 16-0001 , 1-13-16)  
Sec. 40-16. - Possession by certain minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of fourteen (14) years to have in his possession any pneumatic gun unless such person under the age of fourteen (14) years is supervised by his parent, guardian or other capable adult. Any minor, whether permitted by a parent or guardian to use a pneumatic gun, shall be responsible for obeying all laws, regulations and restrictions governing such use. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by as a Class 4 misdemeanor, and the pneumatic gun possessed in violation hereof may be confiscated by the court. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-58; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1074, 1-27-93; Ord. No. 1107, 10-13-93; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 16-0001 , 1-13-16)  
Sec. 40-16.1. - Discharge of rifle, pistol or shotgun loaded with slugs. 
(a)  The discharge or use of a rifle, pistol or shotgun loaded with slugs is hereby prohibited within the city limits. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-59; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 731, 9-8-82; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prohibit discharge of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113.  
Sec. 40-17. - Discharge near dwelling, occupied structure or street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge shots, bullets, pellets or any similar thing from a firearm or pneumatic gun within five hundred (500) feet of any dwelling or occupied structure or any street, alley or other public way in the city. Any violation of this section involving a firearm shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. Any violation of this section involving a pneumatic gun shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-57; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 16-0001 , 1-13-16)  
Sec. 40-18. - Discharge or hunting prohibited. 
(a)  The discharge or use of a firearm or pneumatic gun within the city limits is hereby prohibited, except as provided in subsections 40-18(b) and (c), 40-20 and 40-22. 
(b)  Hunting within the city limits is hereby prohibited, except as provided in section 40-20 or when such hunting takes place pursuant to a permit for controlled wildlife reduction issued by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries. Such hunting may also be subject to review by the city manager. Such review may include but not be limited to, the area in which weapons may be discharged, the caliber of the weapons to be used and the days and hours such hunting shall occur. 
(c)  Discharge or use of a firearm or pneumatic gun within the city limits may be permitted by designated persons for animal control purposes where the chief of police has found that such is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and the action has been reviewed and approved in writing by the chief of police. 
(d)  Any violation of this section involving a firearm shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. Any violation of this section involving a pneumatic gun shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-59; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 731, 9-8-82; Ord. No. 924, 1-25-89; Ord. No. 1200, 12-10-97; Ord. No. 1271, 2-23-00; Ord. No. 1283, 7-19-00; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 16-0001 , 1-13-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit hunting, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113.1.  
Sec. 40-19. - Carrying loaded rifle or shotgun prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, possess or carry a loaded shotgun or loaded rifle in any vehicle, on any public street, road or highway within the City of Hampton. Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $100. 
This section shall become effective on May 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 16-0001 , 1-13-16)  
Sec. 40-20. - Discharge over bodies of water. 
(a)  The discharge or use of a firearm, air gun, spring gun, pellet gun or similar implement over bodies of water within the jurisdiction of the city is prohibited, except from blinds licensed by the Commonwealth. The discharge or use of a rifle or pistol or a shotgun while loaded with slugs from such licensed blinds is prohibited. Further, no firearm, other than a shotgun loaded with shot not heavier than double ought buckshot, shall be discharged from such blind and no shot shall be discharged landward within five hundred (500) feet of the shoreline. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-59; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 731, 9-8-82; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 18-0004 , 4-25-18) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 40-21. - Pointing or brandishing firearm. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to point or brandish any firearm, or any object similar in appearance to a firearm, whether capable of being fired or not, in such a manner as to reasonably induce fear in the mind of another. 
(b)  Any police officer, in the performance of his duty in making an arrest under the provisions of this section, shall not be civilly liable in damages for injuries or death resulting to the person being arrested, if he had reason to believe that the person being arrested was pointing or brandishing a firearm, or object similar in appearance to a firearm, with intent to induce fear in the mind of another. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the word "firearm" shall mean any weapon in which ammunition may be used or discharged by explosion or pneumatic pressure. The word "ammunition", as used herein, shall mean cartridge, pellet, ball, missile or projectile adapted for use in a firearm. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-53; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 40-22. - Exceptions from article. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the following: 
(1)  The discharge of firearms by law enforcement and military personnel as part of authorized training or in the performance of their duties or the discharge of any firearm by any other person whose said willful act is otherwise justifiable or excusable at law in the protection of his life or property, or is otherwise specifically authorized by law. 
(2)  The discharge of firearms or pneumatic guns upon a gunnery range or shooting gallery. 
(3)  The discharge of a pneumatic gun by an adult or minor over the age of 14, on or within private property with permission of the owner or legal possessor thereof when conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property. 
(4)  The discharge of firearms at a shooting event, a permit for which has been obtained from the chief of police by the sponsor of such event. 
(b)  In granting a permit for any event referred to in subsection (a)(4) above, the chief of police shall use the following guidelines and grant no permit until assured that each and every requirement below will be met: 
(1)  The event is in a location sufficiently remote as to impose no threat to life, limb or property located in, on or near any structure, building, house, street, alley or public way. 
(2)  That the direction of any discharge will be such that it will impose no threat, either actual or remote, to any structure, building, house, street, alley or public way. 
(3)  That safety precautions will be taken during the event to insure that the perimeters of the event are well-marked by signs indicating that a shooting event is taking place. 
(4)  That at least two (2) persons will be designated by the sponsor of the event to monitor the perimeters of the event for the protection of life, limb and property. 
A violation of any term or condition of such permit shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 27.1-60; Ord. No. 601, 12-13-78; Ord. No. 1467, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 16-0001 , 1-13-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Chapter 41.1 - WETLANDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General building and development regulations, Ch. 9; land disturbing activity and erosion and sediment control generally, § 13.1-1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Wetlands, Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 41.1-1. - Intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to comply with chapter 13 of title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia (Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq.) providing protection to tidal wetlands located within the confines of the City of Hampton. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-2. - Exemptions from this chapter. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall affect: 
(1)  Any project in vegetated wetlands commenced prior to July 1, 1972, or any project in nonvegetated wetlands commenced prior to January 1, 1983; however, this section shall not be deemed to exclude from regulation under this chapter any activity which expands or enlarges upon a project already in existence or under construction at the time of such date, except for those activities exempted under section 41.1-7(8). 
(2)  Any project or development in vegetated wetlands for which, prior to July 1, 1972, or in nonvegetated wetlands for which, prior to January 1, 1983, a plan or plan of development thereof has been filed pursuant to ordinance or other lawful enactment with either an agency of the federal or state government or with either the planning commission or city council. 
(3)  Any project or development in vegetated wetlands, whether commenced prior to July 1, 1972, and in nonvegetated wetlands, whether commenced prior to January 1, 1983, if located or to be located in whole or in part on ground or in an area an interest in which was authorized by the General Assembly to be conveyed prior to July 1, 1972, for vegetated wetlands and July 1, 1982, for nonvegetated wetlands. 
(b)  For exemptions (1) and (2) as set out in subsection (a) above to be effective the project or development must be certified as exempt by the commission or the wetlands board. The request for certification must be filed prior to January 1, 1984. Projects or developments which have been determined by the commission or the wetlands board prior to July 1, 1982, to be exempt from the provisions of this chapter shall be considered to be certified. If the request for certification is not granted or denied within one hundred twenty (120) days from receipt of the request by the commission or the wetlands board, the certification will be conclusively presumed to have been granted. The time limitations and public hearing requirements imposed by § 28.2-1302 of the Code of Virginia shall not apply to the certification process. Upon request by any person holding a certification issued by the commission or the wetlands board, the clerk of the circuit court having jurisdiction over the property on which the certified project is located shall record such certification in the appropriate deed book of the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
ARTICLE II. - WETLANDS BOARD 
 
Sec. 41.1-3. - Wetlands board generally. 
The wetlands board of the city is hereby created, consisting of Seven (7) residents of the city appointed by the city council. All board members' terms shall be for five (5) years. The chairman of the board shall notify the city council at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of any member's term and shall promptly notify the city council if any vacancy occurs. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council without delay upon receipt of such notice. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may serve successive terms. A member whose term expires shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. Members of the board shall hold no public office in the city other than membership on the local planning or zoning commission, the local erosion commission, the local board of zoning appeals, a board established by the city to hear cases regarding ordinances adopted pursuant to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act (Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2100 et seq.) and regulations promulgated thereunder, or as director of a soil and water conservation board. When members of these local commissions or boards are appointed to the wetlands board, their terms of appointment shall be coterminous with their membership on those boards or commissions. The city council shall also appoint two (2) alternate members to the board. The qualifications, terms, and compensation of the alternate members shall be the same as those of other members. Any member who knows that they will not be able to attend a board meeting shall notify the chairman at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of such meeting. The chairman shall notify the alternate member to serve in place of the absent member at the board meeting, which shall be noted in the records of the board. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1386, 10-27-04; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07; Ord. No. 08-0008, 2-27-08) 
State Law reference— Wetlands board, Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1303.  
Sec. 41.1-3.1. - Officers, meetings, rules, etc., of wetlands board. 
The board shall annually elect from its membership a chairman and such other officers as it deems necessary for terms of one (1) year. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than four (4) members. The board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedures, consistent with state law and local ordinances. The board shall keep a full public record of its proceedings and shall submit a report of its activities to the city council at least once each year. The board shall forward a copy of its report to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07; Ord. No. 08-0008, 2-27-08) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1304.  
Sec. 41.1-4. - Removal of member of wetlands board. 
Upon a hearing with at least fifteen (15) days' notice thereof, any board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, or for other just cause, by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1303.  
ARTICLE III. - WETLANDS ZONING ORDINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— General zoning ordinance, App. A. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt Wetlands Zoning Ordinance as set out in this article, Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1302. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 41.1-5. - Adopted. 
The Hampton City Council, acting pursuant to Chapter 13 of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia (Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1302), for purposes of fulfilling the policy standards set forth in such chapter, adopts this chapter regulating the use and development of wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-6. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
Commission means the Virginia Marine Resources Commission. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of marine resources. 
Governmental activity means any or all of the services provided by this city to its citizens for the purpose of maintaining this city including, but not limited to, such services as constructing, repairing and maintaining roads, providing sewage facilities and street lights; supplying and treating water; and constructing public buildings. 
Nonvegetated wetlands means unvegetated lands lying contiguous to mean low water and between mean low water and mean high water. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity. 
Vegetated wetlands means lands lying between and contiguous to mean low water and an elevation above mean low water equal to the factor one and one-half (1½) times the mean tide range at the site of the proposed project in this city and upon which is growing any of the following species: saltmarsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora), saltmeadow hay (Spartina patens), saltgrass (Distichlis spicata), black needlerush (Juncus roemerianus), saltwort (Salicornia spp.), sea lavender (Limonium spp.), marsh elder (Iva frutescens), groundsel bush (Baccharis halimifolia), wax myrtle (Myrica sp.), sea oxeye (Borrichia frutescens), arrow arum (Peltandra virginica), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), big cordgrass (Spartina cynosuroides), rice cutgrass (Leersia oryzoides), wildrice (Zizania aquatica), bulrush (Scirpus validus), spikerush (Eleocharis sp.), sea rocket (Cakile edentula), southern wildrice (Zizaniopsis miliacea), cattail (Typha spp.), three-square (Scirpus spp.), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), bald cypress (Taxodium distichum), black gum (Nyssa sylvatica), tupelo (Nyssa aquatica), dock (Rumex spp.), yellow pond lily (Nuphar sp.), marsh fleabane (Pluchea purpurascens), royal fern (Osmunda regalis), marsh hibiscus (Hibiscus moscheutos), beggar's tick (Bidens sp.), smartweed (Polygonum sp.), arrowhead (Sagittaria spp.), sweet flag (Acorus calamus), water hemp (Amaranthus cannabinus), reed grass (Phragmites communis) or switch grass (Panicum virgatum). 
Wetlands means both vegetated and nonvegetated wetlands. 
Wetlands board or board means a board created pursuant to § 28.2-1303 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-7. - Permitted uses and activities. 
The following uses of and activities in wetlands are authorized if otherwise permitted by law: 
(1)  The construction and maintenance of noncommercial catwalks, piers, boathouses, boat shelters, fences, duckblinds, wildlife management shelters, footbridges, observation decks and shelters and other similar structures, provided that such structures are so constructed on pilings as to permit the reasonably unobstructed flow of the tide and preserve the natural contour of the wetlands; 
(2)  The cultivation and harvesting of shellfish, and worms for bait; 
(3)  Noncommercial outdoor recreational activities, including hiking, boating, trapping, hunting, fishing, shellfishing, horseback riding, swimming, skeet and trap shooting, and shooting on shooting preserves, provided that no structure shall be constructed except as permitted in subsection (1) of this section; 
(4)  Other outdoor recreational activities, provided they do not impair the natural functions or alter the natural contour of the wetlands; 
(5)  Grazing, haying and cultivating and harvesting agricultural, forestry or horticultural products; 
(6)  Conservation, repletion and research activities of the commission, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries and other conservation-related agencies; 
(7)  The construction or maintenance of aids to navigation which are authorized by governmental authority; 
(8)  Emergency measures decreed by any duly appointed health officer of a governmental subdivision acting to protect the public health; 
(9)  The normal maintenance and repair of, or addition to, presently existing roads, highways, railroad beds or facilities abutting on or crossing wetlands, provided that no waterway is altered and no additional wetlands are covered; 
(10)  Governmental activity in wetlands owned or leased by the commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof; 
(11)  The normal maintenance of man-made drainage ditches, provided that no additional wetlands are covered. This subdivision does not authorize the construction of any drainage ditch; and 
(12)  The construction of living shoreline projects authorized pursuant to a general permit developed under Code of Virginia, § 28.2-104.1(B). 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07; Ord. No. 14-0010, 7-9-14 )  
Sec. 41.1-8. - Required; application generally. 
(a)  Any person who desires to use or develop any wetland within this city, other than for the purpose of conducting the activities specified in section 41.1-7, shall first file an application for a permit directly with the wetlands board or with the commission. 
(b)  The permit application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  A detailed description of the proposed activities; 
(3)  A map, drawn to an appropriate and uniform scale, showing the area of wetlands directly affected; the location of the proposed work thereon; the area of existing and proposed fill and excavation; the location, width, depth and length of any proposed channel and the disposal area; and the location of all existing and proposed structures, sewage collection and treatment facilities, utility installations, roadways and other related appurtenances or facilities, including those on adjacent uplands; 
(4)  A description of the type of equipment to be used and the means of equipment access to the activity site; 
(5)  The names and addresses of owners of record of adjacent land and known claimants of water rights in or adjacent to the wetland of whom the applicant has notice; 
(6)  An estimate of cost; 
(7)  The primary purpose of the project; 
(8)  Any secondary purposes of the project, including further projects; 
(9)  The public benefit to be derived from the proposed project; 
(10)  A complete description of measures to be taken during and after the alteration to reduce detrimental offsite effects; 
(11)  The completion date of the proposed work, project or structure; and 
(12)  Such additional materials and documentation as the wetlands board may require. 
(c)  A nonrefundable processing fee of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) shall accompany each permit application. In the case of an after-the-fact permit application, the fee shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1392, 3-23-05; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-9. - Public inspection of application. 
All applications, maps and documents submitted shall be open for public inspection at the office of the codes compliance department as specified in the advertisement for public hearing required under section 41.1-10 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-10. - Public hearing on application. 
Not later than sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete application, the wetlands board shall hold a public hearing on the application. The applicant, Hampton City Council, commissioner, owner of record of any land adjacent to the wetlands in question, known claimants of water rights in or adjacent to the wetlands in question, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, the Water Control Board, the Department of Transportation and any governmental agency expressing an interest in the application shall be notified of the hearing. The board shall mail these notices not less than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The wetlands board shall also cause notice of such hearing to be published at least once a week for two (2) weeks prior to such hearing in the newspaper of general circulation in this city. The public notice shall specify the place or places within the city where copies of the application may be examined. The costs of publication shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-11. - Grant or denial of permit generally. 
Approval of a permit application shall require the affirmative vote of four (4) members of the board. The chairman of the board or, in his absence, the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Any person may testify at the public hearing. Each witness at the hearing may submit a concise written statement of his testimony. The board shall make a record of the proceeding, which shall include the application, any written statements of witnesses, a summary of statements of all witnesses, the findings and decision of the board and the rationale for the decision. The board shall make its determination within thirty (30) days of the hearing. If the board fails to act within that time, the application shall be deemed approved. Within forty-eight (48) hours of its determination, the board shall notify the applicant and the commissioner of its determination. If the board fails to make a determination within the thirty-day period, it shall promptly notify the applicant and the commission that the application is deemed approved. For purposes of this section, "act" means taking a vote on the application. If the application receives less than four (4) affirmative votes, the permit shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07; Ord. No. 08-0011, 5-28-08)  
Sec. 41.1-12. - Review or appeal of board's action on application. 
If the board's decision is reviewed or appealed, the board shall transmit the record of its hearing to the commissioner. Upon a final determination by the commission, the record shall be returned to the board. The record shall be open for public inspection in the office of the codes compliance department. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-13. - Bond securing compliance with conditions and limitations; suspension or revocation of permit. 
The board may require a reasonable bond or letter of credit in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it securing to the city compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth the permit. The board may, after a hearing held pursuant to this article, suspend or revoke a permit if the applicant has failed to comply with any of the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work described in the application. The board may, after hearing, suspend a permit if the applicant fails to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in the application. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-14. - Factors to be considered in making decision as to grant or denial. 
In fulfilling its responsibilities under this article, the board shall preserve and prevent the despoliation and destruction of wetlands within its jurisdiction while accommodating necessary economic development in a manner consistent with wetlands preservation. 
(1)  In deciding whether to grant, grant in modified form or deny a permit, the board shall consider the following: 
a.  The testimony of any person in support of or in opposition to the permit application; 
b.  The impact of the proposed development on the public health, safety and welfare; and 
c.  The proposed development's conformance with standards prescribed in § 28.2-1308 of the Code of Virginia and guidelines promulgated pursuant to § 28.2-1301 of the Code of Virginia. 
(2)  The board shall grant the permit if all of the following criteria are met: 
a.  The anticipated public and private benefit of the proposed activity exceeds its anticipated public and private detriment; 
b.  The proposed development conforms with the standards prescribed in § 28.2-1308 of the Code of Virginia and guidelines promulgated pursuant to § 28.2-1301 of the Code of Virginia; and 
c.  The proposed activity does not violate the purposes and intent of this ordinance or chapter 13, § 28.2-1300 et seq. of title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(3)  If the board finds that any of the criteria listed in subsection (2) of this section are not met, the board shall deny the permit application but allow the applicant to resubmit the application in modified form. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-15. - Permit. 
The permit shall be in writing, signed by the chairman of the board or his authorized representative, and notarized. A copy of the permit shall be transmitted to the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-16. - Permit expiration and extension. 
No permit shall be granted without an expiration date established by the board. Upon proper application, the board may extend the permit expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-17. - Does not affect zoning and land use ordinances. 
No permit granted by a wetlands board shall in any way affect the applicable zoning and land use ordinances of this city or the right of any person to seek compensation for any injury in fact incurred by him because of the proposed activity. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-17.1 - Wetlands mitigation. 
Pursuant to Virginia Marine Resources Commission Wetlands Mitigation Compensation Policy, the board may require compensation for all permitted wetland losses. In those cases where the board has determined that neither on-site, in-kind nor out-of-kind compensation nor off-site, in-kind nor out-of-kind compensation is practicable, the board may charge the applicant an in lieu fee. Because of the difficulty and uncertainty associated with the creation of wetlands, the in lieu fee shall be determined by multiplying the replacement ratio by the amount charged per square foot in accordance with the wetlands board's mitigation-compensation policy, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-0001, 1-9-08)  
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 41.1-18. - Enforcement officer. 
The director of codes compliance shall designate a member of his staff as the wetlands board staff coordinator and a different member of his staff as the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-19. - Investigations and prosecutions. 
Wetlands boards may investigate all projects, whether proposed or ongoing, which alter wetlands located within their jurisdiction. Wetlands boards may prosecute all violations of their orders and any violation of the wetlands zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-20. - Reporting, site inspections and notice to comply; wetlands board to issue stop work order or restoration order. 
(a)  The board chairman may require a permittee to implement monitoring and reporting procedures he believes are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of the permit and this chapter. The board chairman may require such on-site inspections as deemed reasonably necessary to determine whether the measures required by the permit are being properly performed or whether the provisions of this chapter are being violated. Prior to conducting such inspections, the board chairman shall provide notice to the resident owner, occupier or operator who shall be given an opportunity to accompany the site inspector. If it is determined that there is a failure to comply with the permit, the board chairman shall serve notice upon the permittee at the address specified in his permit application or by delivery at the site of the permitted activities to the person supervising such activities and designated in the permit to receive the notice. 
The notice shall describe the measures needed for compliance and the time within which such measures shall be completed. Failure of the person to comply within the specified period is a violation of this section. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of this chapter from the designated enforcement officer, the board chairman may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in subsection (a) of this section, issue an order requiring all or part of the activities on the site to be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. In the case of an activity not authorized under this chapter or where the alleged permit noncompliance is causing, or is in imminent danger of causing, significant harm to the wetlands protected by this chapter, the order may be issued without regard to whether the person has been issued a notice to comply pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the permittee has failed to comply with the notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply and shall remain in effect for a period of seven (7) days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority, permittee, resident owner, occupier or operator for appropriate relief to the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton. Upon completion of corrective action, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the board chairman from taking any other action specified in section 41.1-19. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of this chapter from the designated enforcement officer, the wetlands board may order that the affected site be restored to predevelopment conditions if the board finds that restoration is necessary to recover lost resources or to prevent further damage to resources. The order shall specify the restoration necessary and establish a reasonable time for its completion. The order shall be issued only after a hearing with at least thirty (30) days' notice to the affected person of the hearing's time, place and purpose, and shall become effective immediately upon issuance by the board. The board shall require any scientific monitoring plan they believe necessary to ensure that such project result in the successful re-establishment of wetlands protected by this chapter and may require that a prepaid contract acceptable to the board be in effect for the purpose of carrying out the scientific monitoring plan. The board may also require a reasonable bond or letter of credit in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it securing to the city compliance with the conditions set forth in the restoration order. The circuit court upon petition by the board, may enforce any such restoration order by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Failure to complete the required restoration is a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  The duties of the board chairman under this section may be delegated to his designee; however, such designee shall not be a designated enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-20.1. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person who knowingly, intentionally or negligently violates any order, rule or regulation of the wetlands board established pursuant to this chapter, any provision of this chapter or of the wetlands zoning ordinance, or any provision of a permit granted pursuant to this chapter, is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Following a conviction, every day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-21. - Injunctions. 
Upon the petition of the wetlands board to the circuit court where any act is done or threatened which is unlawful under this chapter, the circuit court may enjoin the unlawful act and order the defendant to take such steps necessary to restore, protect and preserve the wetlands involved. This remedy shall be exclusive of and in addition to any criminal penalty which may be imposed under section 41.1-20.1. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07)  
Sec. 41.1-22. - Penalties. 
(a)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained under this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who violates or fails, neglects or refuses to obey any wetlands board notice, order, rule, regulations or permit condition authorized by this chapter shall, upon finding by circuit court, be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each day of violation. Such civil penalties may, at the discretion of the court assessing them, be directed to be paid into the treasury of the City of Hampton for the purpose of abating environmental damage to or restoring wetlands therein in such a manner as the court may, by order, direct; except that where the violator is the city itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(b)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained under this chapter, and with the consent of any person who has violated any provision of the chapter or who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any wetlands board order, rule, regulation or permit condition authorized by this chapter, the wetlands board may provide, in an order issued by the wetlands board against such person, for the one-time payment of civil charges for each violation in specific sums, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each violation. Civil charges shall be in lieu of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under the subsection (a) of this section. Civil charges may be in addition to the cost of any restoration ordered by the wetlands board. 
(c)  All funds collected pursuant to section 41.1-17.1 and section 41.1-22(b) shall be placed into a special revenue account to be used solely as approved by the city manager for the creation, enhancement, or restoration of tidal wetlands. Such creation, enhancement or restoration projects shall be subject to review and recommendation by the wetlands board. 
(Ord. No. 1104, 9-22-93; Ord. No. 1477, 5-24-07; Ord. No. 08-0001, 1-9-08)  
Chapter 42 - ZONES; DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES  
ARTICLE I. - TOURISM ZONES 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds that establishment of one (1) or more tourism zones, as authorized by Virginia Code § 58.1-3851, will benefit the public health, safety, and welfare, and will stimulate economic development by fostering the creation and expansion of tourism-related businesses within the City of Hampton. 
( Ord. No. 15-0011, 4-8-15 )  
Sec. 42-2. - Administration and enforcement. 
(1)  This article shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or her designee. 
(2)  The city manager or her designee is authorized to: 
a.  Develop eligibility requirements and an application process for the grant of tax incentives and regulatory flexibility ("Tourism Zone Guidelines"), which shall be kept on file in the office of the department of economic development. 
b.  Negotiate and enter into performance agreements with potential new or expanding qualified tourism businesses. 
( Ord. No. 15-0011, 4-8-15 )  
Sec. 42-3. - Creation of tourism zones; boundaries. 
The boundaries of the city's tourism zones shall be shown on the map entitled "City of Hampton Tourism Zone Map." The City of Hampton Tourism Zones Map is hereby declared to be a part of this article and to have the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth and described herein. The City of Hampton Tourism Zone Map shall be kept on file in the office of the department of economic development. 
( Ord. No. 15-0011, 4-8-15 )  
Sec. 42-4. - Development incentives generally. 
The city manager or her designee is authorized to grant any or all tax incentives and regulatory flexibility permitted by Virginia Code § 58.1-3851, which shall be set forth in the Tourism Zone Guidelines. The Tourism Zone Guidelines are hereby declared to be a part of this article and to have the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth and described herein. The Tourism Zone Guidelines shall be kept on file in the office of the department of economic development. 
( Ord. No. 15-0011, 4-8-15 )  
Sec. 42-5. - Coliseum Central Tourism Zone established; eligibility. 
The Coliseum Central Tourism Zone is hereby established within the boundaries as shown on the City of Hampton Tourism Zones Map. Eligibility for tax incentives and regulatory flexibility within the zone shall be governed by the Tourism Zone Guidelines. 
( Ord. No. 15-0011, 4-8-15 )  
Sec. 42-6. - Hampton Waterfront Tourism Zone established; eligibility. 
The Hampton Waterfront Tourism Zone is hereby established within the boundaries as shown on the City of Hampton Tourism Zones Map. Eligibility for tax incentives and regulatory flexibility within the zone shall be governed by the Tourism Zone Guidelines. 
( Ord. No. 15-0011, 4-8-15 )  
Secs. 42-7—42-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ARTS AND CULTURAL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 42-11. - Arts and cultural districts; purpose and intent. 
The city council finds that establishment of one or more arts and cultural districts, as authorized by Virginia Code § 15.2-1129.1, as amended, will benefit the public health, safety, and welfare, by increasing awareness and support for the arts and culture in the City of Hampton and stimulating related economic development opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 15-0025 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 42-12. - Arts and cultural districts; definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms are defined as follows: 
Antique. A work of art, piece of furniture or decorative object produced at least 100 years ago. 
City Code. The City Code of the City of Hampton, Virginia, as amended. 
District administrator. The city manager of the City of Hampton or her designee. 
Expanded business. A qualified arts or cultural business that is currently located within an Arts and Cultural District and does one of the following: 
(a)  Makes a capital investment in the business of at least $10,000 to acquire or upgrade productive fixed assets, including but not limited to buildings, machinery and equipment, and vehicles, to increase the capacity or efficiency of the business for more than one accounting period. Capital investments do not include funds spent for working capital or day-to-day operation of the business. 
(b)  Creates at least one new full-time job at the business. 
New business. A qualified arts or cultural business that is not currently located within the Arts and Cultural District. 
Qualified arts or cultural business. A new business, expanded business, or non-profit organization that is certified by the district administrator and that meets at least one of the following: 
(a)  A business or non-profit organization that presents or hosts live performances of theatre, dance, music, or other imaginative work or produces or exhibits physical works created by, or under the direction of artists, which are intended for unique production or limited reproduction. Museums or historic sites, the primary mission of which is education, history, or historic preservation, may also be certified as a qualified arts or cultural business. 
(b)  A business whose primary economic activities are the generation or utilization of innovation, knowledge, and information involving individual creativity, skill, and talent. Said economic activities may have the potential for wealth and job creation through the generation of ideas, products, or services and may constitute the intellectual property of the business or artist. This category includes but is not limited to: advertising, architecture, art, antiques, auctioneering, culinary arts instruction, craft breweries, crafts, design, designing computer games or software, embroidery or silk-screening, fashion design or modeling, film and video, furniture design, interior design, landscape architecture, music, performing arts, pottery, publishing, and television and radio. 
In no case shall a restaurant or an office use, including but not limited to a bank, real estate office, medical office, or attorney's office, be deemed to be a qualified arts or cultural business; nor shall a business or individual requiring licensure by the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulations qualify as a qualified arts or cultural business, unless otherwise expressly stated in this article. 
Zoning ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hampton, Virginia, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 15-0025 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 42-13. - Arts and cultural districts; administration and enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be administered and enforced by the district administrator. 
(b)  The district administrator is authorized to develop an application process for the grant of incentives and regulatory flexibility, which shall be kept on file in the office of the department of economic development. 
(Ord. No. 15-0025 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 42-14. - Arts and cultural districts; creation of district and boundaries. 
The boundaries of the city's arts and cultural districts shall be shown on the map entitled "City of Hampton Arts and Cultural Districts Map." The City of Hampton Arts and Cultural District Map is hereby declared to be a part of this article and to have the same force and effect as if it was fully set forth and described herein. The City of Hampton Arts and Cultural District Map shall be kept on file in the office of the department of economic development. 
(Ord. No. 15-0025 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 42-15. - Arts and cultural districts; incentives. 
(a)  Qualified arts or cultural businesses shall be eligible for incentives for up to 5 years provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The qualified arts or cultural business is certified by the district administrator to be a qualified arts and cultural business as defined by this article. The burden shall be on the qualified arts or cultural business to prove, to the satisfaction of the district administrator, that it meets the definition contained in this article; 
(2)  The qualified arts or cultural business is located within an "Incentive Area" designated on the City of Hampton Arts and Cultural District Map; and 
(3)  The qualified arts or cultural business complies with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations at all times. 
(b)  Qualified arts or cultural businesses meeting all of the criteria of this article shall be eligible for the following incentives for up to 5 years from the date of certification by the district administrator as set forth in section 42-15(a)(1): 
(1)  Reduction of certain permit fees. 100% reduction of building permit (City Code § 9-42), electrical permit (City Code § 9-43), mechanical and gas permit (City Code § 9-44), plumbing permit (City Code § 9-45), sign permit (Zoning Ordinance § 1-10), use permit application (Zoning Ordinance § 14-3), and rezoning application (Zoning Ordinance § 14-22) fees. 
(i)  Qualified arts or cultural businesses are eligible to receive no more than $10,000 in reduced permit fees within the 5-year incentive period. 
(2)  Reduction of certain fees related to special events. For special events that will take place within the arts and cultural district boundaries, a 100% reduction of the special event permit application fee (City Code § 2-314), park and outdoor facilities rental fee (City Code § 26-26.1), and park and outdoor facilities staff fee (City Code § 26-26.1). No other fees shall be reduced, including but not limited to the deposit fee, security fee, or other equipment rental or personnel fees as may be required by the special event permit or set forth in City Code § 2-318. 
(i)  Qualified arts or cultural businesses are eligible to receive no more than $10,000 in reduced special event fees within the 5-year incentive period. 
(3)  Increased awards related to Economic Development Authority (EDA) grant programs. Subject to approval by the EDA and the availability of funds, qualified arts or cultural businesses may be eligible for increased awards as set forth in the EDA's adopted grant guidelines for the Downtown and Phoebus Retail Incentive Grant and Revolving Loan Fund/Business Improvement Grant. 
(Ord. No. 15-0025 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 42-16. - Arts and cultural districts; compliance with article. 
(a)  A qualified arts or cultural business that fails to pay in full any tax imposed by the city by the due date shall lose its certification for the year of such tax and its entitlement to any incentives afforded under this article during such period. 
(b)  A qualified arts or cultural business receiving incentives under this article that fails to at all times comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and this article shall in the case of a first offense lose its qualified arts or cultural business certification for the remainder of the current fiscal year and in the case of any subsequent failure shall lose its qualified arts or cultural business certification for the duration of the total remaining 5-year incentive term. 
(Ord. No. 15-0025 , 10-14-15)  
Sec. 42-17. - Arts and cultural districts; effective date. 
This article shall have an effective date of January 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 15-0025 , 10-14-15)  
Secs. 42-18—42-20. - Reserved.  
APPENDIX A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, the zoning ordinance has been omitted from this Code. This appendix is reserved for inclusion of such ordinance in the future, if the city so elects. 
Charter reference— Authority of city as to land development, § 2.06. 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-6(6); effective date of zoning ordinances, § 2-84; planning commission, § 2-201 et seq.; location of poultry or animal yards near residential, church or school buildings, § 5-24; general building and development regulations, Ch. 9; combining site plan required by zoning ordinance with that required by article IV of chapter 9 of this Code, § 9-135; zoning administrator to enforce regulations governing use of barbed wire, § 9-206; land disturbing activity and erosion and sediment control generally, § 13.1-1 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 14; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 20; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 21; open storage of inoperative vehicles on property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes, § 24-39; parks and recreation, Ch. 26; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 30; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 34; subdivisions, Ch. 35; swimming pools, Ch. 36; wetlands zoning ordinance, § 41.1-5 et seq. 
State Law reference— Zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280 et seq. 

ZONING ORDINANCE of the City of Hampton 1960 
____________ 
Effective: February 1, 1960 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council, December 2009. 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF HAMPTON 
____________ 
George E. Wallace 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jimmy Gray, Vice Mayor 
Linda Curtis 
W. H. "Billy" Hobbs, Jr. 
Steven L. Brown 
Eleanor W. Brown 
Chris Osby Snead 
Council Members 
____________ 
Mary Bunting 
City Manager 
____________ 
Cheran Cordell Ivery 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Katherine K. Glass 
Clerk of Council  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. Z15-06, adopted March 25, 2015, repealed the former chapters 1—25, §§ 1-1—1-20, 1-22, 1-24—1-26, 2-1—2-3, 2.1-1, 2.1-2, 3-1—3-7, 3.1-1—3.1-8, 3.2-1—3.2-8, 3.3-1—3.3-8, 3.4-1—3.4-8, 4-1—4-7, 5-1—5-7, 6-1—6-7, 7-1—7-7, 7.1-1—7.1-10, 8-1—8-7, 9-1—9-7, 10-1—10-11, 10-13—10-22, 10-24—10-33, 10-35—10-41, 10.1-01—10.1-2, 10.1-4, 10.1-6—10.1-12, 11-1—11-4, 11-6, 11-7, 12-1—12-4, 12-6, 13-1—13-3, 13-5, 14-1—14-6, 15-1—15-4, 16-1—16-4, 17.1-1—17.1-7, 17.1-9, 17.2-1—17.2-8, 17.2-10, 17.3-1—17.3-3, 17.3-20—17.3-27, 17.3-31—17.3-36, 17.3-38—17.3-40, 17.3-42—17.3-47, 17.3-53—17.3-61, 17.3-63—17.3-65, 17.3-67—17.3-74, 17.3-88—17.3-98, 17.3-100—17.3-114, 17.3-116—17.3-118, 17.3-120, 17.3-121, 17.3-123, 17.3-130—17.3-136, 18.1-1, 18.1-1.1, 18.1-3—18.1-41, 19-1—19-8, 20-1—20-15, 21-1—-21-4, 22-1—22-13, 24-1—24-9, 25-1—25-7, and enacted a new zoning code as set out herein. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Editor's note— This zoning ordinance, as set out herein, shall be in effect on and after June 1, 2015. Amendments are indicated by history notes appearing in parentheses ( ) at the end of the amended sections. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived, unamended, from this ordinance. Any words appearing in brackets [ ] were added by the editor for clarity. 
 
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 1-01. - Recodification of zoning ordinance. 
The February 1, 1960 Zoning Ordinance, as Amended, is hereby recodified as set forth herein and as authorized by Virginia Code § 15.2-1433 with an effective date of June 1, 2015.  
Sec. 1-1. - Districts and boundaries. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Hampton, Virginia, is hereby divided into classes of districts as hereinafter set forth in subsequent chapters.  
Sec. 1-2. - Zoning maps. 
The location of boundaries of the particular districts, except the Flood Zone District as set forth in chapter 9, article 4 of the zoning ordinance, shall be as shown on a map entitled, "Zoning District Map, Hampton, Virginia, 1960, as amended," which map is a reference map to be used in conjunction with this ordinance The said map is a composite of a series of maps, including the noise overlay map depicting the boundaries of the Noise Contour District as set forth in chapter 22, article III of the city code and in chapter 9, article 1 of the zoning ordinance, maps depicting the aircraft accident potential zones, and maps showing a more detailed location of boundaries between districts, said series of maps being entitled, "Zoning District Sectional Maps, 1960, as amended," which aforementioned maps are hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance. The location and boundaries of the various floodplain districts located within the Flood Zone District shall be as shown on a map entitled, "Flood Insurance Rate Map," which map and any amendments thereto as adopted by city council is hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance and shall be used in conjunction with the "Zoning District Sectional Maps" to determine floodplain or flood-prone areas as defined in chapter 9, article 4 of this ordinance. The noise overlay map, the aircraft accident potential zones map, and the original "Zoning District Sectional Maps" and "Flood Insurance Rate Map" shall be filed in the office of the zoning administrator for more detailed reference. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on said maps, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  With the exception of the flood zones, the Chesapeake Bay Preservation District, the Noise Contour District and the aircraft accident potential zones, the district boundary lines are intended to follow street, lot, or property lines, unless such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the "Zoning District Sectional Maps, 1960, as amended." 
(2)  Where such boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, and are not more than ten (10) feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries, unless specifically shown otherwise.  
Sec. 1-3. - Annexed territory. 
Any territory annexed to the City of Hampton, Virginia, shall be considered as being in the R-13 District until such time as the city council has adopted the zoning district for such territory, in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.  
Sec. 1-4. - Use of term "designee." 
Wherever the term director of the department of community development, zoning administrator, building code official, director of the department of public works, director of the department of economic development or director of the department of parks, recreation, and leisure services is used in the zoning ordinance including all chapters thereto, the term shall include their respective authorized designee or designees as applicable. 
(Ord. No. Z16-02 , 3-9-2016)  
Sec. 1-5. - Land not zoned. 
Any area, other than that dedicated for public streets or alleys, shown on the zoning district map or zoning district sectional maps as not being classified in any district, for all intents and purposes of this ordinance, shall be classified as being in the R-13 District. This regulation shall include all sub-marginal land, water areas, and federally-owned and state-owned land.  
Sec. 1-6. - Duties of zoning administrator. 
(1)  This ordinance shall be enforced by the zoning administrator, who shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the city council to administer and enforce the same, including the authority to make findings of fact, in connection with the administration, application and enforcement of the ordinance in specific cases, and in specific cases, with the concurrence of the city attorney conclusions of law regarding determinations of rights accruing under chapter 12, Nonconformities, herein and section 15.2-2311(C) of the Code of Virginia, and further including the ordering in writing or remedying of any condition found in violation of any authority, and the bringing of legal action to insure compliance, including injunction, abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding subject to appeal. Unless agreed to by the requesting party, any decision or determination of zoning matters shall be made within ninety (90) days of such request. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall be responsible for determining whether applications for building permits as required by the building code are in accord with the requirements of the zoning ordinance, and no building permit shall be issued without verification that plans conform to the applicable zoning regulations. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall verify that the plans, specifications and intended use of a lot/parcel of land conform to the applicable zoning regulations before a permit for a land disturbing activity or construction is issued. 
(4)  No person shall use or permit the use of any structure or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, enlarged, or moved, wholly or partly, in use or structure, until the zoning administrator has certified in writing that the use of the structure and/or premises and the placement, dimensions and physical attributes of the structure conform to all applicable zoning regulations. 
(5)  Upon written request and the payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per residential parcel, the zoning administrator shall issue a zoning certification letter indicating the zoning designation of a particular residential parcel or parcels of land as shown on the official zoning map. All other zoning certification letters shall require a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per parcel of land.  
Sec. 1-7. - Review process for building permits. 
Prior to the issuance of a building or zoning permit, an application therefor shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review. Unless waived by the zoning administrator, all such applications shall include: 
(1)  A current physical property survey of the intended development site that is produced and sealed by a professional land surveyor licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia; and 
(2)  A scaled two-dimensional plan or drawing of the intended development that accurately depicts: 
(a)  The lot/parcel boundaries; 
(b)  The location, shape and dimensions of all proposed property improvements in relation to all existing on-site property improvements; 
(c)  All adjacent and on-site easements, right-of-way, waterbodies/waterways and resource protection area features; 
(d)  The existing and intended use of each building or part of a building; 
(e)  The number of families the building is designed to accommodate; 
(f)  The location and the number of off-street parking and off-street loading spaces; and 
(g)  Such other information with regard to the lot/parcel and buildings/structures as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance.  
Sec. 1-8. - Site plan exception. 
A site plan that has been approved in accordance with chapter 35.1 of the city code may be accepted by the zoning administrator in lieu of compliance with section 1-7(a) and (b).  
Sec. 1-9. - Copy of plan. 
One (1) copy of the approved application materials shall be returned to the applicant upon issuance of the building or zoning permit.  
Sec. 1-10. - Review process for zoning permit applications. 
Any structure or development exempted from obtaining building permits shall be required to obtain a zoning permit. All applications for such zoning permits shall be accompanied by usable plat plans in duplicate, showing the actual shape and location on the lot of the building or buildings and accessory buildings existing, or to be erected or altered; the existing and intended use of each building or part of a building; such other information with regard to the lot as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance; and a nonrefundable application fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). Notwithstanding the foregoing, qualified arts and cultural businesses located in a designated arts and cultural district shall be eligible for a 100% reduction in the zoning permit application fee for all signs to be installed at the location of the qualified arts and cultural business under the terms and conditions set forth in the Hampton City Code. 
One (1) copy of such plat plan shall be returned to the applicant upon issuance of the zoning permit. 
No zoning permit shall be issued until any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the City of Hampton on the subject property have been paid, with the exception of applications sponsored by the City of Hampton. 
(Ord. No. Z15-24 , 12-9-2015)  
Sec. 1-11. - Misdemeanor, penalty. 
The owner or general agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of this ordinance has been committed or shall exist, the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist; the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building in which such violation has been committed or shall exist; or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part, or assists in any such violation, or who maintains any building or premises in which such violation shall exist, shall upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If the violation is uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with the zoning ordinance, within a time period established by the court. Failure to remove or abate a zoning violation within the specified time period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and any such failure during any succeeding ten-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each ten-day period punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), However, any conviction resulting from a violation of provisions regulating the number of unrelated persons in one-family residential dwellings shall be punishable by a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Failure to abate the violation within the specified time period shall be punishable by a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and any such failure during any succeeding ten-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each ten-day period punishable by a fine of up to seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00). However, no such fine shall accrue against an owner or managing agent of a one-family residential dwelling unit during the pendency of any legal action commenced by such owner or managing agent of such dwelling unit against a tenant to eliminate an overcrowding condition in accordance with chapter 13 or chapter 13.2 of title 55 of the Code of Virginia as applicable. A conviction resulting from a violation of provisions regulating the number of unrelated persons in a one-family residential dwelling shall not be punishable by a jail term.  
Sec. 1-12. - Inspection warrants, other actions to prevent violations. 
The zoning administrator or his agent may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction and if such sworn testimony establishes probable cause that a zoning ordinance violation has occurred, request that the magistrate or court grant the zoning administrator or his agent an inspection warrant to enable the zoning administrator or his agent to enter the subject dwelling for the purpose of determining whether violations of the zoning ordinance exist. The zoning administrator or his agent shall make a reasonable effort to obtain consent from the owner or tenant of the subject dwelling prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant. 
The zoning administrator or any other official of the City of Hampton may institute in the name of the city any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or conversion of use of any building or structure; or the unlawful use of land, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises.  
Sec. 1-13. - Notification of violations or orders. 
Any written notice of a zoning violation or a written order of the zoning administrator shall include (i) a statement informing the recipient that he may appeal the notice of a zoning violation or written order within thirty (30) days to the board of zoning appeals; (ii) the applicable appeal fee; (iii) and a reference to where additional information may be obtained regarding the filing of an appeal. Such written notice or order shall be final and unappealable if an appeal is not filed within thirty (30) days of the date of such written notice or order.  
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of ordinance. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO MANY OR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 1-15. - Prohibitions. 
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided: 
(1)  No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be used, designed, or intended to be used, for any purpose or in any manner other than is intended among uses hereinafter listed as permitted in the district in which such building or land is located. 
(2)  No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the district in which such building is located. 
(3)  No building shall be erected, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, lot area, and building location regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or open space is located. 
(4)  No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one (1) lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.  
Sec. 1-16. - Application of height limitations. 
The height limitations of this ordinance, except as provided in the Langley Flight Approach (LFA) Districts, shall not apply to any penthouse or roof structure for the use of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, nor shall it apply to spires and belfries in religious facilities, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, fire and parapet walls, skylights, steeples, flag poles, chimneys, smoke stacks, poles and utility towers, silos, or similar structures which may be erected above the height limit, provided that no penthouse or roof structure, or any space above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. The foregoing provisions shall not be interpreted to permit a fire or parapet wall to extend more than four (4) feet above the roof.  
Sec. 1-17. - Vision clearance of corner lots. 
On any comer lot there shall be no planting, structure, fences, shrubbery, or obstruction from vision more than three (3) feet higher than the curb level, within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of any two (2) curb lines.  
Sec. 1-18. - Fence and wall regulations. 
(1)  In any R, MD, or RT district, a fence, screen, or wall, or a hedge or thick growth of shrubs or trees may be located and maintained in required yards provided that the height of any such permitted feature not exceed six (6) feet in side or rear yards, and four (4) feet in front yards, or such lesser height as may be prescribed by law. This provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the erection of an open-mesh type fence enclosing any school or playground site, or landscape features such as trees, shrubs, flowers, or plants, provided they do not produce a hedge effect contrary to the provisions of this section. The use of electrified fences is prohibited except as set forth in section 24-40 of the Hampton City Code. 
(a)  The following uses shall be permitted a feature height of six (6) feet in front yards, provided all other requirements of the zoning ordinance are met: 
(i)  Communication tower, commercial; 
(ii)  Utility infrastructure/structure to house a government function; 
(iii)  Utility building/substation. 
(2)  In the BB-1, BB-2, BB-3, BB-4 and BB-5 districts, the following shall apply: 
(a)  In a front yard, the minimum height shall be twenty-four (24) inches and the maximum height shall be forty-two (42) inches. Pillars, posts, and gateways may be taller. The height of walls, fences, and hedges may be required to be shorter by other sections of city code for the purposes of increased visibility and safety, such as at street intersections, in such cases, the safety provisions take precedent. 
(b)  In a rear or side yard, the minimum height shall be thirty-six (36) inches and the maximum height shall be six (6) feet. 
(c)  In a rear yard on single-family lots adjacent to a rear alley, the minimum setback is five (5) feet. 
(d)  Permitted material and design shall be the following; 
(i)  Wood: picket fences with corner posts 
(ii)  Wrought iron: vertical, five-eighths-inch minimum dimension, four-inch to six-inch spacing 
(iii)  Brick 
(iv)  Stone 
(3)  A fence, screen, wall, hedge, or thick growth of shrubs or trees may be located in any zoning district on vacant property owned by the City of Hampton or a political subdivision of the commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. Z18-8 , 5-9-2018)  
Sec. 1-19. - Corner lots resubdivided. 
Corner lots that are hereafter resubdivided shall conform to the front yard requirements on the street which they originally fronted, in addition to the front yard requirements on the street which they face after resubdivision.  
Sec. 1-20. - Semi-detached dwellings and side yards. 
For the purpose of side yard regulations, semi-detached dwellings shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one (1) lot.  
Sec. 1-21. - Irregular front yard lines in residential districts. 
(1)  Where a uniform front yard line between two (2) intersecting streets does not exist, then the required front yard line shall be established by projecting a line between the two (2) nearest buildings on each side of the proposed building, and the proposed building shall not project beyond said line, provided, however, that the nearest existing building shall be situated on lots located not further than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the proposed building line. 
(2)  Where a lot is of such shape and size that its established building setback line forms an arc, then the minimum lot width may be measured along the chord of such arc and the building may be located at the setback point represented by the chord. Building setback lines greater than thirty (30) feet may be established, provided that the minimum lot width is maintained at the building setback line and all other requirements of the zoning ordinance are complied with. No building shall be located closer to the street than the established building setback line unless the required minimum lot width is maintained.  
Sec. 1-22. - Location of building line. 
On lots for which the comprehensive plan proposes a wider right-of-way for an abutting street than currently exists, the following modifications to the building line location shall apply: 
(1)  Where a yard or setback requirement exists, that requirement shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way line. 
(2)  Where there is no yard or setback requirement, the building line shall not be located nearer to the existing lot line than the proposed right-of-way line.  
Sec. 1-23. - Projections allowed in yards. 
(1)  Cornices, eaves, belt course, sills, canopies, or other similar architectural features (not including bay windows or vertical projections) may extend or project into a required side yard not more than eighteen (18) inches for each five (5) feet of width of such side yard, but not over three (3) feet in any case, nor nearer than three (3) feet to any side lot line, and may extend or project into a required front or rear yard not more than thirty-six (36) inches. Chimneys may project into a required front, side, or rear yard not more than eighteen (18) inches, provided the width of any side yard is not reduced to less than three (3) feet on one (1) side and eight (8) feet on the other. 
(2)  Exterior stairways and access ramps which do not extend above the level of the first finished floor of the building may extend or project into any required front, side, rear yard or court, provided they do not encroach within three (3) feet of any lot line. Any portion of exterior stairways and access ramps which extend above the level of the first finished floor of the building may extend or project into any required rear yard or court, provided they do not encroach to within three (3) feet of any lot line. 
(3)  Any enclosed porch, including screen porches, shall be considered as part of the main building. 
(4)  Terraces, platforms, or landing places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend or project into any required front, side, rear yard or court not more than eight (8) feet, provided they do not encroach to within three (3) feet of the side lot line. 
(5)  An unenclosed porch with a roof may project into the required front yard or the required side yard, adjacent to the right-of-way, on a corner lot a maximum of eight (8) feet but shall be no closer than ten (10) feet to the front property line or the side property line, as applicable. 
(6)  On one-family residential, duplex, and fee simple townhouse lots, mechanical equipment, including but not limited to heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment and generators, may encroach into the side and rear yard, but shall not encroach more than eight (8) feet and shall be no closer than three (3) feet to the property line. No such encroachment may occur in a yard adjacent to a public street. 
(Ord. No. Z18-01 , 1-10-2018; Ord. No. Z19-14 , 4-10-2019)  
Sec. 1-24. - Accessory buildings or structures. 
(1)  Accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted as described in each zoning district, except for those districts listed in subsections 1-24(2) and 1-24(3) below. 
(2)  In any One- or Two-Family Residential ('R') District, the R-M District, the LFA-5 District, and on any fee-simple lot in the MD-4 District, accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted in accordance with all height and setback requirements for primary structures within the zoning district where constructed except as described below: 
(a)  When located in the rear yard. 
(i)  Standard height and setback regulations. Accessory buildings or structures may be located as near as five (5) feet from the rear lot line and as near as three (3) feet to the side lot line provided such building or structure does not exceed one and one-half (1½) stories and sixteen (16) feet in height. 
(ii)  Increased height and setback regulations. Accessory buildings or structures may be constructed to a height of twenty-five (25) feet provided they are not nearer than fifteen (15) feet to any side or rear lot line and not nearer than fifteen (15) feet to the primary structure. In no case shall they have any exterior stairways. 
(b)  When located on a corner lot. No accessory building on a corner lot shall be erected nearer to the street than the requirements herein contained for side yards of corner lots, except an accessory building or structure erected on a corner lot which abuts any interior lot on the side street, then the setback requirements shall not be less than the front yard requirements of the main buildings on the interior lots. 
(3)  In any One- or Two-Family Residential ('R') District, the R-M District, the LFA-5 District, and on any fee-simple lot in any MD-1, MD-2, MD-3, or MD-4 District, accessory buildings or structures shall not occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the rear yard area.  
Sec. 1-25. - Lighting of parking and other areas and signs. 
When provided, lighting of parking areas or business, residential, or manufacturing or storage areas or structures, and of signs, billboards or poster panels, shall be so designed and arranged as to reflect all light away from all public ways or streets.  
Sec. 1-26. - Substandard lots. 
A substandard lot may be developed for residential use provided that it complies with all current development criteria as set forth in the zoning ordinance, city code, and all other applicable laws.  
Sec. 1-27. - Through lots and waterfront lots. 
In any One- or Two-Family Residential (R) District, the R-M District, or any Multifamily Residential (MD) District, through lots or waterfront lots shall have a building setback on each street or waterfront as required for front yards. This shall not be interpreted to restrict the location of private piers, or docks on the waterfront side of such a lot.  
Sec. 1-28. - Garage and yard sales. 
Garage and yard sales shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  Individual permits: 
(a)  The permit must be secured from the zoning administrator or his designee and accompanied by a non-refundable fee of five dollars ($5.00); 
(b)  No more than three (3) garage or yard sales shall be permitted during a calendar year at any one (1) location. If, however, the property owner and/or lessee of all the residents at that location change during the calendar year, the new residents may have three (3) garage or yard sales during the remainder of the calendar year; 
(c)  The garage/yard sale shall be limited to a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days; 
(d)  The permit shall be conspicuously displayed upon the premises during the time of the sale; and 
(e)  The permit may be issued to single-family, duplex, and townhouse dwelling residential structures regardless of the underlying zoning of the location. 
(2)  Community permits: 
(a)  The permit must be secured from the zoning administrator or his designee accompanied by a non-refundable fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) to cover processing and enforcement and a complete list of participants' names, addresses and signatures which shall be submitted to the zoning administrator's office or his designee; 
(b)  No more than three (3) garage or yard sales shall be permitted during a calendar year; 
(c)  The garage/yard sale shall be limited to a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days; 
(d)  The permit shall be conspicuously displayed upon the premises during the time of the sale; and 
(e)  The permit shall be issued only to a neighborhood group/association defined as a group of residents or property owners who advocate or organize activities within a neighborhood which may have elected leaders and voluntary dues. 
Religious facilities are exempt from the provisions of this section.  
Sec. 1-29. - Renewable energy production systems. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards and procedures by which the installation and operation of "renewable energy production systems" shall be regulated within the City of Hampton, in order to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of such systems. Unless otherwise defined in this section specific terms shall be defined as set forth in chapter 2 of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Applicability. 
(a)  The regulation set forth in this section shall govern the installation and siting of renewable energy production systems used to generate electricity for onsite consumption. Renewable energy production systems may be connected to the utility grid pursuant to Code of Virginia § 56-594 governing Virginia net metering laws, 
(b)  Renewable energy production systems shall comply with the regulations set forth in Virginia Administrative Code §§ 20VAC5-315-10 through 20VAC5-315-80. The systems may serve as an independent source of energy or serve in a hybrid system, using complementary systems such as a small wind energy conversion system and solar energy producing system. 
(c)  Renewable energy production systems shall not exceed a rated capacity of twenty (20) kW for residential use and twenty-five (25) kW for commercial use. 
(3)  Application for "small wind energy conversion systems" ("SWECS"). 
(a)  One (1) SWECS per lot shall be permitted in all zoning districts, as an accessory structure, subject to issuance of a use permit, except in the Langley Flight Approach (LFA) Districts where they shall be prohibited. 
(b)  In addition to what is required by section 1-7 of the zoning ordinance, the following shall be provided by the applicant for review and approval by the community development department: 
(i)  Survey of the property showing the proposed location of the SWECS on the property and all applicable setbacks. 
(ii)  Scaled elevation drawings of the proposed system showing the total height of the structure, including the tower plus the length of the rotor blade at its vertical location, colors and specifications. 
(iii)  Certification from a licensed professional engineer or certified installer that the support structure of the system will have the structural integrity to carry the weight and wind loads of the small wind energy system. 
(iv)  The proposed type of wind energy system to be constructed, including the manufacturer and model, product specifications including maximum noise output (measured in decibels), total rated generated capacity, dimensions, rotor diameter, and a description of ancillary functions. 
(c)  The applicant must provide evidence in writing that the provider of electric utility service to the site has been informed of the applicant's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned electricity generator, unless the applicant intends, and so states on the application, that the system will not be connected to the electricity grid. 
(4)  Standards for SWECS. All SWECS must comply with the following requirements. 
(a)  Height. 
(i)  Under no circumstances shall a freestanding SWECS exceed seventy (70) feet in height. 
(ii)  Building mounted SWECS shall be limited to a height of ten (10) feet above the height of the building. Building height shall be determined as defined in chapter 2 of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Setbacks. 
(i)  The minimum setback for a SWECS from a property line, public right-of-way, or public overhead utility line must be a distance which is at least equal to the total height of the SWECS. Placement in the front yard is prohibited. 
(ii)  Properties within the Chesapeake Bay Preservation District are subject to article II of chapter 9 of the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Signs/safety. 
(i)  Other than safety and warning signs, no signage, flags, streamers, or decorative items shall be attached or affixed to any component of the system except the nacelle, which may have lettering that exhibits the manufacturer's identification. 
(ii)  Lighting is prohibited unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA"). 
(iii)  SWECS shall be equipped with both a manual and automatic braking device capable of stopping the system in high winds or must be designed so that the rotational speed of the rotor blade does not exceed the design limits of the rotor. 
(iv)  To prevent unauthorized access, each tower-mounted SWECS shall not be climbable up to twelve (12) feet above ground. 
(d)  Noise. When in operation SWECS shall not exceed sixty (60) dB(A). 
(e)  Color. Unless otherwise required by the FAA, all portions of a wind energy system shall be of nonreflective white, black, galvanized steel, aluminum or other matte-finish color designed to blend with the surrounding environment; provided, however, that blades may be painted black to facilitate deicing. 
(f)  Maintenance. SWECS must be kept and maintained in good repair and condition at all times and shall not pose a potential safety hazard. 
(g)  Inspection. The city shall have the right upon approving SWECS to inspect the premises on which the wind energy system is located at all reasonable times with permission of the property owner, 
(5)  Application for solar energy equipment. 
(a)  Solar energy equipment shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts. 
(b)  For freestanding solar energy equipment, a survey of the property showing the location of the structure on the property and all applicable setbacks will be required. 
(6)  Standards for solar energy equipment. 
(a)  Height. 
(i)  Solar panels may be located on any roof, irrespective of its relationship to the underlying district height limit, up to five (5) feet above the roof surface to adequately access solar energy. 
(ii)  Freestanding solar energy equipment shall be limited to a height of sixteen (16) feet. 
(b)  Setbacks. Freestanding solar energy equipment shall have a minimum rear yard and side yard setback of fifteen (15) feet. Placement in the front yard is prohibited. 
(7)  Nuisance conditions prohibited. 
(a)  All SWECS and solar energy equipment must be maintained in good working order by the property owner. 
(b)  Dilapidated or deteriorated SWECS and solar energy systems will be deemed nuisance structures.  
Sec. 1-30. - General green area requirements. 
(1)  A minimum of ten (10) percent of the land area of the lot shall be designated as green area for trees, shrubs, and turf for all properties except for those zoned R-LL, RT-1, MD-1, MD-2, MD- 18 3, MD-4, P0-1, P0-2, DT-1, DT-2, DT-3, HRC-1, HRC-2, HRC-3, BB-1, BB-2, 19 BB-3, BB-4, BB-5, FM-1, FM-2, FM-3, FM-4, PH-1, PH-2, O-CBP and O-CC, and all one-family, two-family and duplex dwellings. 
(2)  The following criteria shall be met in all districts: 
(a)  No accessory uses or structures except utilities and stormwater management facilities shall be located in a green area. 
(b)  In any parking area, including drive aisles and drive-throughs regardless of size, a minimum ten (10) foot green area shall be provided immediately adjacent to any existing or future public right-of-way. 
(3)  In all districts, development sites less than two (2) acres shall comply with the following: 
(a)  On sites which front upon only one (1) public street, a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the required green shall be located within the front yard. 
(b)  On sites which front upon two (2) public streets or proposed rights-of-way, a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the required green area shall be distributed within the yard areas adjacent to the existing or proposed public rights-of-way; no such area shall contain less than thirty (30) percent of the requirement, and no less than twenty (20) percent of the required green area shall be located in each yard fronting upon existing or proposed public rights-of-way. 
(4)  In all districts, development sites of two (2) or more acres shall comply with the following: 
(a)  On sites which front upon only one (1) public street, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the required green area shall be located within the front yard. 
(b)  On sites which front upon two (2) public streets or proposed rights-of-way, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the required green area and landscaping shall be distributed within the yard areas adjacent to existing or proposed public rights-of-way; no such area shall contain less than twenty (20) percent of the requirement, and no less than ten (10) percent of the required green area shall be located in each yard fronting upon existing or proposed public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Green areas located within any building shall not be credited toward meeting the total green area requirement. 
(6)  Green areas interior to the perimeter of any structure that may serve as a court-yard may be credited toward meeting the total green area requirement. 
(7)  Areas designated as green areas upon the approved site plan, or subdivision plat that are utilized for storage or the display of products shall be considered in violation of the city zoning ordinance. 
(8)  Landscaping within green areas shall comply with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" or as otherwise proffered or conditioned pursuant to applicable provisions of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. Z15-17 , 10-14-2015; Ord. No. Z16-04 , 4-13-2016; Ord. No. Z19-04 , 1-9-2019)  
Sec. 1-31. - Major recreational equipment, parking and storage requirements. 
The parking or storage of major recreational equipment including, but not limited to, travel trailers, utility trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats and boat trailers. amphibious houseboats, or similar equipment normally used for recreational purposes shall be permitted as an accessory use in all residential districts, subject, however, to the following regulations and requirements. 
(1)  Such major recreational equipment shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in length, eight (8) feet in width, and ten (10) feet in height, exclusive of masts, antennas, vent stacks, windshields, or other accessories. 
(2)  Such major recreational equipment shall not be used for living, sleeping, housekeeping, or business purposes, nor shall such major recreational equipment be connected to any utility service, except for temporary periods solely for replenishing supplies, or for the servicing or repair of equipment. 
(3)  Such major recreational equipment shall not be parked or stored in a manner which infringes upon the setback requirements for accessory buildings in the residential district in which the lot is located. 
(4)  Such major recreational equipment shall not be parked or stored in the front yard in any residential district, except that: 
(a)  Such major recreational equipment may be parked in such front yard for a period not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours, for the sole purpose of loading or unloading; 
(b)  In the event such major recreational equipment cannot physically be placed within an enclosed garage, or cannot physically be placed in the side or rear yard of a residence without encroaching upon the lands of another, without violating the setback requirements for accessory buildings in the residential district, or without damage to structures or trees, then one (1) such major recreational equipment, or a combination thereof designed to be used and operated as one (1) unit, may be parked or stored on an improved driveway at a point furthermost from the public street right-of-way, not resulting in physical damage to structures or trees; 
(c)  A camper or coach, when loaded upon and entirely supported by, or when structurally a part of, a pickup truck or motor vehicle not exceeding the rated weight of three-fourths (¾) ton which is in operative condition, shall be deemed a part of the motor vehicle and not major recreational equipment, so long as such camper or coach is entirely supported by, or remains structurally a part of, such pickup truck or motor vehicle. 
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit commercial trailers from loading and unloading in a residential district, or to prohibit the temporary use of a trailer, on site, by a contractor, while construction is in progress.  
Sec. 1-32. - Commercial vehicle parking in residential districts. 
(1)  The parking of commercial vehicles on a lot or any adjacent street in any residential district is prohibited, except under the following provisions: 
(a)  One (1) commercial vehicle, not exceeding a height of six (6) feet, four (4) inches, nor a measurement, from the center of the front axle to the center of the rear axle of that vehicle or any attached equipment, of eleven (11) feet, six (6) inches, may be parked on a residential lot or adjacent street, provided said lot is occupied by the person responsible for operating the vehicle. 
(b)  One (1) commercial vehicle, not exceeding a height of six (6) feet, four (4) inches, with a measurement, from the center of the front axle to the center of the rear axle of that vehicle or any attached equipment, between eleven (11) feet, six (6) inches and fifteen (15) feet, seven (7) inches, may be parked on a residential lot. provided it is kept in a garage or behind the rearmost portion of the building on the lot, and further provided said lot is occupied by the person responsible for operating the vehicle. 
(c)  In no case shall a commercial vehicle with a height exceeding six (6) feet, four (4) inches or a measurement, from the center of the front axle to the center of the rear axle of that vehicle or any attached equipment, exceeding fifteen (15) feet, seven (7) inches be permitted to park in any residential property or adjacent street. 
(d)  In no case shall more than one (1) commercial vehicle be parked on any residential lot or adjacent street, except that one (1) specifically exempted commercial vehicle may also be parked on the same lot or adjacent street. 
(2)  The parking of school buses and buses belonging to religious facilities shall be permitted on any property under the control of the school or religious facility owning the bus, regardless of the zoning of such property. 
(3)  The parking of commercial vehicles, except for specifically exempted vehicles, in multi-family developments shall require the permission of the management and/or homeowners' association, and shall not occur in parking spaces required by chapter 11 of this ordinance. Such parking shall be limited to those vehicles permitted in subsection (1)(a) above.  
Sec. 1-33. - Conversion chart for changes to names of certain zoning districts. 
Former name 	New name 
enacted June 1, 2015 
MD-T 	MD-1 
M-4A 	LFA-1 
M-4B 	LFA-2 
M-5A 	LFA-3 
M-5B 	LFA-4 
M-5C 	LFA-5 
M-5D 	LFA-6 
SPI-BBD-SFR 	BB-1 
SPI-BBD-MR 	BB-2 
SPI-BBD-OMU 	BB-3 
SPI-BBD-RMU 	BB-4 
SPI-BBD-S 	BB-5 
SPI-HRC 	HRC-1 
SPI-HRCNC 	HRC-2 
SPI-HRCW 	HRC-3 
SPI-OHB 	DT-1 
SPI-OHW 	DT-2 
SPI-OHR 	DT-3 
SPI-PL 	PO-1 
SPI-B 	PO-2 
SPI-AA 	O-AICUZ 
SPI-CBPD 	O-CBP 
SPI-CC 	O-CC 
SPI-FZD 	O-FZ 
SPI-IH 	O-IH 
SPI-MVC 	O-MVC 
SPI-PD 	O-HP 
  
Chapter 2 - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Rules of construction. 
For the purpose of this ordinance certain terms and words are herein defined as follows: 
(1)  Words in the present tense include the future; 
(2)  Words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number; 
(3)  The words "shall" and "should" are mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is discretionary; 
(4)  The word "lot" includes the word "plot"; 
(5)  The word "land" includes the words "marsh" and "water"; 
(6)  The word "person" shall be held to mean an individual, a firm, a trust, a partnership, a corporation or association; 
(7)  Masculine words include the feminine; 
(8)  In instances where a specific individual is given authority or responsibility, that authority or responsibility may fall to his designee; and 
(9)  Definitions in this chapter apply to the entire ordinance unless stated otherwise herein.  
Sec. 2-2. - Definitions. 
Abutting. Sharing one (1) or more common boundaries or points; contiguous. 
Accessory building or structure. A subordinate building or structure, clearly incidental, related to, and customarily associated with, the principal building or structure, and located on the same lot as the principal structure. Where any part of the accessory building or structure is attached to the principal building or structure, such accessory building or structure shall be counted as part of the principal building or structure. This term includes temporary family health care structures as provided in Code of Virginia § 15.2-2292.1. 
Accessory dwelling. A second dwelling unit on a residential lot that has a primary dwelling unit. 
Accessory use. A subordinate use, clearly incidental, related to, and customarily associated with the principal use of land, and located on the same lot as the principal use. This term includes temporary family health care use as provided in the Code of Virginia § 15.2-2292.1. 
Active recreation area. That portion of the green area provided in townhouse, multiple dwelling, or mixed-use developments that is intended to, and can support physical recreation activities or facilities. 
Adjacent. Sharing a common boundary or separated by a right-of-way or water body. 
Adult establishment. Any establishment providing entertainment products or services, such as, but not limited to books and films, and which is only open to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older, and whose products or services are harmful to juveniles. For the purposes of this ordinance, "harmful to juveniles" and its defining terms shall be as defined in title 18.2, chapters, article 6 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Alley. Public or private minor way used primarily for vehicular access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
Alteration. Any act or process that changes one (1) or more of the interior or exterior architectural features of a structure. 
Alternative parking plan. A proposal by an applicant to comply with the intent of chapter 11 of the zoning ordinance, through some means other than strict compliance with the standards of that section. 
Amusement center. Any establishment whose principal source of income is derived from access to coin-operated amusement machines. 
Arterial street. Public rights-of-way used primarily for fast or high volume traffic; for efficient, safe and direct connection to, and separation of, neighborhoods; for circulation to destinations outside the residential area. 
Balcony. A platform projecting from the wall of an upper story, supported by brackets, columns or cantilevered out, with or without a roof, and enclosed by a railing or balustrade, with an entrance from the building. 
Banquet hall. A facility constructed with or without a kitchen, leased for the purpose of hosting private social events not open to the general public, with or without live entertainment, where food and/or drink may be consumed on site. 
Bed and breakfast 1. A building or portion thereof containing not more than nine (9) sleeping rooms, in which room and board or room are offered to transient residents. 
Bed and Breakfast 2. A building or portion thereof containing not more than nine (9) sleeping rooms, in which room and board or room are offered to transient residents, and in which events may be held. 
Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
Big box retail. A business established and engaged primarily in retail activities and located in a standalone building of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in size or larger, where the primary user occupies at least ninety (90) percent of that square footage. 
Boarding house. A building or premises, or portion thereof, where lodging and meals are offered for compensation to five (5) or more nontransient residents. 
Boathouse. An accessory structure constructed either wholly or partially over a body of water and designed exclusively for the storage and/or the covering of recreational watercraft. 
Body piercing establishment. An establishment where the act of penetrating skin to make a hole, mark, scar, generally permanent in nature is conducted, except that the use of a mechanized, pre-sterilized piercing system that penetrates the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear, or both, is not body piercing. 
Boundary line adjustment. The process where the location of a zoning district boundary, or other demarcation is shifted on the official zoning district map by the zoning administrator. 
Brewery/distillery. A facility for the production and packaging of alcoholic beverages for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on- or off-premises, with production capacity of more than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels per year for breweries or twenty thousand (20,000) gallons per year for distilleries. 
Buffer area. An area of natural or established vegetation managed to protect other components of a resource protection area and state waters from significant degradation due to land disturbances. 
Buildable acreage. That portion of the total acreage of a lot or property (specifically excluding tidal wetlands and the area of existing ponds, lakes, rivers, streams or other impounded water bodies) that can adequately support physical improvements, used to determine the maximum number of dwelling units in townhouse, multiple dwelling and mixed-used developments. 
Building. A structure having a roof supported by column or walls for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, or movable personal property. When separated by fire walls from the ground up without openings, each portion of such building shall be deemed a separate building. 
Building addition. Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building either horizontally or vertically, connected by a common wall. Building elevation. The external faces of a building; also referred to as a facade. 
Building front. The wall of a building most nearly parallel with and adjacent to the front property line. 
Building height. The vertical distance, measured from the final surveyed grade at the time of building permit issuance to (a) the highest point of the roof surface, if a flat roof; (b) to the deck line of a mansard roof; and (c) to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, as diagrammed below. If built on a terrace, the allowable building height may be increased by the height of the terrace, but this increase shall not exceed five (5) feet For principal structures subject to the provisions of Chapter 9, Article IV, the vertical distance shall be measured from the design flood elevation. 
 
Business center/shopping center. 
A collection of two (2) or more buildings connected to each other by means of common walls; 
A single building containing two (2) or more separate establishments or business spaces; 
Two (2) or more establishments sharing parking; 
Two (2) or more establishments under the same management or association for the purpose of enforcing reciprocal agreements controlling management or parking; or 
Two (2) or more establishments all structurally designed in an integrated fashion around or along the sides of a promenade, walkway, concourse or courtyard. 
Carnival. An itinerant group of persons and equipment primarily in the business of furnishing entertainment, in the combined form of gaming devices, side shows, and riding devices, operated independent of any local facility, commercial establishment, or non-profit organization. Chesapeake Bay Review Committee. The decision making body responsible for hearing requests for relief to the O-CBP regulations and deciding O-CBP boundary disputes; composed of the director of the department of community development, the zoning administrator, the director of public works, the building official, and the chair of the wetlands board or his designee. 
Clearing. Any activity that removes the vegetative ground cover, including but not limited to the removal of root mat or topsoil. 
Coin-operated amusement machine. Any machine, activated by insertion of a coin or token, providing active or passive recreation, amusement, or entertainment, access to which is not legally restricted on the basis of age; except that this term shall not include jukeboxes, vending machines or coin-operated pool tables in a pool hall. 
Coliseum Central Design Review Committee (CCDRC). A committee composed of three (3) city representatives chosen by the director of the department of community development and three (3) community representatives (with one (1) alternate) chosen by the Coliseum Central Business Improvement District Board, or its successor; the community representatives do not have to be members of the board. 
Collector street. Right-of-way carrying traffic from minor collector streets and residential streets to the major system of arterial streets. 
Commercial building-mounted antenna. Any structure affixed to a building that supports broadcast or receiving equipment of any frequency or electromagnetic wave, or any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves, for use by any commercial (for profit) enterprise. For the purpose of this ordinance, antenna used to support two-way radio communication between a main commercial user and vehicles used in the operation of that use and antenna used to support public utility equipment are not considered commercial building-mounted antenna. 
Commercial communication tower. Any structure erected on a lot or attached to another structure that supports broadcast or receiving equipment of any frequency or electromagnetic wave, or any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves, for use by any commercial enterprise. 
Commercial garage. Any structure owned and operated by a private entity, but open to the public, where vehicles are parked for a fee. This shall not be interpreted to apply to garages built and used solely in conjunction with hotels. 
Commercial parking lot. Any parcel owned and operated by a private entity, but open to the public, where vehicles are parked for a fee. 
Commercial vehicle. 
Any vehicle used in the conduct of a business or government function with such identification thereon; 
Any vehicle registered as a commercial or government vehicle, such as step vans, tow trucks, pickup trucks, etc., but not including automobiles, station wagons, and buses used for the transportation of students (public and private schools); or 
Any vehicle, regardless of use, identification or registration, with a registered gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or more. 
Communication tower height. The distance measured from the highest point of any tower to the ground directly beneath that highest point; except, that if a noncommercial tower is attached to a building, the height shall be measured to the floor of the first floor level of the building, or if a noncommercial tower is attached to the roof of a building, the height shall be measured from the roof to the highest point of the tower. 
Community garden. The cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables, and/or ornamental plants by more than one (1) person for noncommercial purposes. 
Comprehensive plan. A document and all related materials embodying a coordinated plan that has been prepared by the planning commission and adopted by the city council for the physical development of the city, or any master plans, being portions of the comprehensive plan, prepared for the physical development of the city that designate, among other things, plans and programs to encourage the most appropriate use of land, lessen congestion throughout the city, and safeguard and promote the interests of public health, welfare and safety. 
Conceptual plan. A sketch, drawing or other representation of a plan for development that carries no vested rights or obligations on any party. 
Conditional use. A use that requires special, unusual, or extraordinary but reasonable limitations tailored to the use on a specific site in order to mitigate adverse impacts to public health, safety and welfare on surrounding properties and protect the public interest and integrity of the comprehensive plan. 
Contiguous. Sharing one (1) or more common boundaries or points; abutting. 
Continuing care retirement community. A development that may include any combination of independent residential units, assisted living units, and nursing home rooms, for residents fifty-five (55) or older or disabled individuals. 
Control measure. Any best management practice or stormwater facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
Copy. Any letter, symbol, or combination of these, located on the face of a sign that can be seen from the street or right-of-way. 
Corner lot. A lot abutting on two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
Dance hall. Any place open to the general public, where dancing is permitted, to which an admission fee is charged, or for which compensation in any manner is received either directly or indirectly by cover charge or otherwise, or where refreshment or food or any form of merchandise are sold before, during, or after dancing; provided, however, that a restaurant licensed under section 4.1-210 of the Code of Virginia, to serve food and beverages and having a dance floor with an area not exceeding ten (10) percent of the total floor area of the establishment, shall not be considered a dance hall. Private clubs are excluded from this definition provided attendance at a dance is limited to bona fide members of such club and bona fide guests of such members; however, if tickets to dances held by or at a private club are sold or given to the general public, then the club shall be classified as a dance hall. 
Day care. Any dwelling or facility receiving children or adults for care limited to less than twenty-four (24) hours per day per client. Three (3) types shall be established based on the number of clients, exclusive of any children or adults living in a dwelling: 
Day Care 1, Family (FDC1) —No more than four (4) clients in an occupied dwelling, in which one of the clients or the provider resides; 
Day Care 2, Family (FDC2) —Five (5) to twelve (12) clients in an occupied, detached, one or two-family residence or duplex dwelling in which one of the clients or the provider resides; 
Day Care, Commercial (CDC) —Any number of clients in any facility other than the residence of a client or provider. 
Day spa. A business, employing professionally-licensed therapists, which provides a variety of services for the purpose of improving health, beauty and relaxation through personal care treatments including, but not limited to, therapeutic massages and body or facial treatments. 
Demountable prefabricated building. A building erected in panel sections that can be dismantled and re-erected in sections. 
Demolition. Any act or process that destroys, in whole or in part, structures or objects. 
Design guidelines. 
For the purposes of O-HP, the set of appropriate activities, adopted by the preservation district review board, that will preserve the historic and architectural character of the property within the boundaries of the O-HP; or 
For all other purposes, a set of discretionary statements that guide development to achieve a desired level of quality for the physical environment, whether developed for a specific zoning district or as part of a specific zoning action. 
Detention facility. Any governmental facility which houses persons who have been arrested, charged or convicted of a crime, including but not limited to jails and juvenile detention facilities, but not including prisons or correctional facilities operated by state or federal government. 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, structures, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operation, or any land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation, or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
Dormitory. A structure devoted to housing of regularly enrolled students of a college or university that contains lodging units or sleeping rooms and may contain a common kitchen and dining facility for the occupants, operated by an agent of the affiliated college or university. 
Downtown. The area including the Central Business District and adjacent residential areas composing the DT Districts. 
Duplex unit. One (1) of the two (2) dwelling units contained in a duplex dwelling. 
Duplex dwelling. A type of multi-family structure containing two (2) dwelling units attached by a common vertical fire-resistant wall, with each unit on a separate fee-simple lot. 
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof designated or used exclusively for residential purposes. 
Dwelling area. The gross heated floor area of a dwelling unit, exclusive of any hallways between units. 
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
Encroachment. Any improvement that intrudes into a required setback, buffer area, or protected open space. 
Environmental site assessment. A physical survey of the site or parcel that is prepared and certified as complete and accurate by a licensed professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed to do business in the state of Virginia; drawn at a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch on a print not greater than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches to clearly delineate with labels the components of the RPA, RMA, IDA and buffer area on and adjacent to the development site and the geographic extent and classification of all wetland areas on and contiguous to the site or parcel; and shall specifically include the boundaries of the following RPA features: (i) tidal wetlands, verified by field survey; (ii) non-tidal wetlands connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or water bodies with perennial flow; (iii) tidal shores; and (iv) a buffer area as set forth in chapter 9, article II of the city zoning ordinance. The geographic extent and classification of wetland areas shall be the result of a recent physical survey, and in the case of non-tidal wetlands, a field delineation that is consistent with the procedures specified in the "Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, 1987, as amended". 
Event. Any announced gathering of people, including but not limited to weddings, reunions, receptions, and birthday parties. 
Extended stay hotel. A facility offering lodging accommodations to the general public for compensation having ten (10) or more sleeping rooms all containing kitchen facilities, a lobby, clerk's desk or counter for guest registers and records, and which may also include additional accessory services such as meeting or restaurant space. For the purpose of this definition, "kitchen facilities" shall include a sink separate from the bathroom sink, a range or cooktop, and a refrigerator. 
Facade. The outside face of a building; building elevation. 
Facade zone. A fixed depth along a property line abutting a right-of-way or a setback line, whichever is required by the applicable zoning district, within which a portion of the building facade must be located. 
Family. 
An individual living alone in a dwelling unit; or 
Any of the following groups of persons living together and sharing living areas in a single dwelling unit: 
Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or approved foster care; 
A group of not more than four (4) persons (including servants) who need not be related by blood, marriage, adoption or approved foster care; 
Day Care 1; 
Group Home 1; or 
A group of not more than two (2) adults who need not be related by blood or marriage, and the children of each of the two (2) adults. 
Fee-simple lot. A lot created within the project property lines of a townhouse or multiple dwelling development, or manufactured/mobile home subdivision for individual ownership, or any lot of record. 
Flag lot. A lot connected to a public right-of-way by a narrow strip of land (the "flagpole" or "panhandle") that does not meet the required minimum frontage standards. 
Flammable liquids. Any liquid having a flash point below two hundred (200) degrees F and having a vapor pressure not exceeding forty (40) pounds per square inch (absolute). (Further data on flammable liquids can be found in the Fire Prevention Ordinance Code.) 
Flea market. An area for the open air retail sales of new and/or used merchandise, where space is provided to individual vendors. 
Front yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the nearest building line and the front lot line or proposed right-of-way line. 
Garage or yard sale. The on-site sale of tangible personal property belonging to the owner or occupant of such property. 
Gas station. Any structure, premises, enclosure, equipment, or space used for the dispensing or sale of any gasoline or oils, or other type fuels for motor vehicles. 
Green area. That space on the same lot as the principal building or buildings which is either landscaped in accordance with the City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines if applicable, planted with grass, planted with ornamental vegetation, or developed and maintained for recreational purposes, but which excludes that portion of the lot which is utilized for off-street parking purposes. 
Green design. An integrated framework of design, construction and operational practices that encompassed the environmental, economic and social impacts of buildings; green building practices recognize the interdependence of the natural and built environments and seek to minimize the use of energy, water and other natural resources and provide a healthy, productive indoor environment. 
Gross density. The allowable number of dwelling units per gross acre of land proposed for development. 
Group home. A residential facility in which individuals with mental illness, intellectual disability, or developmental disabilities reside, with one (1) or more resident or nonresident staff persons, as residential occupancy by a single family licensed by the Virginia Department of Behavioral Health and Developmental Services. For the purposes of this subsection, mental illness and developmental disability shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in the Virginia Code, as amended. 
This term also includes a residential facility in which aged, infirm or disabled persons reside, with one (1) or more resident counselors or other staff persons, as residential occupancy by a single family licensed by the Virginia Department of Social Services. 
Two (2) categories shall be established based on the number of residents and exclusive of resident counselors: 
Group Home 1 (GH1) —No more than eight (8) residents; 
Group Home 2 (GH2) —Nine (9) or more residents. 
Halfway house. Any residential facility for individuals suffering from drug or alcohol abuse while they are undergoing rehabilitative treatment; such treatment shall not include detoxification; or 
Any residential facility, operated or used by the Virginia Department of Corrections or the Federal Bureau of Prisons for the temporary care of adults on probation or parole. 
Heliport. Landing and take-off facility for a helicopter that may have fueling facilities. 
Home occupation. Any occupation or activity which is clearly incidental and secondary to use of the premises as a dwelling and which is carried on wholly or in part within a main building or accessory building by a member of the family who resides on the premises. The term expressly excludes (i) auto repair or service operations for vehicles other than the owner/occupant's personal vehicle(s); (ii) motor vehicle display for purposes of sale or lease other than the owner/occupant's personal vehicle; (iii) animal boarding facilities; (iv) machine shop/metal working; and (v) body piercing and/or tattooing operations. 
Homeowners' association. A private non-profit association organized by the developer of a development in which individual owners share common interest in open space and/or facilities and are in charge of preserving, managing and maintaining the common property, and enforces improvements or other certain covenants and restrictions; also known as a property owners' association. 
Hospital. A facility licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia which provides medical care, testing, or treatment primarily on an inpatient basis for stays in excess of twenty-four (24) hours, but which may also provide outpatient treatment. 
Hotel. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public for compensation and having ten (10) or more sleeping rooms, that may also have additional accessory services, such as meeting rooms, restaurants, and recreational activities. For the purpose of this definition, the term "transient" shall mean occupancy for periods of not more than thirty (30) days unless permitted by Chapter 16.1 of the City Code. 
Housekeeping unit. A dwelling unit organized as a single entity in which residents share common kitchen facilities and have access to all parts of the dwelling unit. 
Impervious surface. A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, buildings, streets, parking areas, and any concrete, asphalt or compacted gravel surface. 
Infill lot. Platted vacant lots as of January 12, 2000, in residential zoning districts. 
Intensely developed area (IDA). A portion of the O-CBP District, delineated within the resource protection area on the Chesapeake Bay Preservation District map, where development is concentrated and little of the natural environment remains. 
Interconnected wind energy system. A wind energy system which is electrically connected to the local electrical power utility system and can provide power to the local electrical power utility system. 
Interior lot. A lot other than a corner lot. 
Juvenile residence. A residential facility for juveniles which houses five (5) or more residents, but which does not include orphanages, shelters, detention facilities, group homes or halfway houses, as defined in this ordinance. 
Kennel. The breeding, training, renting, selling and/or boarding of more than two (2) dogs or two (2) cats over the age of four (4) months. 
Learning/tutoring center. A commercial establishment offering educational counseling and tutoring for a fee. 
Live entertainment. Any artistic, musical or theatrical performance, including but not limited to, karaoke, open-microphone, live vocal or instrumental music, recorded music with a disc jockey (DJ), play, stand-up comedy, dance act, magic, poetry reading, reenactment, cabaret, or any combination thereof, performed by one (1) or more persons, whether or not they are compensated for the performance, in a privately owned premises that is open to the public, whether or not admission is charged. 
Live/work dwelling. A type of mixed-use building where the first floor is used for nonresidential activity and the upper floor(s) are used for residential activity, and the two (2) uses have separate entrances; the resident of the upper floor need not be the operator of the nonresidential use below. 
Loading space. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or material that has access to a street, alley, or other appropriate means of ingress and egress. 
Lot. A parcel of land recorded in a deed or on a plat of record, and fronting on and having access to a public right-of-way, unless otherwise allowed by this ordinance; a lot may include parts of, or be a combination of abutting lots; for the purposes of townhouse and multiple dwelling development, the lot shall be that land enclosed by the project property lines, as defined herein. 
Lot depth. The mean distance between front and rear lot lines, reduced by any adopted right-of-way line in the comprehensive plan overlapping the front or rear of the lot. 
Lot width. The distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines, as reduced by any adopted right-of-way line in the comprehensive plan overlapping a part of the lot. In the case of irregularly shaped lots, the distance between the side lot lines shall be measured at the front setback line. 
Manufactured home. A structure subject to federal regulation, that is transportable in one (1) or more sections; is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40) body feet or more in length in the traveling mode, or is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet when erected on site; is built with a permanent chassis; is designed to be used as a single-family dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities; and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure. 
Manufactured home park. A development where all manufactured/mobile home sites and any common area are under the ownership of one (1) entity and the lots are rented to individuals for the siting of manufactured/mobile homes. The ownership of the individual units within the development shall not affect this designation. 
Manufactured home subdivision. A development where all manufactured mobile home sites are fee-simple lots, all dwelling units are attached to permanent foundations, and any common area within the development is under the ownership of a homeowners' association. All manufactured/mobile homes within the subdivision shall be under the ownership of the person or entity owning the lot on which the unit is located. 
Maximum extent practicable. A situation where no feasible or practical alternative exists, as determined by the city official responsible for administering the permit approval, and all possible efforts to comply with the standards or regulation or minimize potential harmful or adverse impacts have been undertaken by an applicant; economic considerations may be taken into account but shall not be the overriding factor. 
Medical office. An office which provides physical or mental medical care, testing, or treatment on an outpatient basis for stays of twenty-four (24) hours or less by physicians, dentists, optometrists, and other healthcare practitioners licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Mental health/substance abuse treatment facility. A facility licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia which primarily provides treatment for mental health issues on an inpatient basis for stays in excess of twenty-four (24) hours or treatment for substance abuse issues on an inpatient or outpatient basis through the dispensation of controlled substances. 
Micro-brewery/distillery/winery. A facility for the production and packaging of alcoholic beverages for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on- or off-premises, with production capacity of not more than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels per year for micro-breweries or twenty thousand (20,000) gallons per year for micro-distilleries and micro-wineries. 
Mid-block. The interior of a block not abutting a right-of-way. 
Minor collector street. Right-of-way carrying traffic from residential streets to collector streets; may include the principal entrance streets for major circulation within a residential development. 
Mixed-use structure. Any structure containing uses from two (2) different use groups. 
Multi-family dwelling. A dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units. 
Nacelle. The structure which houses all of the generating components, gearbox, drive train and other mechanical components of a wind energy system. 
Net density. The allowable number of dwelling units per buildable acre of land proposed for development. 
New development. For purposes of the O-CC District only, any physical improvement to land that, at the time of site plan submission, contains no structures, or any physical improvement to land that, at the time of site plan submission, contains structures that will be removed or destroyed by the proposed development to the point that exceeds seventy-five (75) percent of the current replacement value. 
Noncommercial communication tower. Any structure erected on a lot or attached to another structure that supports broadcast or receiving equipment of any frequency or electromagnetic wave, or any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves for governmental or private/nonprofit use, to include amateur radio operations licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. 
Nonconforming lot. A lot that does not comply with the dimensional standards that apply in the zoning district where the lot is located, but was permissible under previous provisions of this ordinance or predates this ordinance. 
Nonconforming structure. A structure or portion of a structure that does not conform to the regulations and restrictions prescribed for the district where the structure is located, but was permissible under previous provisions of this ordinance or predates this ordinance. 
Nonconforming use. A use that does not conform to the regulations and restrictions prescribed for the district where the use is located, but was permissible under previous provisions of this ordinance or predates this ordinance. 
Nonpoint source pollution. Pollution consisting of sediment, nutrients, and organic and toxic substances from diffuse sources, such as runoff from agricultural and urban land development and uses. 
Nontidal wetlands. Those wetlands other than tidal wetlands that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Army Corps of Engineers, pursuant to enforcement of section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Nursing home. Any facility or any identifiable component of any facility licensed by the state board of health in which the primary function is the continuous provision of nursing services and health-related services for the treatment and inpatient care of four (4) or more nonrelated individuals, including facilities known by varying nomenclature or designation such as convalescent homes, skilled nursing facilities or skilled care facilities, intermediate care facilities, extended care facilities, assisted living and nursing or nursing care facilities. 
Official zoning district map. A composite map incorporating a series of smaller sectional and specific maps that designate the location, boundaries and extent of the various zoning districts and properties subject to conditions established in this ordinance; the official zoning district map is located and maintained in the office of the zoning administrator. 
One-family dwelling. A structure on a single lot designed as a residence for one (1) family, as defined herein. 
Open space. A parcel of land or an area of water or combination thereof, designated and limited within a development site as being intended for the recreational use (passive and active) and enjoyment of the residents. Open space shall not include streets, alleys, off-street parking or loading areas, or other facilities dedicated as either private or public right-of-way. 
Outdoor material storage. The open air stockpiling of any materials, for use on- or off-site, or for sale, to include, but not be limited to, sand, gravel, pipe, concrete block, the trailers from tractor trailers and/or freight containers (portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed for and used in multi-modal shipment of goods, wares, or merchandise, including receptacles originally designed for the transport of goods but not currently used for such purposes); but not to include equipment or vehicle storage. 
Owner. The person vested with the fee ownership or legal title of property; or the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, or lessee having a lease of at least thirty (30) years. 
Parking lot. Any premises, or space, except such as are defined as a commercial garage, used to park vehicles in compliance with all applicable parking provisions of this ordinance. 
Parking space. Space provided for vehicular parking outside the dedicated right-of-way. 
Pedestrian level. The area eight (8) feet to fifteen (15) feet high, measured from the base of the building, along a right-of-way. 
Pharmaceutical processor. A facility that (i) has obtained a permit from the Board of Pharmacy pursuant to § 54.1-3408.3 of the Code of Virginia and (ii) cultivates cannabis plants intended only for the production of cannabidiol oil or THC-A oil, produces cannabidiol oil or THA-A oil, and dispenses cannabidiol oil or THC-A oil to a registered patient or, if such patient is minor or an incapacitated adult as defined in § 18.2-369 Code of Virginia, such patient's parent or legal guardian. 
Physical recreational amenity. Those structures or facilities used primarily for recreation, such as, but not limited to, clubhouses, pools, tennis courts, tot lots and play equipment. 
Plan of development. For the purposes of the O-CBP District, process for site plan, subdivision plan, or construction plan review to ensure compliance with O-CBP prior to any clearing or grading of a site or the issuance of a building permit. 
Plat. A document, prepared by a registered surveyor or engineer that delineates property lines and shows monuments and other landmarks for the purposes of identifying property. 
Porch. Any gallery, veranda, terrace, piazza, portico or similar projection from the main wall of the building covered by a roof and having no side enclosures other than screens or rails. 
Portable storage container. A portable, weather-resistant receptacle with storage capacity in excess of one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet, designed and used for the storage or shipment of household goods, wares, building materials or merchandise. 
Portico. A roofed space at the entrance to a building whether protruding from or receding into the building. 
Primary access. That entry point into a building articulated in such a way as to appear to be the main entrance/front door; in multi-family buildings, this entrance is used to access a central hallway or foyer from which individual units are accessed. 
Primary entrance. A ground floor entry that serves as the principal pedestrian entrance and makes use of design elements such as lighting, framing, windows, and overhead coverings that identify it as a primary entrance. Emergency, service, and storage room entrances shall not be considered a primary entrance. 
Principal structure. The structure containing the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
Principal use. The main or primary use of a building or lot. 
Private club or lodge (includes fraternal or trade organizations). Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for social, service, educational, or recreational purposes of the members and their guests. 
Private garage. A detached accessory structure used to park vehicles of occupants of the premises, except that one (1) space may be used for the vehicle of persons not residents of the premises. 
Private school. Any establishment operated for the educational and professional instruction of individuals that is not a public school as defined in this chapter, not including colleges or universities. 
Private street. A street or right-of-way built and maintained by a private person that may or may not be open to use by the general public. 
Proffer. A statement submitted by an applicant listing the proposed proffers or conditions associated with an amendment to the official zoning district map. 
Project property line. The boundaries of an entire multi-family, townhouse, or mixed-use development. 
Promotional events. Any open air event with the primary purpose of promoting and advertising a commercial establishment or group of establishments or functioning as a fund raising event for a non-profit organization including, but not limited to, small mechanized or animal rides, displays, exhibits, sporting events, give-aways, contests, or any similar events or combinations thereof. 
Public school. A pre-elementary, elementary, middle, or high school institution that is operated by a political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia or other governmental entity for the educational and professional instruction of individuals, not including colleges or universities. 
Public street. Any dedicated and accepted right-of-way, fifty (50) feet or more in width, or any right-of-way of lesser width that have been dedicated and accepted prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
Rear yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the nearest line of the building and the rear lot line or proposed right-of-way line. 
Recreational vehicle. A travel trailer, camper, coach, motorized dwelling, pickup camper, coach, converted bus, tent trailer or similar device used as a portable residential dwelling, boat, and amphibious houseboat, and any utility trailer used for transporting any of the above named vehicles, whether occupied by such vehicle or not. 
Redevelopment. 
The process of developing land that has been previously developed; 
For the purposes of the O-CBP District, the process of redevelopment shall result in the same or a lesser amount of impervious surface. 
Religious facilities. Places of religious worship such as churches, synagogues, mosques, temples, fellowship halls, etc., or similar places and their appurtenant uses. 
Residential streets. Rights-of-way used primarily for access to the abutting residential properties and designed to discourage their use by through traffic. 
Resource delineation. A site-specific determination of the boundaries of Chesapeake Bay Preservation District depicted on a physical survey of the site or parcel that is prepared and certified as complete and accurate by a licensed professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia; drawn at a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch on a print not greater than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches to clearly delineate with labels the following, on and adjacent to the development site, unless such components are waived by the zoning administrator: 
(a)  Topographic information; 
(b)  Tidal shores and tidal wetlands as verified by recent physical survey; 
(c)  Non-tidal wetlands delineated accordance with the comprehensive onsite determination method specified in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, 1987, as it may be amended from time to time (provide U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Jurisdictional Determination); 
(d)  Waterbodies with perennial flow as determined by a qualified professional using a state approved, scientifically valid system of in-field indicators of perennial flow; and 
(e)  Site-specific boundaries of the RPA, IDA, and RMA as defined in the ordinance and adjusted as necessary as a result of the above-referenced information. 
Resource management area (RMA). That component of the O-CBP District that is not classified as the resource protection area. The RMA is comprised of land that is contiguous to the variable width buffer for a distance of one hundred (100) feet in the landward direction. 
Resource management area (RMA). That component of the O-CBP District that is not classified as the resource protection area. The RMA is comprised of land that is contiguous to the variable width buffer for a distance of one hundred (100) feet in the landward direction. 
Resource protection area (RPA). That component of the O-CBP District comprised of lands adjacent to water bodies with perennial flow that have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform or that are sensitive to impacts which may result in significant degradation to the quality of state waters. Resource protection areas include tidal wetlands; non-tidal wetlands connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or water bodies with perennial flow; tidal shores; and, a variable width buffer area not less than one hundred (100) feet in width. The variable width buffer area shall be located adjacent to and landward of the components listed above and along both sides of any water body with perennial flow. The buffer area shall be designated as the landward component of the RPA notwithstanding the presence of permitted uses, encroachments, and permitted vegetation clearing in compliance with O-CBP. 
Right-of-way. Every way, lane, road, street, and boulevard and every way or place in the city open as a matter of right to public foot or vehicular travel, regardless of ownership. 
Rooming house. A building or premises where lodging is offered for compensation to five (5) or more nontransient residents. 
Rotors. In a wind energy system, it is the blade and hub assembly of a wind generator. 
Rummage sale. Sale of tangible personal property conducted by a corporation, trust, religious organization, association, community chest, fund, or foundation organized and operated for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, community, or educational purposes. 
Salvage or wrecking. The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts. 
Satellite earth stations (or dish antennas). An accessory structure comprised of the combination of (1) antenna or dish antenna whose purpose is to send and/or receive communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and/or other extraterrestrial sources; (2) a low noise amplifier which is situated at the focal point of the receiving component and whose purpose is to magnify and transfer signals; (3) a coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signals into the interior of the building. 
Service station. Any structure, enclosure or premises used for the repairing and servicing of motor vehicles when outdoor vehicle storage is restricted to designated paved parking spaces and limited to sixty (60) days for vehicles not used in the operation of the station. 
Setback. The prescribed distance between the edge of an improvement (structure, parking lot, etc.) and the respective property line (front, rear or side), creating a yard. 
Shelter. Any facility providing temporary or emergency housing for individuals in need, including facilities for the homeless and/or victims of abuse or neglect. 
Side yard. A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or to the respective lot line if no such yard exists, and lying between the nearest line of the building and the side lot line or proposed right-of-way line. 
Sign. Any structure, wall fixture, object, display, or device that directs attention to or is intended to direct attention to the sign or to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business by means of temporary or permanent written copy, graphics, symbols, figures, fixtures, or projected images. The term shall not include public art; flags of any nation, state, or other geopolitical entity not related to a commercial business, product, or service; seasonal displays and decorations not advertising a product, service, or entertainment; or architectural features, except those that identify products or services or advertise a business use. The following terms and their definitions apply to the sign regulations in this chapter: 
Abandoned nonconforming sign —A sign installed in conjunction with an establishment where the establishment has not been in operation for at least two (2) consecutive years. 
Awning/canopy sign —A type of wall sign attached to, printed on, or painted on an awning or canopy. 
Banner —A type of temporary sign hung on a building, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentals applied to plastic or fabric. 
Discontinued sign —A sign installed in conjunction with an establishment where that establishment has not operated for a period of at least ninety (90) consecutive days. 
Establishment —For the purposes of signage only, any business, institutional, professional or religious entity which provides products or services, or any apartment, condominium, cluster home, townhouse for sale, or similar project. Only an entity which occupies a separate business space which is enclosed by walls and accessed and secured separately will be considered a single establishment. Any apartment, condominium, cluster home, townhouse for sale or similar project under single management or association will be considered a single establishment unless located on non-contiguous lots, in which case each non-contiguous grouping will be considered a separate establishment for purposes of this chapter. 
Feather sign —-A type of temporary sign that is portable and mounted to one flexible vertical pole, the physical structure of which may resemble a sail, bow, or teardrop, the only movement of which is incidental to the movement of the atmosphere. 
Freestanding sign —A sign that is permanently attached to the ground and not attached to or supported by a building. 
Inflatable sign —A type of temporary sign that is located on the ground and which is enlarged or inflated by air or moving gas. 
Interstate/arterial sign —A type of freestanding sign located within a 1000' radius of the intersection of the centerline of an interstate highway right-of-way and the centerline of an arterial street right-of-way (as listed in the comprehensive plan) with direct access to that interstate. 
Lawn sign—A type of freestanding temporary sign typically supported by a wooden or wire frame. 
Monument sign —A type of freestanding sign with a continuous vertical plane extending from the ground to the top of the sign. 
Mural —A painted scene or other type of graphic that does not contain any copy and does not provide information concerning the establishment or any product, good or service offered by the establishment. 
Nonconforming sign —A sign that does not conform to the regulations and restrictions prescribed for the district where the sign is located, but was permissible under previous provisions of this ordinance or predates this ordinance. 
Off premises advertising sign —A permanently attached, freestanding sign that directs the attention of the general public to a business, service or activity not conducted or a product not offered or sold upon the premises where the sign is located. 
Projecting sign —A type of wall sign attached to a building which projects perpendicularly from the building wall. 
Public art —Objects expressing creative skill or imagination in a visual form that do not contain any copy, which are intended to beautify or provide aesthetic influences to public areas or areas which are visible from the public realm, including but not limited to murals, paintings, and sculptures, rather than draw attention to an establishment. 
Pylon sign —A type of freestanding sign that is mounted on one or more freestanding pylons or poles. 
Roof sign —A sign attached to and extending vertically from the roof of a building. 
Sandwich board sign —A temporary, moveable sign consisting of two sign faces placed together at an angle of ninety (90) degrees or less to form an "A"-shaped structure which tapers from a wide base to a narrow top. 
Sign area —The larger of that area bounded by the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characters, and delineation, or the outer extremities of the framework or background of the sign; the sign area for a freestanding sign shall be contained in a continuous, unbroken plane or geometric shape. The support for the sign background, whether it be columns, a pylon, a building, or part thereof, shall not be included in the sign area and shall not be used to provide information or identification. When two (2) sign faces are parallel, back to back, continuously enclosed, and not more than thirty-six (36) inches from each other, only one (1) face shall be included in the computation of the sign area; otherwise each sign face shall be included in the computation of sign area. 
Sign face —Any side of a sign providing information or identification. 
Sign height —The vertical distance measured from the surface grade of the lot to the highest point of the sign. 
Temporary sign —A sign displayed for a limited period of time, which is neither permanently installed on the ground nor permanently affixed to a building or structure. 
Wall sign —A sign that is permanently attached to, erected, or painted on the outside wall of a structure, or which extends from a building wall, including projecting signs and awning signs. 
Window sign —A sign that is attached to, or located behind a window that does not exceed thirty-three (33) percent of the window area. 
Silviculture. The bona fide production or harvesting of trees for sale. 
Skateboard ramp. A recreational facility consisting of grid boxes, quarter pipes, half pipes, grind rails, fun boxes, fly boxes, decks or ramps used for skateboarding. 
Small artisan shop. A business engaged in the sale of goods traditionally produced by craftsmen and artisans that are manufactured or assembled primarily by hand and where the facility includes an area for the crafting of the items being sold. 
Small wind energy conversion system (SWECS). Any wind turbine or wind charger that converts wind energy into electricity, including rotors, generators, towers and associated control or conversion electronics that has a maximum power of at most twenty-five (25) Kw which will be used to reduce on-site consumption of utility power. 
Solar energy equipment (solar panel). A panel designed to absorb and convert the sun's rays into usable forms of energy. 
Special green area. Additional green area adjacent to primary structures where required by the provisions of the O-CBP District - Chesapeake Bay Preservation Overlay. 
Stormwater. Precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one (1) or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, requiring location on or in the ground, or attached to something having location on the ground. 
Substandard lot. A lot that does not meet the dimensional standards of the zoning district in which it is located, but met the requirements in effect at the time the lot was recorded. 
Tattoo parlor. Any establishment placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other mark upon or under the skin of any person with ink or other substance resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin, including permanent makeup or jewelry, by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture skin, except when performed by a medical doctor, veterinarian, registered nurse or other medical professional licensed pursuant to title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia in the performance of professional duties. Such establishment may also perform body piercing. 
Through lot. A lot having frontage on two (2) approximately parallel streets. 
Tidal shore or shore. Land contiguous to a tidal body of water between the mean low water level and mean high water level. 
Tidal wetlands. Vegetated land lying between and contiguous to mean low water and an elevation above mean low water equal to the factor of one and one-half (1½) times the mean tide range, or nonvegetated land lying contiguous to mean low water and between mean low water and mean high water. 
Timeshare dwelling. Any dwelling unit that is owned by a group of owners, each having a limited share in the use of the unit (normally by week or month). 
Total wind energy system height. The vertical distance measured from the ground at the base of a tower or pole mounted wind energy system mounting system tower to the uppermost vertical extension of any blade or to the maximum height reached by any part of the wind energy system. This definition shall not apply to a building mounted wind energy system. 
Townhouse dwelling. A type of multi-family dwelling where each unit has its own front and rear exposure to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one (1) or more common vertical fire-resistant walls. 
Tributary stream. Any perennial stream that is so depicted on the most recent U.S. Geological Survey seven and one-half (7½) minute topographic quadrangle map. 
Tuck-under parking. Parking spaces provided on the ground level and accessed at the rear of a building with upper floors of the building creating cover. 
Two-family dwelling. A type of multi-family structure on a single lot containing two (2) dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from the ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell to both dwelling units. 
Use. Any purpose for which a structure, lot, or other tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or intended to be carried on in a structure or on a lot. 
Use group. One (1) of the four (4) categories of similar or related uses permitted in the various zoning districts: 
One-family, multi-family dwellings and community facilities; 
Townhouse dwellings; 
Commercial uses; and 
Manufacturing uses. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the terms of this ordinance by the board of zoning appeals of the City of Hampton, as allowed in chapter 13 herein. 
Vehicle storage area. Any premises or space exposed to the weather used for the storage of towed, abandoned, or damaged vehicles for up to sixty (60) days. 
Water area. Area of ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, or other impounded water bodies and associated marshlands and wetlands. 
Water-dependent facility. A development of land that cannot exist outside of the resource protection area and must be located on the shoreline by reason of the nature of its operation, such as ports, the intake and outfall structure of power plants, water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants and storm sewers, marinas and other boat docking structures, not to include office, showrooms or other sales areas, beaches and other public water-oriented recreation areas, and fisheries and similar marine resources facilities. 
Water quality impact assessment, major. A major water quality impact assessment shall include: 
(a)  A resource delineation; 
(b)  A water quality impact assessment meeting the requirements of section 33.2-12 of the city code, except that, in consultation with the director or public works or his designee, the zoning administrator may waive certain requirements of section 33.2-12; and 
(c)  Additional materials as may be required by the zoning administrator. 
Water quality impact assessment, minor. A minor water quality impact assessment shall include: 
(a)  A resource delineation; and 
(b)  An analysis of impact to water quality from the proposed development. For the purpose of a minor water quality impact assessment, impacts to water quality from proposed development are assumed to be offset by buffer establishment, replacement, and restoration methods outlined in Chapter 5.1 of the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality Riparian Buffers Modification and Mitigation Guidance Manual. 
Wind energy system setback. The distance from the base of the structure, tower, pole or building upon which the wind energy system is mounted to a public right-of-way, overhead public utility line or lot line, whichever is closest. 
Wind energy system. Equipment that converts and then stores or transfers energy from the wind into usable forms of energy and includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, turbine, vane, wire or other component used in the system. 
Wind energy system, hybrid system. An energy system that uses more than one (1) technology to produce energy or work (for example, a wind-solar system). 
Workforce development center. A facility for employment training or counseling. 
Yard. An open space, other than a hard surface court on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, that lies between the building or group of buildings and a lot line, and is unoccupied or unobstructed from the ground upward except for walls and fences as may be permitted by the zoning district where the lot is situated. 
(Ord. No. Z15-09, 6-10-2015; Ord. No. Z15-18 , 10-14-2015; Ord. No. Z16-05 , 4-13-2016; Ord. No. Z16-10 , 6-8-2016; Ord. No. Z16-13 , 7-13-2016; Ord. No. Z16-16 , 10-12-2016; Ord. No. Z17-03 , 12-13-2017; Ord. No. Z18-04 , 1-10-2018; Ord. No. Z18-5 , 3-14-2018; Ord. No. Z18-12 , 9-26-2018; Ord. No. Z19-13 , 4-10-2019)  
Chapter 3 - USES PERMITTED 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Uses permitted, in general. 
The following table identifies uses that are permitted within each zoning district. If a use is not listed, it is not permitted within the district unless the zoning administrator interprets the use to be substantially similar to one (1) of the uses listed. Uses may be permitted by-right (P), conditionally with a use permit (UP), by planning commission action (PC), by special exception (SX) or by zoning administrator action (ZA). Uses not permitted are blank. Uses which have additional standards are denoted by an asterisk (*) with reference to the specific section of the zoning ordinance which contains said standards.  
Sec. 3-2. - Table of uses permitted. 
(a)  Table of Uses Permitted in Standard Zoning Districts. 
Click here for Part A of a PDF version of the Table of Uses Permitted in Standard Zoning Districts. 
Click here for Part B of a PDF version of the Table of Uses Permitted in Standard Zoning Districts. 
 
 
 
 
(b)  Table of Uses Permitted in Special Zoning Districts. 
Click here for a PDF version of the Table of Uses Permitted in Special Zoning Districts. 
 
 
 
 
A "Retail sales, general": uses of the same general character as antique shop, appliance store, art shop, bakery (retail), boating supply store, book store, clothing store, confectionery, convenience store, dairy products store, delicatessen, department store, drapery store, drug store, dry cleaning (collection or pick-up station), florist, furniture and floor coverings stone, grocery store (including produce, meat, or seafood markets), hardware store, interior decorating store, Internet cafe, jewelry store, newsstand, office supply/stationery store, pet shop, photography studio, shoe store and repair, or variety store. 
B "Manufacturing/processing/treatment 1": uses of the same general character as manufacturing/processing/treatment of aircraft and spacecraft (including component parts); medical, photographic and metering equipment; drafting, optical and musical instruments; watches and clocks; toys, novelties and games; electronic apparatus; light mechanical and electrical devices; machines (including component parts); meters; wire products; pumps; vending and office machines; appliances; electronic equipment (including parts such as coils, thermostats, heaters, generators but excluding heavy parts such as electrical power generation components); bolts, nuts, screws and rivets; firearms (excluding ammunitions and explosives); tools, dies, machinery and hardware; bakery and dairy products; fruit, vegetable, meat and poultry products (excluding slaughtering and bulk storage of animal feed or grain); pillows, quilts, clothing and textiles; or boxes, furniture and light wood products. 
C "Manufacturing/processing/treatment 2": uses of the same general character as manufacturing/processing/treatment of acetylene gas, acid, alcohol, ammonia, animals (dead), bituminous products, bleaching powder, bone distillation, chlorine, casein, cement, chemicals, explosives, fertilizer, gas, gelatin, gutta-percha, lacquer, lampblack, lime gypsum, linoleum, matches, offal, oil, oil cloth, paint, paper, paper pulp, plaster of Paris, plastics, potash, pyroxylin, rendering of fat, rubber, salt, shellac, size, soap, sodium compounds, shoe polish, tar products, turpentine, varnish, vegetable products, or wool. 
D "Manufacturing/processing/treatment 3": uses of the same general character as manufacturing/processing/treatment of animal feed, automobiles, bags, bottles, barrels, concrete, brick, tile, terra cotta, or petroleum products (excluding refinery). 
E "Manufacturing/processing/treatment 4": uses of the same general character as manufacturing/processing/treatment of appliances, electrical devices, light mechanical products, pottery, signs (including electric and neon), cosmetics, or pharmaceuticals. 
F "Manufacturing/processing/treatment 5": uses of the same general character as manufacturing/processing/treatment of batteries, metal products, grains, bone, horns, feathers, fur, leather, hair, canvas, cellophane, cloth, felt, paint, paper, plastic, yarn, cork, fiber, stone, tobacco, or wood. 
( Ord. No. Z15-10, 6-10-2015 ; Ord. No. Z15-13, 8-12-2015 ; Ord. No. Z15-19 , 10-14-2015; Ord. No. Z16-06 , 4-13-16; Ord. No. Z16-11 , 6-8-2016; Ord. No. Z16-17 , 10-12-2016; Ord. No. Z17-04 , 12-13-2017; Ord. No. Z18-6 , 3-14-2018; Ord. No. Z18-10 , 7-11-2018; Ord. No. Z18-13 , 9-26-2018; Ord. No. Z19-05 , 1-9-2019)  
Sec. 3-3. - Additional standards on uses. 
The following uses have additional standards: 
(1)  One-family detached dwelling. 
(a)  In the R-R, R-LL, R-43, R-33, R-22, R-15, R-13, R-11, R-9, R-8, R-4, and R-M districts, such dwellings may be altered to contain two (2) dwelling units, provided that each dwelling unit shall be occupied by only one (1) family; and provided further that one (1) of the two (2) occupant families shall include the owner or at least one (1) of the owners of the premises; and further provided, that such use entails none but minor interior alterations to the dwelling while retaining the exterior appearance of a single-family dwelling with a single outside entrance to both dwelling units. 
(b)  In the RT-1 district, such dwellings may be altered to contain two (2) dwelling units, provided that each dwelling unit shall be occupied by only one (1) family; and provided further that one (1) of the two (2) occupant families shall include the owner or at least one (1) of the owners of the premises; and further provided, that such use entails none but minor interior alterations to the dwelling while retaining the exterior appearance of a single-family dwelling with a single outside entrance to both dwelling units. Additionally, no one-family dwelling constructed after the property is zoned RT-1 shall have a driveway with direct access to an arterial street 
(2)  Duplex dwelling. In the RT-1 district, duplex dwellings shall be in conformance with the requirements of the R-8 district, with two (2) modifications: 
(a)  Each duplex lot created after the property is zoned RT-1 District shall have a minimum frontage of sixty-two and one-half (62½) feet; and 
(b)  No duplex dwelling constructed after the property is zoned RT-1 shall have a driveway with direct access to an arterial street. 
(3)  Manufactured home. In the R-R district, manufactured homes shall be 19 or more feet in width and attached to a permanent foundation. 
(4)  Manufactured/mobile home park or subdivision. In the MD-2, MD-3, R-M, C-1, C-2, RT-1, DT-1, DT-2, and DT-3 districts, the hereinafter stated regulations, minimum requirements and objective standards shall apply to all manufactured home parks and subdivisions permitted after October 24, 1990, and any changes or additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions existing prior to October 24, 1990. 
(a)  Application requirements. In addition to a use permit, the following shall be included with the application: 
(i)  A site plan and a landscape plan as required herein for a manufactured home park. 
(ii)  A preliminary subdivision plat and a landscape plan as required herein for a manufactured home subdivision. Nothing in this section shall alter the requirements for the approval of site plans and/or subdivision plans, as provided in chapters 35 and 35.1 of the city code. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Only those manufactured homes constructed in accordance with regulations promulgated under the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act or the Virginia Industrialized Building and Manufactured Home Safety Regulations, as amended, and bearing the appropriate seals and labels to certify compliance with such regulations shall be permitted under this article. Manufactured home park owners/operators and individual unit owners in subdivisions shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of units in such parks or subdivisions. 
(c)  Area requirements; number of lots. All manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be located on a minimum of five (5) acres, and shall be comprised of a minimum of ten (10) lots. 
(d)  Lot area requirements. All lots within a manufactured home park shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(i)  Lots for single-wide units shall contain at least three thousand eight hundred (3,800) square feet and have at least forty (40) feet of street frontage. 
(ii)  Lots for double-wide units shall contain at least five thousand two hundred twenty-five (5,225) square feet and have at least fifty-five (55) feet of street frontage. 
(iii)  Lots that are contiguous to the required 50-foot buffer area, along either the side or rear lot line may reduce their lot area by the depth of the required setback times the length of that side or rear property line. 
(iv)  All fee-simple lots within a manufactured home subdivision shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(aa)  Lots for single-wide units shall contain at least four thousand seven hundred twenty-five (4,725) square feet and have at least forty-five (45) feet of street frontage. 
(bb)  Lots for double-wide units shall contain at least six thousand three hundred (6,300) square feet and have at least sixty (60) feet of street frontage. 
(cc)  Lots that are contiguous to the required 50-foot buffer area, along either the side or rear lot line may reduce their lot area by the depth of the required setback times the length of that side or rear property line. 
(e)  Height regulations. All structures within the manufactured home park or subdivision shall comply with the height regulations of the district in which they are located. 
(f)  Dwelling area requirements. All manufactured homes placed in a park or subdivision shall have a minimum dwelling area of three hundred twenty (320) square feet. 
(g)  Building setback requirements. 
(i)  Front setback. 
(aa)  Manufactured homes in parks shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the front lot line. 
(bb)  Manufactured homes in subdivisions shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the front fee-simple lot line. 
(cc)  All structures within manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the front project property line. 
(ii)  Side setback. 
(aa)  Manufactured homes in parks shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from one (1) side lot line and fifteen (15) feet from the other side lot line. The unit shall be sited such that the primary entrance opens onto the larger side yard. 
(bb)  Manufactured homes in subdivisions shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the side fee-simple lot line. 
(cc)  If the lot area has been reduced under the provisions of section 3-3(4)(d) herein, no side setback is required abutting the buffer area. 
(dd)  All structures within manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the side project property lines. 
(iii)  Rear setback. 
(aa)  Manufactured homes in parks shall be set back at ten (10) feet from the rear lot line. 
(bb)  Manufactured homes in subdivisions shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear fee-simple lot line. 
(cc)  If the lot area has been reduced under the provisions of section 3-3(4)(d) herein, no rear setback is required abutting the buffer area. 
(dd)  All structures within manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be set back at feast fifty (50) feet from the rear project property line. 
(h)  Off-street parking. A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured/mobile home in parks and subdivisions. At least one (1) space shall be provided on the lot housing the unit. The additional space may be provided in an off-street parking area, to be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the unit it is to serve. All parking spaces shall meet the provisions of chapter 11 hereof. 
(i)  Landscaping. A landscape plan complying with the provisions of the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" shall be submitted with the application for a use permit as delineating the following: 
(aa)  Perimeter screening. All manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall provide a perimeter screen composed of landscaping or a combination of landscaping and fencing, the intent of which is to limit ingress and egress on the property, and to provide some buffering from adjoining uses. The screen shall be at least six (6) feet in height, and shall be located on all project property lines that do not abut existing or proposed public rights-of-way; such screening shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any existing or proposed public rights-of-way. The only openings permitted in such screening shall be for vehicular ingress and egress. Barbed wire and electric fences are expressly prohibited. Landscaping materials for the perimeter screen cannot be counted toward the green area requirements of section 3-3(4)(j) herein. 
(bb)  Green area requirements. All manufactured/mobile home parks and subdivisions with twenty (20) or more lots shall be required to provide at least three hundred (300) square feet of green area per lot which shall be retained as common area. Such green area shall be in addition to the minimum lot area for dwelling units, and shall be aggregated in increments of at least four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet, No more than twenty-five (25) percent of this required area may be provided by water area. Such green area shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". (c) Buffers. No structures, except fences as part of the perimeter screen, shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of the project property lines. Parking shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet from the project property lines. All green area and landscaping within this buffer, except for that required for the perimeter screen may be counted toward the green area requirement stated above. 
(j)  Streets. All street layouts in manufactured/mobile home parks and subdivisions shall be designed so as to ensure efficient vehicular flow, adequate access for emergency vehicles, and unobstructed access to public streets. Private streets shall be permitted within the park or subdivision, however, any public street within said development shall be constructed to the standards provided in section 35-74 of the city code. On-street parking shall be regulated according to the following pavement widths: 
Pavement Width 	On-Street Parking 
22' 	Not permitted 
27' 	One side of street 
32' 	Both sides of street 
 
Manufactured home park and subdivision owners shall be responsible for enforcement of parking regulations on private streets. 
(k)  Signs. All signs placed upon the site shall meet the provisions of chapter 11 hereof. 
(l)  Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall not be placed within the buffer area required along any property line abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way, or within twenty (20) feet of any project property line abutting a residential district. Individual toters shall be kept behind the building setback lines except on collection days. 
(m)  Fences. On any manufactured home lot, a fence may be located and maintained along the lot line, provided that such fence shall not exceed four (4) feet in height along the front yard and six (6) feet in height along the rear and side yard lines. The use of electrified fences or barbed wire is expressly prohibited. 
(n)  Accessory structures. 
(i)  The following accessory structures are permitted: 
(aa)  Laundry facilities, to be located in common areas. 
(bb)  Patios, porches and decks. 
(cc)  Storage sheds. 
(dd)  Service buildings for the park, to include a rental/management office, to be located in common areas. 
(ee)  Recreational facilities for the exclusive use of the residents and their guests, to be located in common areas. 
(ii)  No accessory structures shall be permitted within the required five (5) foot buffer area. In the case of lots of reduced area under the provisions [of] section 3-3(4)(d) herein, no accessory structures may be located in the contiguous buffer area. 
(iii)  Patios, porches, stoops and decks shall be permitted to encroach a maximum of ten (10) feet into the fifteen-foot side setback or the rear setback so long as they are not enclosed in any manner. 
(iv)  Stoops shall be permitted to encroach a maximum of four (4) feet into the ten-foot side setback, exclusive of handicapped ramps. The landing area for such stoop shall not exceed four (4) feet by four (4) feet. 
(v)  Sheds shall be permitted to encroach into the rear setback so long as they do not occupy more than thirty-three (33) percent of the required yard. Sheds shall not be required to meet the rear or side yard setbacks. 
(o)  Maintenance, perpetuation of open space and guarantee of development in manufactured home subdivisions. A manufactured home subdivision may be accomplished as outlined in this section by providing for the retention of open space in common ownership of the individual owners through appropriate legal documents, with appropriate provision to assure continuous maintenance and the use of the common property for the purpose intended. The legal document or documents shall place unencumbered title to the common property in a form of common ownership representing the residents of the manufactured home subdivision (homeowners' association), shall place responsibility for the management and maintenance of all common property, shall set forth the restrictive covenants, and place responsibility for the enforcement thereof, and shall provide for the subjection of each lot to assessment of its proportionate share of maintenance costs of the common property. Such legal documents shall be filed with the application for approval of a manufactured home subdivision and shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. Such legal documents shall be recorded and indexed as deeds are recorded prior to or in conjunction with the recordation of any subdivision plat. 
(p)  Sanitary sewer. All lots within any manufactured home park or subdivision shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer system or an approved private sewer system. 
(q)  Phasing of development. In the event that the manufactured home park or subdivision is to be developed in phases, each individual phase must, at a minimum, meet the open space and landscaping requirements for the number of lots created in that phase. It is the intent of this section to protect the integrity of the overall development by protecting the integrity of each phase. 
(r)  Waiver of requirements. Under the provisions of the use permit, the city reserves the right to waive any of the above requirements if the proposed park or subdivision meets the intent of the regulations using good design principles. 
(5)  Upper-floor dwelling units. 
(a)  In the C-2 district, upper-floor dwelling units, with an approved use permit may be located above permitted office, retail or commercial uses excluding certain uses listed below: 
(i)  Car wash, hand/auto detailing; 
(ii)  Car wash, self-service or automated; 
(iii)  Boarding/rooming houses; 
(iv)  Religious facilities; 
(v)  Commercial communications towers, not to exclude building mounted antennas with an approved use permit; 
(vi)  Detention facilities; 
(vii)  Gas stations; 
(viii)  Group homes; 
(ix)  Halfway houses; 
(x)  Light vehicle repair; 
(xi)  Motorcycle sales; 
(xii)  Motorcycle service; 
(xiii)  Orphanages; 
(xiv)  Skating rink, ice or roller; 
(xv)  Swimming pool, commercial; 
(xvi)  Tire sales; 
(xvii)  Tire repair; 
(xviii)  Turkish baths; 
(xix)  Vehicle storage, including vehicle storage accessory to heavy vehicle repair. 
Residential uses may not be combined with any other use on the same floor. 
Residential uses may not be located on pedestrian level and must have at least one (1) separate exterior entrance. 
No commercial, office, retail, or parking uses shall be located on any floor above a residential use. 
Commercial building setbacks shall apply with all building code standards being met as necessary for such building separations. 
(b)  In the DT-1 and DT-2 districts, mixed-use structures may include two (2) or more of the following elements: residential, office, retail, commercial or parking with the following standards: 
(i)  Residential uses may not be combined with any other use on the same floor. 
(ii)  Residential uses may not be located on pedestrian level and must have at least one (1) separate exterior entrance. 
(iii)  No commercial, office, retail, or parking uses shall be located on any floor above a residential use. 
(6)  Dwelling unit for resident caretaker/watchman. In the M-1, M-2, M-3, LFA-1, LFA-2, LFA-4, LFA-6, and HRC-3 districts, resident caretakers and watchmen must be employed on the premises. 
(7)  Home occupation. In the R-R, R-LL, R-43, R-33, R-22, R-15, R-13, R-11, R-9, R-8, R-4, MD-1, MD-2, MD-3, MD-4, R-M, C-1, C-2, LFA-5, RT-1, BB-1, BB-2, BB-3, BB-4, BB-5, DT-1, DT-2, DT-3, FM-1, FM-2, and FM-3 districts, home occupations shall be permitted only as an accessory use and only where the character of such use is such that it is clearly subordinate and incidental to the principal residential use of a dwelling. Home occupations that have the following general characteristics are permitted: 
(a)  Only those persons who are bona fide residents of the premises may participate in the home occupation. There shall be no on-site employment or use of labor from persons who are not bona fide residents of the dwelling. 
(b)  No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be employed within or on the premises other than machinery or equipment customarily found in a home; except that computer systems, fax machines and equipment customarily associated with home office equipment shall be permitted. 
(c)  No outside display of goods and no outside storage of any equipment or materials used in the home occupation shall be permitted. 
(d)  There shall be no audible noise, or any detectable vibration or odor from activities or equipment of the home occupation beyond the confines of the dwelling, or any accessory building, including transmittal through vertical or horizontal party walls. 
(e)  The storage of biohazardous waste, hazardous waste or materials not otherwise and customarily associated with home use is prohibited. 
(f)  The home occupation must be conducted entirely within the dwelling or an accessory structure, or both. Not more than two hundred (200) square feet of floor area of the dwelling shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation, including storage of stock-in-trade or supplies. 
(g)  All parking in connection with the home occupation (including, without limitation, parking of vehicles marked with advertising or signage for the home occupation) must be in driveway and garage areas on the premises, or in available on-street parking areas. 
(h)  Except for the sign authorized by Chapter 10, there shall be no evidence or indication visible from the exterior of the dwelling that the dwelling is being used in whole or in part for any purpose other than as a residential dwelling. 
(8)  Group home 2 in the MD-1, MD-2, MD-3, MD-4, R-M, C-1 and C-2 districts, or; 
Juvenile residence in the R-R, R-LL, R-43, R-33, R-22, R-15, R-13, R-11, R-9, R-8, R-4, MD-1, MD-2, MD-3, MD-4, R-M, C-1 and C-2 districts. 
(a)  No facility shall be located within a three-quarter (¾) mile radius of any existing facility of the same type; 
(9)  Orphanage in the R-M, C-1, C-2 and C-3 districts, or; 
Shelter in the R-R, R-LL, R-43, R-33, R-22, R-15, R-13, R-11, R-9, R-8, R-4, MD-1, MD-2, MD-3, MD-4, R-M, C-1, C-2 and C-3 districts. 
(a)  No facility shall be located within a two (2) mile radius of any existing facility of the same type; 
(10)  Day care 1, family in the M-1, M-2, M-3, LFA-1, LFA-2, LFA-3, LFA-4, LFA-6, RT-1, HRC-1, HRC-2, HRC-3, PO-1, and PO-2 districts. 
(a)  This use shall be permitted only in dwellings with legal non-conforming status. 
(11)  Day care 2, family. 
(a)  In the R-LL, R-43, R-R, R-33, R-22, R-15, R-13, R-11, R-9, R-8, R-4, R-M, LFA-5, RT-1, BB-1, BB-2, BB-3, DT-1, DT-2, FM-1, FM-2, and FM-3 districts, this use shall comply with all of the following provisions: 
(i)  No more than one (1) employee of the day care shall reside outside of the dwelling. 
(ii)  No day care 2, family shall operate prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy and all other necessary permits and inspections. 
(iii)  No day care 2, family shall be permitted to operate without a valid business license as issued by the Commissioner of Revenue. 
(iv)  No day care 2, family shall be permitted to operate without a license issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(v)  All parking in connection with the day care must be in driveway and garage areas on the premises, or in available on-street parking areas. 
(vi)  Play areas shall be provided in accordance with the following standards in order to provide minimum disturbance to adjacent properties and maximum safety of clients: 
(aa)  A six (6) foot tall opaque fence shall be provided around the play area in accordance with Section 1-18 of this ordinance. 
(bb)  All outdoor play activities shall be conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  In the MD-1, MD-2, MD-3, MD-4, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2, M-3, LFA-1, LFA-2, LFA-3, LFA-4, LFA-6, BB-4, BB-5, HRC-1, HRC-2, HRC-3, DT-3, PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, FM-4, PO-1, and PO-2 districts, this use shall be permitted only in dwellings with legal non-conforming status and shall comply with all of the following provisions: 
(i)  No more than one (1) employee of the day care shall reside outside of the dwelling. 
(ii)  No day care 2, family shall operate prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy and all other necessary permits and inspections. 
(iii)  No day care 2, family shall be permitted to operate without a valid business license as issued by the Commissioner of Revenue. 
(iv)  No day care 2, family shall be permitted to operate without a license issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(v)  All parking in connection with the day care must be in driveway and garage areas on the premises, or in available on-street parking areas. 
(vi)  Play areas shall be provided in accordance with the following standards in order to provide minimum disturbance to adjacent properties and maximum safety of clients: 
(aa)  A six (6) foot tall opaque fence shall be provided around the play area in accordance with Section 1-18 of this ordinance. 
(bb)  All outdoor play activities shall be conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(12)  Outdoor dining 1 in the C-1, C-2, C-3, M-2, RT-1, BB-3, BB-4, BB-5, FM-1, FM-2, FM-3, and FM-4 districts. 
(a)  The proposed dining operation and location will not significantly interfere with the pedestrian traffic or otherwise constitute a health and safety risk; 
(b)  Tables, chairs and other furniture placed outdoors shall be readily available for use. Any furniture which is not readily accessible may not be stored outside, but must be stored within a wholly enclosed structure; 
(c)  Any sound or noise from amplified music shall not exceed a noise level measurement of sixty (60) dBA upon the real property of another as determined by a sound level meter using the "A" weighting scale in accordance with the American National Standard Institute; 
(d)  Any encroachment of an outdoor dining area into a public right-of-way must be approved by the city council. The applicant must adhere to all terms and provisions specified in the agreement granted by the city council; 
(e)  The hours of operation of the outdoor dining area shall not extend beyond 8:00 a.m.—9:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 8:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday, 
(f)  All outdoor lighting shall be focused downward and inward in a way that prevents spillover onto adjacent properties; 
(g)  All outdoor dining shall be subject to the provisions of the Hampton Zoning Ordinance and Hampton City Code, to include, but not be limited to, parking, setbacks, and building code requirements; 
(h)  The outdoor dining permit shall be valid for eighteen (18) months from the date of approval by the zoning administrator. After twelve (12) months of operation, prior to the expiration date, the outdoor dining permit will be scheduled for review by the zoning administrator to consider if the continuation of the outdoor dining permit would not be detrimental to the public health, safely and welfare and that to continue the activities under the outdoor dining permit would not cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land in the zoning district. The review will be based, in part, upon a physical site review, hours and manner of operation, noise, light, neighborhood complaints, police service calls, and any violations of any federal, state or local law. If, after review, the zoning administrator determines that the outdoor dining permit would not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and that to continue the activities under the outdoor dining permit would not cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land in the zoning district, the zoning administrator may administratively extend the outdoor dining permit in five-year increments. Each such extension shall be subject to the same administrative review. If the zoning administrator determines that the outdoor dining permit would be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and that to continue the activities under the outdoor dining permit would cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land in the zoning district, the zoning administrator will notify the permittee of a denial of the extension in writing in the same manner as required under chapter 25 of the zoning ordinance. A permittee aggrieved by the decision of the zoning administrator may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator to the board of zoning appeals in the manner set forth in chapter 22 of the zoning ordinance. Nothing contained herein shall limit the rights of a permittee to seek a new outdoor dining permit; and 
(i)  The zoning administrator, or appointed designee, shall have the ability to revoke the outdoor dining permit upon violations of any of the above conditions. 
(13)  Outdoor dining 2 in the C-1, C-2, C-3, M-2, RT-1, BB-3, BB-4, BB-5, FM-1, FM-2, FM-3, and FM-4 districts. 
Outdoor dining 2 venues are defined as those requesting to operate beyond the conditions set forth under the provisions of outdoor dining 1 in the same zoning districts as described above and are subject to obtaining a use permit by city council. The city will evaluate each application on a site-by-site basis with regard to the surrounding land use patterns and city council may impose more restrictive conditions when the proposal is adjacent to residential land uses. Conditions shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Submission of a site plan indicating the location and total area of the outdoor dining space; 
(b)  Hours of operation; 
(c)  Sound or noise; 
(d)  Term limitation on the use permit, administrative review, and extension or denial of use permit. 
(14)  Outdoor dining, downtown in the DT-1 and DT-2 districts. 
(a)  All outdoor dining areas shall conform to the provisions and guidelines of this section. No zoning certificate shall be issued to authorize the installation of an outdoor dining area without prior approval by the zoning administrator, after review by the director of planning and the city health department of the plans for such installation. Elements to be reviewed shall include: the type, number and placement of tables, chairs, and/or other dining furniture; the color, design and placement of canopies and awnings; the design and placement of planters, trash receptacles, bollards, fences, other street furnishings and landscaping; the type, amount and location of surface material to be applied and the corresponding loss of green space, if any, and the type and amount of landscaping to be installed to compensate for that loss; the limits of encroachment, if any, into public rights-of- way; the width of the unobstructed pedestrian thoroughfare adjacent to the outdoor dining area; and overall conformance with the recommendations of the downtown master plan. 
(b)  Any encroachment of an outdoor dining area into a public right-of-way must be approved by the city council. The applicant must adhere to all terms and provisions specified in the agreement granted by the city council. 
(c)  Any outdoor dining area shall be surfaced with bricks, wood decking, exposed aggregate, pavers or similar material effectively treated to facilitate maintenance and minimize dust. If required to meet the standards of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation District (O-CBP), other surfaces may be used. Surfaces shall be kept free of litter and shall be graded to prevent pooling of water. No vehicle parking shall be permitted on these surfaces. If green space is lost due to the application of surface material, then landscaping shall be required to mitigate that loss. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  The outer edge of any outdoor dining area shall not reduce the adjacent pedestrian thoroughfare to less than four (4) feet. 
(f)  Tables, chairs and other furniture placed within the outdoor dining area shall be readily available for use. Any furniture which is not readily accessible may not be stored within the outdoor dining area, but must be stored within a wholly enclosed structure. 
(g)  Where there are existing awnings or canopies on the street face block, the height, scale, and design of proposed awnings or canopies shall be compatible with them. Where none exist, proposed awnings or canopies shall be compatible with other design elements on the street face block. 
(h)  Signage on awnings and canopies is permissible and will count towards the maximum total signage allowed for the principal establishment. 
(i)  The hours of operation shall not extend beyond the normal operating hours of the principal establishment. 
(15)  Rummage sale, temporary in the C-1, C-2, C-3, M-2, RT-1, PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, DT- 1, DT-2, FM-2, and FM-3 districts. 
Permitted only for a corporation, trust, religious organization, association, community chest, fund, or foundation organized and operated for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, community, or educational purpose. 
(16)  Second-hand store in the C-2, C-3, and M-2 districts. 
Use shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
(17)  Tire sales in the C-2, C-3, and M-2 districts, or; 
Tire repair in the C-2, C-3, and M-2 districts. 
Use shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
(18)  Vehicle storage, including vehicle storage accessory to heavy vehicle repair in the C-3, M-2, M-3, LFA-1, and LFA-2 districts. 
The following minimum conditions shall be met: 
(a)  All storage areas shall be enclosed by a six (6) foot opaque fence. 
(b)  There shall be a landscaped buffer of fifteen (15) feet between the fence and any existing or proposed right-of-way. 
(c)  There shall be a landscaped buffer of twenty (20) feet between the fence and any adjacent residential district or the property line of any existing dwelling unit. 
(d)  There shall be a landscaped buffer of fifteen (15) feet between the fence and any adjacent commercial property. 
(e)  When any yard area of a vehicle storage area abuts the front yard(s) of one (1) or more residential lots, all required fencing and all storage areas shall be set back a distance equal to the largest front setback of the dwelling(s) on the adjacent parcel(s). 
(19)  School, horse riding in the R-R, R-LL, R-43, R-33, R-22, and R-15 districts, or, 
Animal boarding/stables in the R-R district. 
The following minimum conditions shall be met: 
(a)  No more than four (4) animals be kept, stabled, or pastured for each acre of land so used. 
(b)  An accessory building, structure, or use, to include a private stable for the keeping of, or the use of, horses, ponies, or similar animals customarily used for recreational purposes is permitted, provided: 
(i)  That such a stable or such use shall not be permitted on a lot containing less than one (1) acre; if two (2) or more such animals but not exceeding eight (8) are to be kept, a minimum lot area of two (2) acres shall be required; if more than eight (8) such animals are to be kept, a minimum lot area of three (3) acres shall be required; and 
(ii)  That no structure used as a private stable, manure pit, or bin shall be located nearer than sixty (60) feet to any adjacent lot line, except where such lot line abuts a water course at least sixty (60) feet in width. 
(20)  Adult entertainment establishment in the C-3 and M-2 districts. 
Structures for such use shall not be located nearer than one thousand (1,000) feet to: 
(a)  Any school, religious facility, park, playground, or library property; 
(b)  Any other adult entertainment establishment; 
(c)  Any residentially zoned property which fronts on the same street or which contains any school, religious facility, park, playground, and library; otherwise, the minimum distance from such structures to a residential zone shall be three hundred (300) feet. 
For the purposes of this paragraph, distances shall be measured on a straight line: (1) from the adult entertainment establishment to the nearest point of the property named in (a) or (c) above; or (2) between the establishment named in (b) above. 
(21)  Coin-operated amusement devices, accessory in the C-1, C-2, C-3, PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, RT-1, DT-1, and DT-2 districts. 
No more than six (6) coin-operated amusement machines shall be allowed as an accessory use at any business establishment. 
(22)  Live entertainment 1, in conjunction with a restaurant or micro-brewery/distillery/winery use, as specified in the section 3-2 table of uses permitted. 
Live entertainment 1 venues are defined as venues providing live entertainment only within the building, without a dance floor or similar gathering area, and having performance space of 75 square feet or less. Any other live entertainment venue is considered a live entertainment 2 venue. 
Live entertainment 1 is subject to a live entertainment zoning administrator permit with the following attached conditions: 
(a)  Live entertainment shall be conducted inside the building only; 
(b)  A floor plan shall be provided and approved showing the arrangement of tables, chairs, and performance area. The layout shall remain in place for live entertainment performances and no dance floor or similar open gathering space shall be permitted 
(c)  The hours of operation for live entertainment shall not extend past 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 11:59 p.m. Friday and Saturday; 
(d)  The live entertainment shall comply with section 22-9 of the City Code, as amended, pertaining to noise. 
(e)  Each ingress/egress point in the building shall be monitored by an attendant during the hours of operation, and additional attendants may be required to monitor vehicle parking areas that serve the building and maintain and control patron behavior upon exit of the building into the parking areas; 
(f)  The restaurant or micro-brewery/distillery/winery shall meet the minimum requirements for parking as established in Chapter 11 herein; 
(g)  The restaurant or micro-brewery/distillery/winery shall maintain compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and requirements of licensing agencies, including but not limited to ABC licensing; 
(h)  The live entertainment permit shall be valid for eighteen (18) months from the date of approval by the zoning administrator. After twelve (12) months of operation, prior to the expiration date, the live entertainment permit will be scheduled for review by the zoning administrator to consider if the continuation of the live entertainment permit would not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and that to continue the activities under the live entertainment permit would not cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land in the zoning district. The review will be based, in part, upon a physical site review, traffic flow and control, access to and circulation within the property, off-street parking and loading, hours and manner of operation, noise, light, neighborhood complaints, police service calls, and any violations of any federal, state or local law. If, after review, the zoning administrator determines that the live entertainment permit would not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and that to continue the activities under the live entertainment permit would not cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land in the zoning district, the zoning administrator may administratively extend the live entertainment permit in five-year increments. Each such extension shall be subject to the same administrative review. If the zoning administrator determines that that the live entertainment permit would be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and that to continue the activities under the live entertainment permit would cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land the zoning district, the zoning administrator will notify the permittee of a denial of the extension in writing in the same manner as required under chapter 1 of the zoning ordinance. A permittee aggrieved by the decision of the zoning administrator may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator to the board of zoning appeals in the manner set forth in chapter 13 of the zoning ordinance. Nothing contained herein shall limit the rights of a permittee to seek a new live entertainment permit; and 
(i)  The zoning administrator, or appointed designee, shall have the ability to revoke the live entertainment permit upon violation of any of the above conditions. 
(23)  Reserved. 
(24)  Religious facility in the R-R, R-LL, R-43, R-33, R-22, R-15, R-13, R-11, R-9, R-8, R-4, MD-1, MD-2, MD-3, MD-4, R-M, C-1, C-2, C-3, RT-1, BB-1, BB-2, BB-3, BB-4, BB-5, PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, DT-1, DT-2, and DT-3 districts. 
Religious facilities and accessory uses such as convents, Sunday schools, parish houses, and assembly rooms (excluding rescue mission or temporary revival), are permitted provided: 
(a)  For the above uses with a capacity within any single assembly area, of no more than five hundred (500) people, no vehicular access shall be permitted from any residential street unless required for emergency vehicular access. 
(b)  For the above uses with a capacity within any single assembly area of between five hundred one (501) and one thousand (1,000) people, no vehicular access shall be permitted from any residential or minor collector street unless required for emergency vehicular access. 
(c)  For the above uses with a capacity within any single assembly area in excess of one thousand (1,000) people, no vehicular access shall be permitted from any residential, minor collector, or collector street unless required for emergency vehicular access. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 12, Nonconformities, a religious facility may make additions to its physical plant, without regard to any street access requirements or limitations, provided: 
(i)  Any addition or construction of additional buildings which increases sanctuary seating above the limits which would otherwise be imposed by street access requirements, shall occur only on the property owned in accordance with section 57-12 of the Code of Virginia by the religious facility at the time of adoption of this ordinance; 
(ii)  All additions or construction of additional buildings shall comply with the setback requirements in effect at the time of submission of the site plan for the addition or construction; and 
(iii)  Any addition or construction of additional buildings which increases sanctuary seating shall be accompanied by additional parking spaces for the new seating provided at the ratio required at the time of submission of the site plan for such addition or construction. 
(25)  Shooting range, trap or skeet in all districts. 
Trap shooting range shall be a minimum area of four (4) acres and with a minimum width of two hundred (200) feet. Skeet shooting range shall be a minimum area of nine (9) acres with a minimum width of four hundred fifty (450) feet. 
Both are subject to securing a use permit and may be rescinded subject to such time limitations as may be prescribed at the time of the granting of the use permit. 
(26)  Skateboard ramp in the R-R, R-13, R-11, R-9, R-8, R-4, MD-1, MD-2, MD-3, R-M, C-1, C-2, RT-1, DT-1, DT-2, and DT-3 districts. 
The board of zoning appeals shall apply the following standards before granting a special exception: 
(a)  Skateboard ramps shall only be permitted in rear yards; 
(b)  Skateboard ramps shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any rear or side property line; 
(c)  Skateboard ramps located on corner lots shall comply with the side yard setbacks for accessory buildings on corner lots as specified in chapter 1, section 1-24(1)(b). 
The board of zoning appeals may impose conditions concerning the operation of skateboard ramps such as: 
(d)  Hours of operation; 
(e)  Landscaping; 
(f)  Such other conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed structure as it may deem necessary in the public interest. 
Special exception granted under this section shall not be transferable. The board of zoning appeals has the right to revoke the special exception for failure to meet the conditions set forth in the special exception. 
(27)  Silviculture/plant nursery, including retail sales in all districts. 
The following minimum conditions shall be met: 
(a)  The minimum lot size for such a use shall be two (2) acres; 
(b)  The owner and operator of the premises occupy a residence on site; 
(c)  The rental, repair, or sale of motorized equipment or tools other than hand tools shall be prohibited; 
(d)  The operations of such a use, including storage, but excluding outside plant production storage and sale shall be conducted within a completely enclosed structure; 
(e)  The sale or storage of liquid or dry chemicals unless same is pre-packaged by the manufacturer shall be prohibited; 
(f)  There may be only one (1) unlighted exterior sign in accordance with local zoning ordinances; and 
(g)  Off-street parking on site is provided in conformance with chapter 19 of the zoning ordinance. 
(28)  Veterinarian office/hospital in the R-R district. 
All buildings and areas used for such purposes shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all side property lines. 
Veterinarian office/hospital in the C-2, C-3, and RT-1 districts. Use shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
(29)  Accessory use/structure for keeping of recreational animals in the R-R, R-LL, R-43, R-33, R-22, R-15, R-13, R-11, R-9, R-8, R-4, R-M, C-1, C-2, C-3, RT-1, DT-1, and DT-2 districts. 
Accessory building, structure, or use, to include a private stable for the keeping of or the use of, horses, ponies, or similar animals customarily used for recreational purposes are permitted provided: 
(a)  That such a stable or such use shall not be permitted on a lot containing less than one (1) acre; if two (2) or more such animals but not exceeding eight (8) are to be kept, a minimum lot area of two (2) acres shall be required; if more than eight (8) such animals are to be kept, a minimum lot area of three (3) acres shall be required; and 
(b)  That no structure used as a private stable, manure pit, or bin shall be located nearer than sixty (60) feet to any adjacent lot line, except where such lot line abuts a water course at least sixty (60) feet in width. 
(30)  Small artisan shop in the PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, C-2 and C-3 districts is required to have a retail sales component as part of any such use. Additionally in the PH-1, PH-2, and PH-3 districts, total area of such use shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(31)  Storage of materials, indoor or outdoor, including equipment rental and contractor's storage in the M-1, M-2, M-3, LFA-1, LFA-2, HRC-2, and HRC-3 districts. Outdoor material storage areas shall be subject to the following setback, landscaping and stacking requirements: 
(a)  Storage areas shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any existing or proposed public rights-of-way, and twenty (20) feet from any property line that abuts a residential, commercial, or special public interest district. Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 12 hereof, any business utilizing outdoor material storage on December 14, 1988, shall be permitted to expand such storage area on property owned by said business on December 14, 1988, without conforming to the above setbacks, so long as the storage area does not violate the green area requirements of the city zoning ordinance. In the case where the expansion abuts a residential, commercial, or special public interest zone, a twenty-foot setback shall be required. 
(b)  Any fence enclosing a storage area shall not violate the required setback. 
(c)  Storage area setbacks shall be landscaped in accordance with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" kept on file in the department of community development, development services center. Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 12 hereof, businesses utilizing outdoor material storage on December 14, 1988, shall be permitted to expand their storage area on property owned by said business on December 14, 1988, without conforming to the above landscaping requirements in accordance with the provisions of chapter 35.1 of the city code. 
(d)  The number of freight containers stacked vertically must be equaled or exceeded by the number of containers placed side-by-side, to a maximum of three (3) containers stacked vertically. Additionally, the stacked containers shall comply with the wind load requirements of the building code. 
(e)  Appropriate BMPs shall be employed as required by chapter 33.1 of the city code to prevent off-site release of stored materials. 
(32)  Wrecking; automobile, outdoor in the M-3 district. 
Use shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
(33)  Communication antenna, commercial building-mounted in the R-R, R-LL, R-43, R-33, R-22, R-15, R-13, R-11, R-9, R-8, R-4, MD-1, MD-2, MD-3, MD-4, R-M, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2, M-3, RT-1, BB-3, BB-4, BB-5, HRC-2, HRC-3, PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, DT-1, DT-2, DT-3, PO-1, FM-3, and FM-4 districts. The following minimum conditions shall be met: 
(a)  The following criteria regulate the use of less obtrusive support structures that are alternatives to traditional monopole and tower-based facilities, by accommodating installations that are a subordinate use in conjunction with a permitted principal or accessory use of a property. Such installations may include but not be limited to rooftop installations and permitted rooftop mechanical enclosures; installations on the face of a building; installations on otherwise permitted water towers and within otherwise permitted ornamental towers and steeples. The specific review criteria set forth in this subsection are intended to result in installations that are minimally visible when viewed from surrounding properties. 
(b)  The following minimum conditions shall be met: 
(i)  The building is not a single-family dwelling; 
(ii)  The minimum height of the building as defined by chapter 2 shall be no less than twenty (20) feet or shall have a parapet wall with a highest point of no less than twenty (20) feet above grade; 
(iii)  The height of the antenna (including support structures) shall not exceed ten (10) feet above the highest point of the building and shall be mounted at a minimum height of no less than twelve (12) feet above grade; 
(iv)  The antenna and support structures are painted so that they are compatible with the primary building structure, unless roof mounted; and 
(v)  Intermodulation testing is coordinated through the City of Hampton demonstrating that the proposed antenna operation is designed in a manner to eliminate interference with public safety communications within one (1) mile of the tower site. Such testing shall also be required from each subsequent operator prior to any building permits to add or modify antennae. Should any equipment associated with the antennae be found to interfere with the public safety communications, the owner shall be responsible for the elimination of such interference. 
(34)  Communication tower, commercial in the R-R, R-LL, R-43, R-33, R-22, R-15, R-13, R-11, R-9, R-8, R-4, MD-1, MD-2, MD-3, R-M, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2, M-3, RT-1, HRC-1, HRC-2, HRC-3, PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, DT-1, DT-2, DT-3, FM-3, and PO-1 districts. 
The following minimum conditions shall be met: 
(a)  Use permit applications for commercial communication towers shall include the following: 
(i)  A site plan drawn to scale specifying the location of tower(s), guy anchors (if any), transmission building(s) and other accessory uses, parking, access, landscaped areas (specifying size, spacing, and plant material proposed) fences, and identify adjacent property owners. 
(ii)  A report from a registered structural or civil engineer indicating tower height and design, structure, installation and total anticipated capacity of the structure (including number and types of antennas which could be accommodated). This data shall demonstrate that the proposed commercial communication tower conforms to all structural requirements of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and shall set out whether the commercial communication tower will meet the structural requirements of EIA-222 E "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures" published by the Electronic Industries Association, effective June 1, 1987 or current update. 
(iii)  A statement from a registered engineer that the NIER (nonionizing electromagnetic radiation) emitted therefrom does not result in a ground level exposure at any point outside such facility which exceeds the lowest applicable exposure standards established by any regulatory agency of the U.S. government or the American National Standards Institute. 
(iv)  Evidence of the lack of space on suitable existing commercial communication towers, buildings, or other structures to locate the proposed antenna and the lack of space on existing commercial communication tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna within the service area shall be considered in the review of use permit applications for a new commercial communication tower. 
(v)  Intermodulation testing is coordinated through the City of Hampton demonstrating that the proposed antenna operation is designed in a manner to eliminate interference with public safety communications within one (1) mile of the tower site. Such testing shall also be required from each subsequent operator prior to any building permits to add or modify antennae. Should any equipment associated with the antennae be found to interfere with the public safety communications, the owner shall be responsible for the elimination of such interference. 
(b)  The following locational criteria shall be considered in determining the appropriateness of sites for commercial communication towers: 
(i)  Whether the application represents a request for multiple use of a commercial communication tower or site, or use on a site contiguous to an existing commercial communication tower site. 
(ii)  Whether the application contains a report that other potential users of the site and the commercial communication tower have been contacted, and they have no current plans, to the best of their ability to determine, that could be fulfilled by joint use. 
(iii)  Whether the application shows how the commercial communication tower or site will be designed or laid out to accommodate future multiple users. Specific design features evaluated shall include but not be limited to height, wind loading, and coaxial cable capacity. 
(iv)  Whether the proposed commercial communication tower is to be located in an area where it would be unobtrusive and would not substantially detract from aesthetic or neighborhood character, due either to location, to the nature of surrounding uses, (such as industrial uses) or to lack of visibility caused by natural growth or other factors. 
(c)  Accessory facilities may not include offices, vehicle storage, or outdoor storage unless permitted by underlying zoning. 
(d)  Advertising and/or signage on tower structures is prohibited. 
(e)  The minimum setback requirements from the base of the commercial communication tower to any property line abutting a right-of-way of any planned or existing street, and all residential uses shall be at least fifty (50) feet unless a greater setback is specified due to site specific characteristics. For property lines abutting nonresidential uses, the minimum setback requirements shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet unless a greater setback is specified due to site specific characteristics. The minimum setback for guy towers shall be equal to forty (40) percent of tower height. 
(f)  Minimum site size shall be no less than two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(g)  Commercial communication towers two hundred (200) feet in height or less shall have a galvanized finish or be painted silver. 
Regulations of the Federal Aviation Commission or Federal Communications Commission supersede this requirement if contradictory. 
(h)  Commercial communication towers shall be illuminated as required by the Federal Aviation Administration. However, if not required by the Federal Aviation Commission, no lighting shall be incorporated. 
(i)  Landscaping shall be required as set forth in the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" on file with the department of community development, development services center. 
(j)  Additional conditions may be included contingent upon site specific characteristics for commercial communication towers other than those exempt under subsection (k) herein below. 
(k)  Commercial communication towers up to one hundred fifty (150) feet in height sited on properties included in the inventory of appropriate sites for communication towers which is adopted by reference as a component of the 2006 community plan, as amended, are exempt from the use permit requirement provided all the above listed provisions, except for subsection (j), are satisfied and proposals to site said improvements are first reviewed by the planning commission, with its recommendation forwarded to the appropriate board or commission for further consideration. Failure on the part of the planning commission to act on such proposals within ninety (90) days of submission of a complete application shall be deemed to be an approval, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time. 
(35)  Excavation, filling, borrow pit operation, extraction, processing or removal of soil in all districts. 
Provided that nothing herein shall be construed to require the securing of a use permit for the following: swimming pool construction, construction of foundation, landscaping activities on a single lot or parcel, the stripping of sod for agricultural purposes, an approved subdivision plan, activities in connection with a planned unit development, or activities in connection with an approved site plan. The controlled activity shall be subject to the following and subject to securing a use permit. In addition: 
(a)  The minimum lot size for any use in this category shall be two (2) acres. 
(b)  The excavations shall be confined to areas distant at least one hundred (100) feet from all adjoining property lines and distant at least two hundred (200) feet from any dwelling, existing street, or proposed right-of-way and all property lines in a platted subdivision, except that the provisions of this paragraph may be varied when the excavation lies completely within the external boundaries of an approved subdivision and is designed as an integral part thereof; provided that this section shall not apply to borrow pits located wholly within the bed of a navigable stream. 
(c)  The areas for approved activities shall be delineated on a plat prepared by a certified land surveyor licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(d)  No trees or other existing growth shall be removed from the site except in the area to be excavated and in the right-of-way of haul roads, except that an area not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet may be cleared for operational offices, shops, and storage areas. In all cases, existing vegetation shall not be removed immediately prior to excavation in that particular area. 
(e)  Access shall not be from a minor residential street. All vehicular access from the premises on which such operations are conducted to any public roads shall be located to secure public safety, lessen congestion, and facilitate transportation, and shall be so maintained as to eliminate any nuisance from dust to neighboring properties. The city council may deny the application if it finds that excessive traffic congestion or street deterioration would result from the operation. 
(f)  All equipment used for the production or transportation of materials shall be located, constructed, maintained, and operated in such a manner as to eliminate, as far as practicable, noises, vibrations, or dust which are injurious to persons living in the vicinity. Additional equipment not directly involved with the activity shall not be stored or maintained on the premises. 
(g)  The slope of the banks of all excavations under this section shall be designed and maintained as follows: For the first one hundred (100) linear feet towards the center from the perimeter, the slope shall not be steeper than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical; for the second one hundred (100) linear feet, the slope shall not be steeper than two (2) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical; and for distances over two hundred (200) feet, the slope shall not be steeper than one (1) foot horizontal to one (1) foot vertical unless soil or other conditions are such that a flatter slope is required to ensure adequate stability and safety. 
(h)  The slope of the banks of any fill under this subsection shall not exceed one and one-half (1½) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical without the use of an approved retaining wall. A flatter slope than one and one-half (1½) to one (1) may be required if the conditions of the fill material or other conditions are such that a flatter slope is necessary to ensure adequate stability and safety. When filling is to be done adjacent to tidal marshes, an earthen dike or berm shall be established around the portion adjacent to the marsh. The top of the slope of the bank of the dike may not be closer than fifteen (15) feet to the saltbush Sine or other evidence of the upper limits of the marsh, and the slope of the bank on the marsh side shall not exceed three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical. A vegetative cover shall be established upon the dike. 
(i)  A body of freestanding water will be permitted when the grades of slopes, depth of excavation, and run-off structures are approved as not creating a public nuisance or public health hazard. All woody vegetation and debris will be removed from all slopes prior to the pit being filled with water for a distance of one hundred (100) linear feet from the ultimate shore line. 
(j)  A specific plan of systematic operation and rehabilitation shall be submitted and approved which shall provide in all respects for the adequate safeguarding and protection of other nearby interests and the general public health, safety, convenience, prosperity, and welfare, and which shall include a plan and program showing, by contour maps and otherwise, how the land is to be restored to a safe, stable, usable, and generally attractive condition by regrading, draining, planting, or other suitable treatment to resist erosion and conform substantially with adjacent land characteristics. 
(k)  In the case of activities approved pursuant to this subsection, a reduction in the size of the proposed project may be permitted provided that all other provisions of the section are met and provided that such reduction shall be approved by the director of community development. 
(l)  In consideration of applications under this sub-subsection, the council may vary, alter, or modify the specific provisions set forth herein in order to provide for more effective land use and development; giving due regard to the uniqueness and particular characteristics of the parcel of land involved, 
(36)  Promotional event in the C-1, C-2, C-3, M-2, RT-1, PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, DT-1, and DT-2 districts. 
The following minimum conditions shall be met: 
(a)  That an operating permit be secured from the zoning administrator at a cost of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each permit issued. 
(b)  That the event conform and comply with the guidelines following: 
(i)  All rides shall be inspected and approved by the city building official for safety and soundness. 
(ii)  All rides shall be surrounded with a restraining barrier to limit access to the rides. 
(iii)  All electrical wiring shall, to the greatest extent possible, be placed in areas generally not open to the public or protected from public contact. 
(iv)  All facilities for the preparation or dispensing of food shall be approved by the city health official. 
(v)  The sponsors or operators of the event shall provide security forces adequate to maintain order at the site. 
(vi)  The event, if held in a parking area, shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the total parking area. 
(vii)  The sponsor or operator of the event shall provide proof of liability insurance in an amount predetermined by council. 
(viii)  The hours of operation shall be established at the time of application. However, no such event shall extend beyond the normal operating hour of the establishment being promoted. 
(ix)  The provisions of these regulations in no way exempts any such event from complying with all other state and local codes and ordinances. 
(x)  All animals in any event shall be inoculated as required and approved by the city health official. 
(xi)  Enclosures, buildings, shelters, and/or related equipment that may present a fire hazard shall be inspected and approved for use by the fire marshal. 
(c)  That any such event shall be limited to not more than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days. 
(d)  That the zoning administrator shall not issue any operating permit if the proposed event would violate any provisions of the zoning ordinance or any other city codes or ordinances. 
(37)  Agriculture/farming in the R-R district shall be on a lot with a minimum of three (3) acres. 
(38)  Kennel in the R-R district shall have all buildings and areas used for such purposes located at least one hundred (100) feet from all side property lines. 
(39)  Silviculture/plant nursery, no retail sales in the RT-1 district shall be on a minimum of five (5) acres. 
(40)  Motorcycle sales in the C-2 district shall be within a wholly enclosed building. 
(41)  Motorcycle service in the C-2 district shall be within a wholly enclosed building. 
(42)  Vehicle storage, including vehicle storage accessory to sales of new vehicles or gas station in the C-2 district. 
The following minimum conditions shall be met: 
(a)  All storage areas shall be enclosed by a six (6) foot opaque fence. 
(b)  There shall be a landscaped buffer of fifteen (15) feet between the fence and any existing or proposed right-of-way. 
(c)  There shall be a landscaped buffer of twenty (20) feet between the fence and any adjacent residential district or the property line of any existing dwelling unit. 
(d)  There shall be a landscaped buffer of fifteen (15) feet between the fence and any adjacent commercial property. 
(e)  When any yard area of a vehicle storage area abuts the front yard(s) of one (1) or more residential lots, all required fencing and all storage areas shall be set back a distance equal to the largest front setback of the dwelling(s) on the adjacent parcel(s). 
(43)  Ice storage and distribution in the C-3 district shall have a maximum capacity of five (5) tons. 
(44)  Laboratory or research office in the M-1, LFA-2 LFA-3, LFA-4, LFA-6, PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, HRC-1, HRC-2, and HRC-3 districts shall not permit the testing of explosives. 
(45)  Boat sales in the LFA-1 district shall be limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(46)  Community garden in all districts shall be permitted only: 
(a)  As a primary use on city-owned vacant property, designated by city council, as set forth in the Community Garden Rules and Guidelines; 
(b)  As an accessory use on publicly-owned land; or 
(c)  As an accessory to a religious facility, educational, nonprofit, or charitable use. 
(47)  Micro-brewery/distillery/winery in the PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, DT-1, DT-2, and FM-2 districts shall include a retail component which is open to the general public. 
(48)  Outdoor dining, Phoebus in the PH-1, PH-2, and PH-3 districts shall be subject to a zoning administrator permit and the hours of operation shall not extend beyond the hours of operation for the principle establishment. 
(49)  Day care 1, commercial in the C-1, C-2, C-3, DT-1, DT-2, DT-3, PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, FM-1, FM-2, FM-3 and PO-1 districts are subject to a day care permit granted by the zoning administrator with the following attached conditions: 
(a)  Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday; 
(b)  Loading and unloading of clients from vehicles shall be conducted on site and not on any public street or right-of-way; 
(c)  Capacity shall not exceed the number listed on capacity certificate; 
(d)  The day care operator must maintain a daily ledger containing the names of clients cared for; 
(e)  The day care operator must obtain a Certificate of Occupancy prior to commencing the day care operation; and 
(f)  The zoning administrator, or appointed designee, shall have the ability to revoke the day care permit upon violation of any of the above conditions. 
(50)  Day care 2, commercial in the R-LL, R-43, R-R, R-33, R-22, R-15, R-13, R-11, R-9, R-8, R-4, MD-1, MD-2, MD-3, MD-4, R-M, C-1, C-2, C-3, DT-1, DT-2, DT-3, PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, FM-1, FM-2, FM-3, and PO-1 districts. Such facilities are defined as those requesting to operate beyond the conditions set forth under the provisions of "day care 1, commercial" and are subject to obtaining a use permit by city council. Conditions shall include those listed in Section 14-6 Standards for Use Permit Application Review of the City of Hampton Zoning Ordinance. 
(51)  Banquet hall in the PH-1, PH-2, PH-3, DT-1, FM-1, FM-3, and FM-4 districts are subject to a zoning administrator permit with the following attached conditions: 
(a)  Events shall be private and not open to the general public, whether or not a fee is charged; 
(b)  The hours of operation for a banquet hall shall not extend beyond 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. the following day. 
(c)  During the time of any event, occupancy shall not exceed the number listed on the capacity certificate; 
(d)  Live entertainment shall comply with City Code section 22-9 with respect to any sound or noise; 
(e)  Sufficient staff shall be provided to monitor patron behavior upon their exit of the building into the surrounding areas; 
(f)  When required by law, the restaurant must maintain a valid license from the Virginia Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (VABC) and comply with all restrictions or requirements imposed by VABC. In addition, the banquet hall permit may be terminated for any violation of federal, state, or local law; 
(g)  The property owner shall comply with section 4-16 of the Hampton City Code with respect to dancing on the premises and dance floor area; 
(h)  Neither the facility nor any portion of it shall be leased, let, or used by any third party to stage an event for profit. No outside promoter shall be permitted to use, operate, rent, or host any event at the facility; 
(i)  The operator must provide proof of and maintain liability insurance underwritten by insurers, indemnifying the property owner and operator against all claims which may arise in connection with the proposed activity. 
(j)  The banquet hall permit shall be valid for eighteen (18) months from the date of approval by the zoning administrator. After twelve (12) months of operation, prior to the expiration date, the banquet hall permit will be scheduled for review by the zoning administrator to consider if the continuation of the banquet hall permit would not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and that to continue the activities under the banquet hall permit would not cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land in the zoning district. The review will be based, in part, upon a physical site review, traffic flow and control, access to and circulation within the property, off-street parking and loading, hours and manner of operation, noise, light, neighborhood complaints, police service calls, and any violations of any federal, state or local law. If, after review, the zoning administrator determines that the banquet hall permit would not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and that to continue the activities under the banquet hall permit would not cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land in the zoning district, the zoning administrator may administratively extend the banquet hall permit in five-year increments. Each such extension shall be subject to the same administrative review. If the zoning administrator determines that that the banquet hall permit would be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and that to continue the activities under the banquet hall permit would cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land the zoning district, the zoning administrator will notify the permittee of a denial of the extension in writing in the same manner as required under chapter 1 of the zoning ordinance. A permittee aggrieved by the decision of the zoning administrator may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator to the board of zoning appeals in the manner set forth in chapter 13 of the zoning ordinance. Nothing contained herein shall limit the rights of a permittee to seek a new banquet hall permit; and 
(k)  The zoning administrator, or appointed designee, shall have the ability to revoke the banquet hall permit upon violation of any of the above conditions. 
(l)  No zoning administrator permit for a banquet hall shall be issued for a location where a zoning administrator permit for a banquet hall was revoked within the previous twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. Z15-08, 6-10-2015; Ord. No. Z15-19 , 10-14-2015; Ord. No. Z15-25 , 12-9-2015; Ord. No. Z16-06 , 4-13-16; Ord. No. Z16-11 , 6-8-2016; Ord. No. Z16-17 , 10-12-2016; Ord. No. Z19-01 , 1-9-2019; Ord. No. Z19-05 , 1-9-2019)  
Chapter 4 - ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
ARTICLE I. - R-LL DISTRICT—ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Intent. 
The purpose of the R-LL (Large Lot), One Family Residential District is to provide the opportunity for the development of quality housing products at the density envisioned by the Harris Creek Small Area Plan, adopted in February 2000. The development regulations in this chapter are designed to protect the existing rural nature of the area and encourage open space and aggregated green areas, thereby minimizing land disturbance and negative environmental impacts.  
Sec. 4-2. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 4-3. - Height. 
Buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height; provided that the height limit for any building may be increased to not more than forty-five (45) feet when side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet each are provided  
Sec. 4-4. - Lot area. 
(1)  All lots shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2½) acres with a minimum frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(2)  In an effort to promote cluster development, the required lot area and public street frontage can be reduced by-right. The minimum two and one-half (2½) acre lot area may be reduced to one (1) acre for detached, single-family dwellings so long as the remaining one and one-half (1½) acres per unit are maintained as commonly held green space In this circumstance, the required street frontage may be reduced to one hundred twenty (120) feet.  
Sec. 4-5. - Dwelling area. 
All dwellings shall contain a minimum of two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) square feet of heated living area; however, if a lot is created in an R-LL District through legal means other than city subdivision approval, any dwelling erected on such a lot shall have at least one thousand six hundred twenty (1,620) square feet of heated living area.  
Sec. 4-6. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet; however, any lot of record existing prior to February 26, 2003 shall be required to have a front yard equal to the average front yard in the block on which it is located. Such yards shall never be less than twenty (20) feet in depth, and shall not be required to be more than sixty (60) feet in depth. 
Religious facilities shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this setback shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. The depth of the two (2) side yards on any lot shall total at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, measured at the front setback line. No individual side yard shall be less than ten (10) percent of the lot width unless the total side yard depth is required to be twenty-five (25) feet or more. In that case, one (1) of the side yards may be reduced to ten (10) feet in depth, with the balance of the twenty-five (25) percent located in the remaining side yard. Any side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
Lots having a width of forty (40) feet or less and of record prior to January 27, 1960 may have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet on each side. 
Religious facilities shall provide side yards, the total of which shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, with a minimum individual side yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, provided if the total lot depth exceeds seventy-five (75) feet, additional rear yard depth is required. The rear yard shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the lot depth over seventy-five (75) feet, but in no case shall any rear yard be required to be more than thirty-five (35) feet in depth. 
Religious facilities shall provide a rear yard of thirty (30) feet; parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited.  
Secs. 4-7—4-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - R-43 DISTRICT—ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 4-11. - Intent. 
The purpose of the R-43, One Family Residential District is to provide the opportunity for the development of quality housing products at the density envisioned by the Harris Creek Small Area Plan, adopted in February 2000. The development regulations in this chapter are designed to protect the existing rural nature of the area and encourage open space and aggregated green areas, thereby minimizing land disturbance and negative environmental impacts.  
Sec. 4-12. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 4-13. - Height. 
All buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height; provided that the height limit for any building may be increased to not more than forty-five (45) feet when side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet each are provided.  
Sec. 4-14. - Lot area. 
(1)  All lots shall be a minimum of one (1) acre with a minimum frontage of one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(2)  In an effort to promote cluster development, the required lot area and public street frontage can be reduced by-right. The minimum one (1) acre lot area may be reduced to three-fourths (¾) acre for detached, single-family dwellings so long as the remaining one-quarter (¼) acre per unit are maintained as commonly held green space. In this circumstance, the required street frontage may be reduced to one hundred (100) feet.  
Sec. 4-15. - Dwelling area. 
All dwellings shall contain a minimum of two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) square feet of heated living area; however, if a lot is created in an R-43 District through legal means other than city subdivision approval, any dwelling erected on such a lot shall have at least one thousand six hundred twenty (1,620) square feet of heated living area.  
Sec. 4-16. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet; however, any lot of record existing prior to February 26, 2003 shall be required to have a front yard equal to the average front yard in the block on which it is located. Such yards shall never be less than twenty (20) feet in depth, and shall not be required to be more than sixty (60) feet in depth. 
Religious facilities shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this setback shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. The depth of the two (2) side yards shall total at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, measured at the front setback line. No individual side yard shall be less than ten (10) percent of the lot width unless the total side yard depth is required to be twenty-five (25) feet or more. In that case, one (1) of the side yards may be reduced to ten (10) feet in depth, with the balance of the twenty-five (25) percent located in the remaining side yard. Any side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Lots having a width of forty (40) feet or less and of record prior to January 27, 1960 may have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet on each side. 
Religious facilities shall provide side yards, the total of which shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, with a minimum individual side yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, provided if the total lot depth exceeds seventy-five (75) feet, additional rear yard depth is required. The rear yard shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the lot depth over seventy-five (75) feet, but in no case shall any rear yard be required to be more than thirty-five (35) feet in depth. 
Religious facilities shall provide a rear yard of thirty (30) feet; parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited.  
Secs. 4-17—4-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - R-R DISTRICT—RURAL ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 4-21. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. Additionally, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  An accessory building or structure or use, including a private pier, private garage, guest house, or servant quarters, is permitted provided: 
(a)  That no guest house shall be located on a lot having an area less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet; 
(b)  That no servant quarters are located in any accessory building on a lot containing less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet; provided further, no accessory building shall be constructed on a lot until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced and no accessory building shall be used unless the main building is completed and in use. 
(2)  One (1) temporary open air stand is permitted provided that it does not exceed an area of two hundred (200) square feet, for the display and sale of products on the premises.  
Sec. 4-22. - Height. 
All buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height; provided that the height limit for any building may be increased to not more than forty-five (45) feet when side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet each are provided.  
Sec. 4-23. - Lot area. 
All lots shall be a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet in area with a minimum frontage of sixty (60) feet.  
Sec. 4-24. - Dwelling area. 
All dwellings shall contain a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area.  
Sec. 4-25. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet; however, lots of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall have a front yard equal to the average front yard in the block, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet; however, no such front yard need be more than sixty (60) feet. 
Religious facilities shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this setback shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. The depth of the two (2) side yards shall total at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, measured at the front setback line. No individual side yard shall be less than ten (10) percent of the lot width unless the total side yard depth is required to be twenty-five (25) feet or more. In that case, one (1) of the side yards may be reduced to ten (10) feet in depth, with the balance of the twenty-five (25) percent located in the remaining side yard. Any side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Lots having a width of forty (40) feet or less and of record prior to January 27, 1960 may have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet on each side. 
Religious facilities shall provide side yards, the total of which shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, with a minimum individual side yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, provided if the depth of the lot is greater than seventy-five (75) feet, the required depth of the rear yards shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the excess depth over seventy-five (75) feet; however, no such rear yard need be more than thirty-five (35) feet. 
Religious facilities shall provide a rear yard of thirty (30) feet; parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited.  
Secs. 4-26—4-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - R-33 DISTRICT—ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 4-31. - Intent. 
The purpose of the R-33, One Family Residential District is to provide the opportunity for the development of quality housing products at a very low density that protects environmentally sensitive areas. The larger lot areas required in the R-33 District reduce the overall density of development, thereby reducing potential hazards and minimizing negative impacts in those areas where the infrastructure was not designed for moderate or high density development.  
Sec. 4-32. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 4-33. - Height. 
All buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height; provided that the height limit for any building may be increased to not more than forty-five (45) feet when side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet each are provided.  
Sec. 4-34. - Lot area. 
All lots shall be a minimum of thirty-three thousand (33,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of one hundred twenty (120) feet.  
Sec. 4-35. - Dwelling area. 
All dwellings shall contain a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of heated living area; however, if a lot is created in an R-33 District through legal means other than city subdivision approval, any dwelling erected on such a lot shall have at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of heated living area.  
Sec. 4-36. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet; however, lots of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall have a front yard equal to the average front yard in the block, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet; however, not such front yard need be more than sixty (60) feet. 
Religious facilities shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this setback shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. The depth of the two (2) side yards shall total at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, measured at the front setback line. No individual side yard shall be less than ten (10) percent of the lot width unless the total side yard depth is required to be twenty-five (25) feet or more. In that case, one (1) of the side yards may be reduced to ten (10) feet in depth, with the balance of the twenty-five (25) percent located in the remaining side yard. Any side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Lots having a width of forty (40) feet or less and of record prior to January 27, 1960 may have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet on each side. 
Religious facilities shall provide side yards, the total of which shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, with a minimum individual side yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited, 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, provided if the depth of the lot is greater than seventy-five (75) feet, the required depth of the rear yards shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the excess depth over seventy-five (75) feet; however, no such rear yard need be more than thirty-five (35) feet. 
Religious facilities shall provide a rear yard of thirty (30) feet; parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited.  
Secs. 4-37—4-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - R-22 DISTRICT—ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 4-41. - Intent. 
The purpose of the R-22, One Family Residential District is to provide the opportunity for the development of quality housing products at a low density that protects environmentally sensitive areas. The larger lot areas required in the R-22 District reduce the overall density of development, thereby reducing potential hazards and minimizing negative impacts in those areas where the infrastructure was not designed for moderate or high density development.  
Sec. 4-42. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 4-43. - Height. 
All buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height; provided that the height limit for any building may be increased to not more than forty-five (45) feet when side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet each are provided.  
Sec. 4-44. - Lot area. 
All lots shall be a minimum of twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of one hundred ten (110) feet.  
Sec. 4-45. - Dwelling area. 
All dwellings shall contain a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of heated living area; however, if a lot is created in an R-22 District through legal means other than city subdivision approval, any dwelling erected on such a lot shall have at least fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of heated living area.  
Sec. 4-46. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet; however, lots of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall have a front yard equal to the average front yard in the block, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet; however, not such front yard need be more than sixty (60) feet. 
Religious facilities shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this setback shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. The depth of the two (2) side yards shall total at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, measured at the front setback line. No individual side yard shall be less than ten (10) percent of the lot width unless the total side yard depth is required to be twenty-five (25) feet or more. In that case, one (1) of the side yards may be reduced to ten (10) feet in depth, with the balance of the twenty-five (25) percent located in the remaining side yard. Any side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Lots having a width of forty (40) feet or less and of record prior to January 27, 1960 may have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet on each side. 
Religious facilities shall provide side yards, the total of which shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, with a minimum individual side yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, provided if the depth of the lot is greater than seventy-five (75) feet, the required depth of the rear yards shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the excess depth over seventy-five (75) feet; however, no such rear yard need be more than thirty-five (35) feet. 
Religious facilities shall provide a rear yard of thirty (30) feet; parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited.  
Secs. 4-47—4-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - R-15 DISTRICT—ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 4-51. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 4-52. - Height. 
Buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height; provided that the height limit for any building may be increased to not more than forty-five (45) feet when side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet each are provided.  
Sec. 4-53. - Lot area. 
All lots shall be a minimum of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of ninety (90) feet.  
Sec. 4-54. - Dwelling area. 
All dwellings shall contain a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of heated living area; however, if a lot is created in an R-15 District through legal means other than city subdivision approval, any dwelling erected on such a lot shall have at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of heated living area.  
Sec. 4-55. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet; however, lots of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall have a front yard equal to the average front yard in the block, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet; however, no such front yard need be more than sixty (60) feet. 
Religious facilities shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this setback shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. The depth of the two (2) side yards shall total at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, measured at the front setback line. No individual side yard shall be less than ten (10) percent of the lot width unless the total side yard depth is required to be twenty-five (25) feet or more. In that case, one (1) of the side yards may be reduced to ten (10) feet in depth, with the balance of the twenty-five (25) percent located in the remaining side yard. Any side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Lots having a width of forty (40) feet or less and of record prior to January 27, 1960 may have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet on each side. 
Religious facilities shall provide side yards, the total of which shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, with a minimum individual side yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, provided if the depth of the lot is greater than seventy-five (75) feet, the required depth of the rear yards shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the excess depth over seventy-five (75) feet; however, no such rear yard need be more than thirty-five (35) feet. 
Religious facilities shall provide a rear yard of thirty (30) feet; parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited.  
Secs. 4-56—4-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - R-13 DISTRICT—ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 4-61. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted,  
Sec. 4-62. - Height. 
Buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height; provided that the height limit for any building may be increased to not more than forty-five (45) feet when side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet each are provided.  
Sec. 4-63. - Lot area. 
All lots shall be a minimum of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of eighty (80) feet.  
Sec. 4-64. - Dwelling area. 
All dwellings shall contain a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of heated living area; if an attached fully enclosed garage or porch on either end has the same type construction and exterior appearance as the dwelling, then two hundred (200) square feet of the floor area of either or both may be applied and considered a part of the two thousand (2,000) square feet, provided that screened-in porches shall not qualify for this credit.  
Sec. 4-65. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet; however, lots of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall have a front yard equal to the average front yard in the block, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet; however, no such front yard need be more than sixty (60) feet. 
Colleges and public or private schools as may be permitted in this section shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the front property line and at least thirty (30) feet from all other boundary fines of the property. 
Religious facilities shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this setback shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. The depth of the two (2) side yards shall total at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, measured at the front setback line. No individual side yard shall be less than ten (10) percent of the lot width unless the total side yard depth is required to be twenty-five (25) feet or more. In that case, one (1) of the side yards may be reduced to ten (10) feet in depth, with the balance of the twenty-five (25) percent located in the remaining side yard. Any side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
Lots having a width of forty (40) feet or less and of record prior to January 27, 1960 may have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet on each side. 
Religious facilities shall provide side yards, the total of which shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, with a minimum individual side yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, provided if the depth of the lot is greater than seventy-five (75) feet, the required depth of the rear yards shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the excess depth over seventy-five (75) feet; however, no such rear yard need be more than thirty-five (35) feet. 
Religious facilities shall provide a rear yard of thirty (30) feet; parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited.  
Secs. 4-66—4-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - R-11 DISTRICT—ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 4-71. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 4-72. - Height. 
Buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height; provided that the height limit for any building may be increased to not more than forty-five (45) feet when side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet each are provided.  
Sec. 4-73. - Lot area. 
All lots shall be a minimum of nine thousand (9,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of seventy (70) feet.  
Sec. 4-74. - Dwelling area. 
All dwellings shall contain a minimum of one thousand seven hundred (1,700) square feet of heated living area; if an attached fully enclosed garage or porch on either end has the same type construction and exterior appearance as the dwelling, then two hundred (200) square feet of the floor area of either or both may be applied and considered a part of the one thousand seven hundred (1,700) square feet, provided that screened-in porches shall not qualify for this credit feet.  
Sec. 4-75. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet; however, lots of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall have a front yard equal to the average front yard in the block, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet; however, no such front yard need be more than sixty (60) feet. 
Colleges and public or private schools as may be permitted in this section shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the front property line and at least thirty (30) feet from all other boundary lines of the property. 
Religious facilities shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this setback shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. The depth of the two (2) side yards shall total at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, measured at the front setback line. No individual side yard shall be less than ten (10) percent of the lot width unless the total side yard depth is required to be twenty-five (25) feet or more. In that case, one (1) of the side yards may be reduced to ten (10) feet in depth, with the balance of the twenty-five (25) percent located in the remaining side yard. Any side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Lots having a width of forty (40) feet or less and of record prior to January 27, 1960 may have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet on each side. 
Religious facilities shall provide side yards, the total of which shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, with a minimum individual side yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, provided if the depth of the lot is greater than seventy-five (75) feet, the required depth of the rear yards shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the excess depth over seventy-five (75) feet; however, no such rear yard need be more than thirty-five (35) feet. 
Religious facilities shall provide a rear yard of thirty (30) feet; parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited.  
Secs. 4-76—4-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - R-9 DISTRICT—ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 4-81. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 4-82. - Height. 
Buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height; provided that the height limit for any building may be increased to not more than forty-five (45) feet when side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet each are provided.  
Sec. 4-83. - Lot area. 
All lots shall be a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of sixty (60) feet.  
Sec. 4-84. - Dwelling area. 
All dwellings shall contain a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of heated living area; if an attached fully enclosed garage or porch on either end has the same type construction and exterior appearance as the dwelling, then two hundred (200) square feet of the floor area of either or both may be applied and considered a part of the one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, provided that screened-in porches shall not qualify for this credit.  
Sec. 4-85. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet; however, lots of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall have a front yard equal to the average front yard in the block, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet; however, no such front yard need be more than sixty (60) feet. 
Colleges and public or private schools as may be permitted in this section shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the front property line and at least thirty (30) feet from all other boundary lines of the property. 
Religious facilities shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this setback shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. The depth of the two (2) side yards shall total at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, measured at the front setback line. No individual side yard shall be less than ten (10) percent of the lot width unless the total side yard depth is required to be twenty-five (25) feet or more. In that case, one (1) of the side yards may be reduced to ten (10) feet in depth, with the balance of the twenty-five (25) percent located in the remaining side yard. Any side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
Lots having a width of forty (40) feet or less and of record prior to January 27, 1960 may have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet on each side. 
Religious facilities shall provide side yards, the total of which shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, with a minimum individual side yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, provided if the depth of the lot is greater than seventy-five (75) feet, the required depth of the rear yards shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the excess depth over seventy-five (75) feet; however no such rear yard need be more than thirty-five (35) feet. 
Religious facilities shall provide a rear yard of thirty (30) feet; parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited.  
Secs. 4-86—4-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - R-8 DISTRICT—TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 4-91. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 4-92. - Height. 
Buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height; provided that the height limit for any building may be increased to not more than forty-five (45) feet when side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet each are provided.  
Sec. 4-93. - Lot area. 
(1)  One-family dwelling: all lots shall be a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of sixty (60) feet. 
(2)  Two-family dwelling: all lots shall be a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  Duplex unit: all lots shall be a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of forty (40) feet.  
Sec. 4-94. - Dwelling area. 
(1)  One-family dwelling: all dwellings shall contain a minimum of one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet of heated living area. 
(2)  Two-family dwelling: all dwellings shall contain a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of heated living area per each dwelling unit. 
(3)  Duplex unit: all dwellings shall contain a minimum of one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet of heated living area. If an attached fully enclosed garage or porch on either end has the same type construction and exterior appearance as the dwelling, then two hundred (200) square feet of the floor area of either or both may be applied and considered a part of the minimum square footage, provided that screened-in porches shall not qualify for this credit.  
Sec. 4-95. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet; however, lots of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall have a front yard equal to the average front yard in the block, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet; however, no such front yard need be more than sixty (60) feet. 
Colleges and public or private schools as may be permitted in this section shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the front property line and at least thirty (30) feet from all other boundary lines of the property. 
Religious facilities shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this setback shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. The depth of the two (2) side yards shall total at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, measured at the front setback line. No individual side yard shall be less than ten (10) percent of the lot width unless the total side yard depth is required to be twenty-five (25) feet or more. In that case, one (1) of the side yards may be reduced to ten (10) feet in depth, with the balance of the twenty-five (25) percent located in the remaining side yard. Any side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
Lots having a width of forty (40) feet or less and of record prior to January 27, 1960 may have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet on each side. 
Religious facilities shall provide side yards, the total of which shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, with a minimum individual side yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, provided if the depth of the lot is greater than seventy-five (75) feet, the required depth of the rear yards shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the excess depth over seventy-five (75) feet; however, no such rear yard need be more than thirty-five (35) feet. 
Religious facilities shall provide a rear yard of thirty (30) feet; parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited.  
Secs. 4-96—4-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - R-4 DISTRICT—ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 4-101. - Intent and application of the district. 
This district is intended to accommodate the orderly development of residential neighborhoods in traditional lot patterns as found in the city's earlier neighborhoods. This district is also intended to facilitate development of sizable infill parcels within established neighborhoods in a compatible manner. Such development makes efficient use of available land in well-connected patterns helping to create a pedestrian friendly environment. 
Application of this district shall be limited to two (2) scenarios: 
(1)  Contiguous lots collectively comprising a minimum of twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet of land area to justify consideration for applying the R-4 District within the context of the recommendations of the comprehensive plan and the surrounding zoning and development pattern; or 
(2)  Geographic areas within the boundaries of adopted master plans, small area plans or neighborhood plans which recommend residential development on lots meeting R-4 standards and are further governed by a city adopted pattern book to which any development shall conform.  
Sec. 4-102. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 4-103. - Height. 
Buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height.  
Sec. 4-104. - Lot area. 
(1)  A lot served by an alley shall contain a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet and such lot shall have a minimum frontage of forty (40) feet, unless located on a corner, in which case the lot shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet and such lot shall have a minimum frontage of fifty (50) feet; or 
(2)  Lots without alley access shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet and such lot shall have a minimum frontage of fifty (50) feet.  
Sec. 4-105. - Dwelling area. 
All dwellings shall contain a minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of heated living area.  
Sec. 4-106. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. 
(a)  The front yard setback shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet for single-family homes. 
(b)  Religious facilities and other places of assembly shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet. Parking shall be prohibited within this required setback. 
(2)  Side yard. 
(a)  The side yard setback shall be a minimum of five (5) feet for single-family homes, unless on a corner lot. 
(b)  The side yard setback shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet for single-family homes on a corner lot. Unenclosed porches with a roof may project into this required side yard a maximum of eight (8) feet. 
(c)  Religious facilities and other places of assembly shall provide minimum side yards of twenty (20) feet. Parking shall be prohibited within this required setback. 
(3)  Rear yard. 
(a)  The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet for single-family homes. Garages, as permitted in this section, shall have a minimum setback of five (5) feet. 
(b)  Religious facilities shall provide a minimum rear yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the rear property line shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. Z18-02 , 1-10-2018)  
Sec. 4-107. - Connectivity of streets. 
Regular intersections with through streets shall be created at intervals no greater than eight hundred (800) feet, except for places where connections cannot be made because of physical obstacles, such as construction of existing buildings, wetlands, water bodies, railroad and utility rights-of-way, existing limited access rights-of-way, and parks or dedicated open space. New streets and street extensions shall align with existing streets and creating regular blocks as much as practicable. Cul-de-sacs shall not be utilized to the extent practicable. 
  
Sec. 4-108. - Additional regulations. 
Upon the approval of the rezoning of property to R-4 the following additional regulations shall apply. 
(1)  For structures to be constructed on R-4 lots, the following shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for approval: 
(a)  A plat showing a footprint of the proposed structure(s) along with the location of any proposed driveways, alleys, parking aprons, or similar feature. 
(b)  Building elevations including description of proposed materials. 
(c)  Floor plans. 
(d)  A landscape plan. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall review the documents and render a determination, in writing, as to whether the proposed structure is consistent with either: 
(a)  The adopted pattern book, if one (1) has been adopted by the city for the geographic area, in which the proposed R-4 structure is to be constructed; or 
(b)  If a pattern book has not been adopted by the city for the geographic area in which the proposed R-4 structure is to be constructed, the general visual character, placement and architectural scale (size, height, bulk, etc.) of existing single-family homes within three hundred (300) feet in all directions from the subject lot's property lines.  
Secs. 4-109—4-110. - Reserved.  
Chapter 5 - MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
ARTICLE I. - R-M DISTRICT—MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 5-2. - Height regulations. 
No building in an R-M District shall exceed three (3) stories or fifty-one (51) feet in height, provided that the height limit of any building may be increased to no more that sixty-eight (68) feet, but not more than four (4) stories when side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet are provided; however, buildings may be increased an additional five (5) feet in height for each additional ten (10) feet of side yard.  
Sec. 5-3. - Lot area. 
(1)  No one-family dwelling in an R-M District shall be erected or placed on a lot or building site containing less than six thousand (6,000) square feet and such lot shall have a minimum frontage of sixty (60) feet. 
(2)  No two-family dwelling in an R-M District shall be erected or placed on a lot or building site containing less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, and such lot shall have a minimum frontage of sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  No duplex dwelling unit in an R-M District shall be erected or placed on a lot or building site containing less than four thousand (4,000) square feet, and such lot shall have a minimum frontage of forty (40) feet. 
(4)  The use of all rooms shall be clearly defined or the plans submitted with the application for a building permit. 
(a)  The minimum lot area of each family or apartment unit in any R-M District shall be as follows: 
Size of apartment unit, by number of bedrooms 	Lot area required for each apartment unit 
Studio/efficiency 	800 sq. ft. 
1-bedroom 	1,200 sq. ft. 
2-bedroom 	1,600 sq. ft. 
3-bedroom or more 	1,800 sq. ft. 
 
(b)  No building in an R-M District shall hereafter be erected or altered to provide for three (3) or more family or apartment units on any lot containing less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of lot area and average width of sixty (60) feet of lot width. The minimum width and area requirements of this paragraph shall not be altered or varied by any commission, board, or administrator.  
Sec. 5-4. - Dwelling area. 
No dwelling in an R-M District shall be erected having a floor area of less than eight hundred (800) square feet. Duplex or semi-detached units shall contain not less than six hundred (600) square feet each. These minimum areas shall be exclusive of attached garages, carports, porches, patios, breezeways, or utility rooms.  
Sec. 5-5. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard in an R-M District having a depth of thirty (30) feet; however, lots of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall have a front yard equal to the average front yard in the block, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet; however, no such front yard need be more than sixty (60) feet. 
Colleges and public or private schools, as may be permitted in this section, shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the front street line and at least thirty (30) feet from all other boundary lines of the property. 
Religious facilities, as may be permitted in this section, shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this setback shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard in an R-M District along each side of each building, and the sum of the sides thereof shall be not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot's width measured at the building setback line. The minimum width of any such side yard shall be ten (10) percent of the lot's width, except that if the total required width of the two (2) side yards is twenty-five (25) feet or more, one (1) need not be more than ten (10) feet in width. The side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
Lots having a width of forty (40) feet or less and of record prior to January 27, 1960 shall have a side yard setback of not less than five (5) feet on each side. 
Religious facilities, as may be permitted in this section, shall provide side yards, the total of which shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width, with a minimum individual side yard of thirty (30) feet. Parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard in an R-M District having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet provided that if the depth of the lot is greater than seventy-five (75) feet, the required depth shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the rear yard depth over seventy-five (75) feet; however, no such rear yard shall need be more than thirty-five (35) feet in depth. Every rear yard shall extend to and be measured from the rearmost portion of the main building. 
Colleges and public or private schools, as may be permitted in this section, shall set back at least fifty (50) feet from the front street line and at least thirty (30) feet from all other boundary lines of the property. 
Religious facilities, as may be permitted in this section, shall provide a rear yard of thirty (30) feet; parking within ten (10) feet of the property line shall be prohibited.  
Secs. 5-6—5-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MD-1 DISTRICT—TOWNHOUSE MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 5-11. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 5-12. - Homeowners' association. 
In the case where the development involves fee-simple ownership of either land or dwelling units or both, and the development also includes land or facilities that are in common ownership, a homeowners' association shall be required. Such association, its executive organ or designated managing agent shall be responsible for any and all commonly-owned property. The city shall be kept notified of the party responsible for commonly-owned property.  
Sec. 5-13. - Building size. 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be permitted up to a height of thirty-six (36) feet; the limit for any building may be increased to forty-one (41) feet when side yards of at least thirty (30) feet each are provided. 
(2)  Townhouse structures shall not exceed a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) feet in length.  
Sec. 5-14. - Lot area. 
Townhouse and multi-family development shall be permitted on lots with a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.  
Sec. 5-15. - Dwelling area. 
The minimum dwelling area of all units shall equal that of the least restrictive, adjacent single-family district; if there is no adjacent single-family district, the minimum dwelling area shall be nine hundred (900) square feet.  
Sec. 5-16. - Density. 
Residential development shall be permitted a maximum density of ten (10) units per buildable acre.  
Sec. 5-17. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Residential uses. 
(a)  Setbacks from project property lines. 
(i)  Front yard. All structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the front project property line; however, if the property is adjacent to any single-family or duplex residential district all structures located within fifty (50) feet of said residential district shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front project property line. Parking within this required front yard shall be prohibited. 
(ii)  Side yard. All structures shall be set back from the side project property lines, with one (1) side yard equal to ten (10) percent, and the other equal to fifteen (15) percent, of the lot width as measured at the front setback line. Except for the provisions of subsection 5-13(1) above, the total of the two (2) side yards shall not be required to exceed forty (40) feet. Parking within this side yard shall be prohibited. 
(iii)  Rear yard. All structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the rear project property line. Parking within this required rear yard shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Setbacks from fee-simple lot lines. 
(i)  Front yard. All dwelling units shall be set back at least eight (8) feet from the front fee-simple lot line; however, if the front fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line, the setbacks in subsection 5-17(1)(a) shall apply, in addition to the eight (8) feet required herein. 
(ii)  Side yard. No side yard shall be required unless the side fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line; in which case the setbacks in subsection 5-17(1)(a) shall apply. 
(iii)  Rear yard. All dwelling units shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the rear fee-simple lot line; however, if the rear fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line, the setbacks in subsection 5-17(1)(a) shall apply, in addition to the twenty (20) feet required herein. 
(c)  Distance between improvements. 
(i)  For any townhouse or multi-family dwelling project with all buildings less than or equal to thirty-six (36) feet in height, there shall be provided a sixteen (16) foot radius between all structures or improvements, exclusive of surface parking and walkways. 
(ii)  Projects with one (1) or more buildings in excess of thirty-six (36) feet in height shall provide a twenty-five (25) foot radius between all structures or improvements, exclusive of surface parking and walkways. 
(2)  Colleges and public or private schools, as may be permitted in this section, shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the front property line and thirty (30) feet from the side and rear property lines. 
(3)  Religious facilities, as may be permitted in this section, shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this required setback shall be prohibited. Side setbacks of at least thirty (30) feet each shall be provided, and the sum of such side yards shall equal at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width. A setback of at least thirty (30) feet shall be provided from the rear property line. Parking within ten (10) feet of any side or rear property line is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Sec. 5-18. - Lot coverage and green area. 
(1)  Buildings and structures, exclusive of physical recreational amenities, shall be permitted a total lot coverage of twenty (20) percent. 
(2)  A minimum of forty (40) percent of the total lot area shall be maintained as green area. This green area shall be exclusive of the eight (8) foot front and twenty (20) foot rear yards within fee-simple lots. 
(a)  A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of this requirement may be water area. 
(b)  A maximum of fifty (50) percent of this requirement may be within the footprint of physical recreational amenities. 
(3)  In order to encourage the provision of active recreation areas within townhouse and multiple dwelling developments, density bonuses shall be granted to those developments meeting all the criteria for active recreation areas: 
(a)  Fifty (50) percent of the required green is active recreation area. 
(b)  The minimum dimension of any active recreation area is fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  Each dwelling unit is within five hundred (500) feet of an active recreation area. 
(d)  If the total area of the site is greater than two (2) acres, ten thousand (10,000) contiguous square feet of active recreation area shall be provided for each two (2) acres of lot area. 
(4)  A bonus of one (1) dwelling unit per acre will be granted under the provisions of subsection 5-18(3) above for each of the following facilities: 
(a)  Swimming pool; 
(b)  Clubhouse; 
(c)  Lighted tennis court; 
(d)  Lighted basketball court; 
(e)  Nine-hole golf course; 
(f)  Dock, pier, or boat ramp; 
(g)  Shuffleboard area; or 
(h)  On-site day care. 
In no case, however, will the total bonus granted under these provisions exceed ten (10) units for the entire development. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Secs. 5-19, 5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MD-2 DISTRICT—MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 5-21. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 5-22. - Homeowners' association. 
In the case where the development involves fee-simple ownership of either land or dwelling units or both, and the development also includes land or facilities that are in common ownership, a homeowners' association shall be required. Such association, its executive organ or designated managing agent shall be responsible for any and all commonly-owned property. The city shall be kept notified of the party responsible for commonly-owned property.  
Sec. 5-23. - Building size. 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be permitted up to a height of thirty-six (36) feet; the limit shall be increased to forty-one (41) feet when side yards of at least thirty (30) feet each are provided. 
(2)  Townhouse structures shall not exceed a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) feet in length.  
Sec. 5-24. - Lot area. 
Townhouse and multi-family development shall be permitted on lots of a minimum of one (1) acre.  
Sec. 5-25. - Dwelling area. 
(1)  Townhouse units shall have a minimum dwelling area of nine hundred (900) square feet. 
(2)  Multi-family units shall have a minimum dwelling area of five hundred (500) square feet.  
Sec. 5-26. - Density. 
Residential development shall be permitted a maximum density of sixteen (16) units per buildable acre.  
Sec. 5-27. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Residential uses. 
(a)  Setbacks from project property lines. 
(i)  Front yard. All structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the front project property line; however, if the property is adjacent to any single-family or duplex residential district, all structures located within fifty (50) feet of said residential district shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front project property line. Parking within this required front yard shall be prohibited. 
(ii)  Side yard. All structures shall be set back from the side project property lines, with one (1) side yard equal to ten (10) percent, and the other equal to fifteen (15) percent, of the lot width as measured at the front setback line. Except for the provisions of subsection 5-22(1) above, the total of the two (2) side yards shall not be required to exceed forty (40) feet. Parking within this side yard shall be prohibited. 
(iii)  Rear yard. All structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the rear project property line. Parking within this required rear yard shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Setbacks from fee-simple lot lines. 
(i)  Front yard. All dwelling units shall be set back at least eight (8) feet from the front fee-simple lot line; however, if the front fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line, the setbacks in subsection 5-27(1)(a) shall apply, in addition to the eight (8) feet required herein. 
(ii)  Side yard. No side yard shall be required unless the side fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line; in which case the setbacks in subsection 5-27(1)(a) shall apply. 
(iii)  Rear yard. All dwelling units shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the rear fee-simple lot line; however, if the rear fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line, the setbacks in subsection 5-27(1)(a) shall apply, in addition to the twenty (20) feet required herein. 
(c)  Distance between improvements. 
(i)  For any townhouse or multi-family dwelling project with all buildings less than or equal to thirty-six (36) feet in height, there shall be provided a sixteen-foot radius between all structures or improvements, exclusive of surface parking and walkways. 
(ii)  Projects with one (1) or more buildings in excess of thirty-six (36) feet in height shall provide a twenty-five (25) foot radius between all structures or improvements, exclusive of surface parking and walkways. 
(2)  Colleges and public or private schools, as may be permitted in this section, shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the front property line and thirty (30) feet from the side and rear property lines. 
(3)  Religious facilities, as may be permitted in this section, shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this required setback shall be prohibited. Side setbacks of at least thirty (30) feet each shall be provided, and the sum of such side yards shall equal at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width. A setback of at least thirty (30) feet shall be provided from the rear property line. Parking within ten (10) feet of any side or rear property line is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Sec. 5-28. - Lot coverage and green area. 
(1)  Buildings and structures, exclusive of physical recreational amenities, shall be permitted a total lot coverage of twenty (20) percent. 
(2)  A minimum of forty (40) percent of the total lot area shall be maintained as green area. This green area shall be exclusive of the eight (8) foot front and twenty (20) foot rear yards within fee-simple lots. 
(a)  A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of this requirement may be water area. 
(b)  A maximum of fifty (50) percent of this requirement may be within the footprint of physical recreational amenities. 
(3)  In order to encourage the provision of active recreation areas within townhouse and multiple dwelling developments, density bonuses shall be granted to those developments meeting all the criteria for active recreation areas: 
(a)  Fifty (50) percent of the required green is active recreation area. 
(b)  The minimum dimension of any active recreation area is fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  Each dwelling unit is within five hundred (500) feet of an active recreation area. 
(d)  If the total area of the site is greater than two (2) acres, ten thousand (10,000) contiguous square feet of active recreation area shall be provided for each two (2) acres of lot area. 
(4)  A bonus of one (1) dwelling unit per acre will be granted under the provisions of subsection 5-28(3) for each of the following facilities: 
(a)  Swimming pool; 
(b)  Clubhouse; 
(c)  Lighted tennis court; 
(d)  Lighted basketball court; 
(e)  Nine-hole golf course; 
(f)  Dock, pier, or boat ramp; 
(g)  Shuffleboard area; or 
(h)  On-site day care. 
In no case, however, will the total bonus granted under these provisions exceed ten (10) units for the entire development. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Secs. 5-29, 5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MD-3 DISTRICT—MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 5-31. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 5-32. - Homeowners' association. 
In the case where the development involves fee-simple ownership of either land or dwelling units or both, and the development also includes land or facilities that are in common ownership, a homeowners' association shall be required. Such association, its executive organ or designated managing agent shall be responsible for any and all commonly-owned property. The city shall be kept notified of the party responsible for commonly-owned property.  
Sec. 5-33. - Building size. 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be permitted up to a height of fifty-six (56) feet. 
(2)  Townhouse structures shall not exceed a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) feet in length.  
Sec. 5-34. - Lot area. 
Townhouse and multi-family developments shall be permitted on lots of a minimum of two (2) acres.  
Sec. 5-35. - Dwelling area. 
(1)  Townhouse units shall have a minimum dwelling area of nine hundred (900) square feet. 
(2)  Multi-family units shall have a minimum dwelling area of five hundred (500) square feet.  
Sec. 5-36. - Density. 
Residential development shall be permitted a maximum density of twenty (20) units per buildable acre.  
Sec. 5-37. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Residential uses. 
(a)  Setbacks from project property lines. 
(i)  Front yard. All structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the front project property line; however, if the property is adjacent to any single-family or duplex residential district, all structures located within fifty (50) feet of said residential district shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front project property line. Parking within this required front yard shall be prohibited. 
(ii)  Side yard. All structures shall be set back from the side project property lines, with one (1) side yard equal to ten (10) percent, and the other equal to fifteen (15) percent, of the lot width as measured at the front setback line. In any case, the total of the two (2) side yards shall not be required to exceed forty (40) feet. Parking within this side yard shall be prohibited. 
(iii)  Rear yard. All structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the rear project property line. 
Parking within this required rear yard shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Setbacks from fee-simple lot lines. 
(i)  Front yard. All dwelling units shall be set back at least eight (8) feet from the front fee-simple lot line; however, if the front fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line, the setbacks in subsection 5-37(1)(a) shall apply, in addition to the eight (8) feet required herein. 
(ii)  Side yard. No side yard shall be required unless the side fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line; in which case the setbacks in subsection 5-37(1)(a) shall apply. 
(iii)  Rear yard. All dwelling units shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the rear fee-simple lot line; however, if the rear fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line, the setbacks in subsection 5-37(1)(a) shall apply, in addition to the twenty (20) feet required herein. 
(c)  Distance between improvements. 
(i)  For any townhouse or multi-family dwelling project with all building less than or equal to thirty-six (36) feet in height there shall be provided a sixteen-foot radius between all structures or improvements, exclusive of surface parking and walkways. 
(ii)  Projects with one (1) or more buildings in excess of thirty-six (36) feet in height shall provide a twenty-five-foot radius between all structures or improvements, exclusive of surface parking and walkways. 
(2)  Colleges and public or private schools, as may be permitted in this section, shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the front property line and thirty (30) feet from the side and rear property lines. 
(3)  Religious facilities, as may be permitted in this section, shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line; parking within this required setback shall be prohibited. Side setbacks of at least thirty (30) feet each shall be provided, and the sum of such side yards shall equal at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width. A setback of at least thirty (30) feet shall be provided from the rear property line. Parking within ten (10) feet of any side or rear property line is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Sec. 5-38. - Lot coverage and green area. 
(1)  Buildings and structures, exclusive of physical recreational amenities, shall be permitted a total lot coverage of twenty (20) percent. 
(2)  A minimum of forty (40) percent of the total lot area shall be maintained as green area. This green area shall be exclusive of the eight-foot front and twenty-foot rear yards within fee-simple lots. 
(a)  A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of this requirement may be water area. 
(b)  A maximum of fifty (50) percent of this requirement may be within the footprint of physical recreational amenities. 
(3)  In order to encourage the provision of active recreation areas within townhouse and multiple dwelling developments, density bonuses shall be granted to those developments meeting all the criteria for active recreation areas: 
(a)  Fifty (50) percent of the required green is active recreation area. 
(b)  The minimum dimension of any active recreation area is fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  Each dwelling unit is within five hundred (500) feet of an active recreation area. 
(d)  If the total area of the site is greater than two (2) acres, ten thousand (10,000) contiguous square feet of active recreation area shall be provided for each two (2) acres of lot area. 
(4)  A bonus of one (1) dwelling unit per acre will be granted under the provisions of subsection 5-38(3) for each of the following facilities: 
(a)  Swimming pool; 
(b)  Clubhouse; 
(c)  Lighted tennis court; 
(d)  Lighted basketball court; 
(e)  Nine-hole golf course; 
(f)  Dock, pier, or boat ramp; 
(g)  Shuffle board area; or 
(h)  On-site day care. 
In no case, however, will the total bonus granted under these provisions exceed ten (10) units for the entire development. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Secs. 5-39, 5-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MD-4 DISTRICT—MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 5-41. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 5-42. - Homeowners' association. 
In the case where the development involves fee-simple ownership of either land or dwelling units or both, and the development also includes land or facilities that are in common ownership, a homeowners' association shall be required. The homeowners' association documents shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney prior to recordation. 
Such association, its executive organ or designated managing agent shall be responsible for any and all commonly-owned property. The city shall be kept notified of the party responsible for commonly-owned property.  
Sec. 5-43. - Lot area. 
No minimum lot area required except that which is required to meet the minimum required building setbacks for each type of permitted structure and the required off-street parking.  
Sec. 5-44. - Dwelling area. 
(1)  Townhouse units shall have a minimum dwelling area of nine hundred (900) square feet. 
(2)  Multi-family units shall have a minimum dwelling area of five hundred (500) square feet.  
Sec. 5-45. - Setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. 
(a)  Multi-family: There shall be no minimum front yard setback with a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  Townhouse: There shall be no minimum front yard setback with maximum of twenty (20) feet. 
Parking within the front yard shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be no minimum side yard setback unless the property abuts a one-family residential district in which case the minimum shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet unless the property abuts a one-family residential district in which case the minimum shall be thirty (30) feet.  
Secs. 5-46—5-50. - Reserved.  
Chapter 6 - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS  
ARTICLE I. - C-1 DISTRICT—NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 6-2. - Development standards in general. 
(1)  Limitations. Permitted stores, shops, offices, or businesses, except gasoline supply stations and parking lots, shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building and no more than fifty (50) percent of the floor area of any building shall be used for the storage of merchandise. 
(2)  Accessory structures. 
(a)  Accessory structures shall not cover more than twenty (20) percent of the rear yard. 
(b)  No accessory structure shall be located closer than five (5) feet to the rear property line. 
(c)  No accessory structure shall be located closer than three (3) feet to the side property line.  
Sec. 6-3. - Development standards for all uses other than townhouses and multiple dwellings. 
(1)  Height. Maximum of two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, provided that the height limit may be increased to not more than forty-five (45) feet, but not to exceed three (3) stories when side yards of not less than fifty (50) feet each are provided. 
(2)  Green area shall be provided as specified in chapter 1, section 1-30.  
Sec. 6-4. - Development standards for townhouses and multiple dwellings. 
(1)  Homeowners' association. In the case where the development involves fee-simple ownership of either land or dwelling units or both, and the development also includes land or facilities that are in common ownership, a homeowners' association shall be required. Such association, its executive organ or designated managing agent shall be responsible for any and all commonly-owned property. The city shall be kept notified of the party responsible for commonly-owned property. 
(2)  Height and building size. 
(a)  Buildings and structures shall be permitted up to a height of thirty-six (36) feet; the limit for any building may be increased to forty-one (41) feet when side yards of at least thirty (30) feet each are provided. 
(b)  Townhouse structures shall not exceed a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) feet in length. 
(3)  Lot area. Lots shall have a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(4)  Dwelling area. The minimum dwelling area of all units shall equal that of the least restrictive, adjacent single-family district; if there is no adjacent single-family district, the minimum dwelling area shall be nine hundred (900) square feet. 
(5)  Density. The maximum density shall be ten (10) units per buildable acre. 
(6)  Lot coverage and green area. 
(a)  The maximum lot coverage, exclusive of physical recreational amenities, shall be twenty (20) percent. 
(b)  A minimum of forty (40) percent of the total lot area shall be maintained as green area. This green area shall be exclusive of the eight (8) foot front and twenty (20) foot rear yards within fee-simple lots. 
(i)  A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of this requirement may be water area. 
(ii)  A maximum of fifty (50) percent of this requirement may be within the footprint of physical recreational amenities. 
(c)  In order to encourage the provision of active recreation areas, density bonuses shall be granted to developments meeting all the criteria for active recreation areas: 
(i)  Fifty (50) percent of the required green is active recreation area. 
(ii)  The minimum dimension of any active recreation area is fifty (50) feet. 
(iii)  Each dwelling unit is within five hundred (500) feet of an active recreation area. 
(iv)  If the total area of the site is greater than two (2) acres, ten thousand (10,000) contiguous square feet of active recreation area shall be provided for each two (2) acres of lot area. 
(d)  A bonus of one (1) dwelling unit per acre will be granted under the provisions of subsection 6-4(6)(c) for each of the following facilities: 
(i)  Swimming pool; 
(ii)  Clubhouse; 
(iii)  Lighted tennis court; 
(iv)  Lighted basketball court; 
(v)  Nine-hole golf course; 
(vi)  Dock, pier, or boat ramp; 
(vii)  Shuffleboard area; or 
(viii)  On-site day care. 
In no case, however, will the total bonus granted under these provisions exceed ten (10) units for the entire development.  
Sec. 6-5. - Setback regulations for all uses other than townhouses and multiple dwellings. 
(1)  Front yard. No front yard is required. 
(2)  Side yard. No side yard is required except as follows: 
(a)  Where a lot adjoins a residential district, a side yard of ten (10) percent of the lot's width shall be provided, but in no case less than ten (10) feet. 
(b)  The side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in width. 
(c)  Where dwelling units are provided in conjunction with any commercial use, and in which all rooms do not open onto a front or rear yard, there shall be provided side yards of not less than ten (10) feet in width. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than ten (10) percent of the depth of the lot, but such rear yard need not exceed thirty (30) feet, and shall have a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet.  
Sec. 6-6. - Setback regulations for townhouses and multiple dwellings. 
(1)  Setbacks from project property lines. 
(a)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet; however, if the property is adjacent to any single-family or duplex residential district, all structures located within fifty (50) feet of said residential district shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front project property line. Parking within this required front yard shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Side yard. One (1) side yard equal to ten (10) percent and the other equal to fifteen (15) percent of the lot width as measured at the front setback line. Except for the provisions of section 6-4(2)(a) above, the total of the two (2) side yards shall not be required to exceed forty (40) feet. Parking within this side yard shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. Parking within this required rear yard shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Setbacks from fee-simple lot lines. 
(a)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet; however, if the front fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line, the setbacks in subsection 6-6(1)(a) shall apply, in addition to the eight (8) feet required herein. 
(b)  Side yard. No side yard setback is required unless the side fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line; in which case the setbacks in subsection 6-6(1)(b) shall apply. 
(c)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet; however, if the rear fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line, the setbacks in subsection 6-6(1)(c) shall apply, in addition to the twenty (20) feet required herein. 
(3)  Distance between improvements. 
(a)  For any townhouse or multiple dwelling project with all buildings less than or equal to thirty-six (36) feet in height, there shall be provided a sixteen (16) foot radius between all structures or improvements, exclusive of surface parking and walkways. 
(b)  Projects with one (1) or more buildings in excess of thirty-six (36) feet in height shall provide a twenty-five (25) foot radius between all structures or improvements, exclusive of surface parking and walkways.  
Secs. 6-7—6-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - C-2 DISTRICT—LIMITED COMMERCIAL 
 
Sec. 6-11. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 6-12. - Development standards for all uses other than townhouses and multiple dwellings. 
(1)  Height. Maximum of two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, provided that the height limit may be increased provided that all height greater than thirty-five (35) feet shall set back from all required front, side, and rear yards one (1) foot for each three (3) feet of such additional height. 
(2)  Green area shall be provided as specified in chapter 1, section 1-30.  
Sec. 6-13. - Development standards for townhouses and multiple dwellings. 
(1)  Homeowners' association. In the case where the development involves fee-simple ownership of either land or dwelling units or both, and the development also includes land or facilities that are in common ownership, a homeowners' association shall be required. Such association, its executive organ or designated managing agent shall be responsible for any and all commonly-owned property. The city shall be kept notified of the party responsible for commonly-owned property. 
(2)  Height and building size. 
(a)  Buildings and structures shall be permitted up to a height of thirty-six (36) feet; the limit for any building may be increased to forty-one (41) feet when side yards of at least thirty (30) feet each are provided. 
(b)  Townhouse structures shall not exceed a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) feet in length. 
(3)  Lot area. Lots shall have a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(4)  Dwelling area. The minimum dwelling area of all units shall equal that of the least restrictive, adjacent single-family district; if there is no adjacent single-family district, the minimum dwelling area shall be nine hundred (900) square feet. 
(5)  Density. The maximum density shall be twenty (20) units per buildable acre. 
(6)  Lot coverage and green area. 
(a)  The maximum lot coverage, exclusive of physical recreational amenities, shall be twenty (20) percent. 
(b)  A minimum of forty (40) percent of the total lot area shall be maintained as green area. This green area shall be exclusive of the eight (8) foot front and twenty (20) foot rear yards within fee-simple lots. 
(i)  A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of this requirement may be water area. 
(ii)  A maximum of fifty (50) percent of this requirement may be within the footprint of physical recreational amenities. 
(c)  In order to encourage the provision of active recreation areas, density bonuses shall be granted to developments meeting all the criteria for active recreation areas: 
(i)  Fifty (50) percent of the required green is active recreation area. 
(ii)  The minimum dimension of any active recreation area is fifty (50) feet. 
(iii)  Each dwelling unit is within five hundred (500) feet of an active recreation area. 
(iv)  If the total area of the site is greater than two (2) acres, ten thousand (10,000) contiguous square feet of active recreation area shall be provided for each two (2) acres of lot area. 
(d)  A bonus of one (1) dwelling unit per acre will be granted under the provisions of subsection 6-13(6)(c) for each of the following facilities: 
(i)  Swimming pool; 
(ii)  Clubhouse; 
(iii)  Lighted tennis court; 
(iv)  Lighted basketball court; 
(v)  Nine-hole golf course; 
(vi)  Dock, pier, or boat ramp; 
(vii)  Shuffleboard area; or 
(viii)  On-site day care. 
In no case, however, will the total bonus granted under these provisions exceed ten (10) units for the entire development. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Sec. 6-14. - Setback regulations for all uses other than townhouses and multiple dwellings. 
(1)  Front yard. No front yard is required. 
(2)  Side yard. No side yard is required except as follows: 
(a)  Where a lot adjoins a residential district, a side yard of ten (10) percent of the lot's width shall be provided, but in no case less than ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Where dwelling units are provided in conjunction with any commercial use, and in which all rooms do not open onto a front or rear yard, there shall be provided side yards of not less than ten (10) feet in width. 
(3)  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except that if the lot adjoins a residential district, a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet shall be required.  
Sec. 6-15. - Setback regulations for townhouses and multiple dwellings. 
(1)  Setbacks from project property lines. 
(a)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet; however, if the property is adjacent to any single-family or duplex residential district, all structures located within fifty (50) feet of said residential district shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front project property line. Parking within this required front yard shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Side yard. One (1) side yard equal to ten (10) percent and the other equal to fifteen (15) percent of the lot width as measured at the front setback line. Except for the provisions of section 6-14(2)(a) above, the total of the two (2) side yards shall not be required to exceed forty (40) feet. Parking within this side yard shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. Parking within this required rear yard shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Setbacks from fee-simple lot lines. 
(a)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet; however, if the front fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line, the setbacks in subsection 6-15(1)(a) shall apply, in addition to the eight (8) feet required herein. 
(b)  Side yard. No side yard setback is required unless the side fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line; in which case the setbacks in subsection 6-15(1)(b) shall apply. 
(c)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet; however, if the rear fee-simple lot line is the same as any project property line, the setbacks in subsection 6-15(1)(c) shall apply, in addition to the twenty (20) feet required herein. 
(3)  Distance between improvements. 
(a)  For any townhouse or multiple dwelling project with all buildings less than or equal to thirty-six (36) feet in height, there shall be provided a sixteen (16) foot radius between all structures or improvements, exclusive of surface parking and walkways. 
(b)  Projects with one (1) or more buildings in excess of thirty-six (36) feet in height shall provide a twenty-five (25) foot radius between all structures or improvements, exclusive of surface parking and walkways. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Secs. 6-16—6-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - C-3 DISTRICT—GENERAL COMMERCIAL 
 
Sec. 6-21. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 6-22. - Height. 
Buildings shall be a maximum of two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, provided that the height limit may be increased provided that all height greater than thirty-five (35) feet shall set back from all required front, side, and rear yards one (1) foot for each three (3) feet of such additional height.  
Sec. 6-23. - Building setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. No front yard is required. 
(2)  Side yard. No side yard is required except that if the lot adjoins a residential district, then a side yard of ten (10) percent of the lot's width shall be provided, but in no case less than ten (10) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except that if the lot adjoins a residential district, then a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet shall be required.  
Secs. 6-24—6-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 7 - MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS  
ARTICLE I. - M-1 DISTRICT—LIMITED MANUFACTURING 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Purpose of the district. 
The purpose of this district is to provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for certain types of businesses and manufacturing, research and development relatively free from offense, in modern landscaped buildings, to make available more attractive locations for these enterprises and industries, and to provide opportunities for employment closer to employees' residences with corresponding reduction of travel time from home to work. Certain commercial uses are permitted primarily for services to employees in the district. Typical development in the district would be that which is commonly known as an "industrial park." Accessory signs of limited area and application are permitted. In order to preserve the land for industry and to avoid future conflicts between industry and residence, future residential uses are restricted.  
Sec. 7-2. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 7-3. - Development standards. 
The uses permitted in this district shall be subject to the following special conditions: 
(1)  All uses conducted outside of a building shall be screened so as not to be prominently visible from surrounding properties and streets. 
(2)  The front yard and unfenced side yards which abut a street shall be landscaped in accordance with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines." 
(3)  Loading operations shall be conducted at the side or rear of buildings. 
(4)  Accessory buildings or structures shall not be located in the front yard.  
Sec. 7-4. - Height. 
Buildings shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height, unless otherwise approved by use permit in accordance with chapter 14.  
Sec. 7-5. - Setback regulations. 
Minimum dimensions as follows: 
	Required Setback 
Main Buildings 	Required Setback 
Accessory Buildings 
Front yard 	30 feet 	not applicable 
Side yard 	10 feet 	5 feet 
Side yard abutting a residential district 	15 feet 	10 feet 
Rear yard 	15 feet 	10 feet 
Rear yard abutting a residential district 	20 feet 	15 feet 
  
Secs. 7-6—7-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - M-2 DISTRICT—LIGHT MANUFACTURING 
 
Sec. 7-11. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 7-12. - Height. 
Maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that the height limit may be increased provided that all height greater than thirty-five (35) feet shall set back from all lot lines one (1) foot for each three (3) feet of such additional height.  
Sec. 7-13. - Setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. No front yard is required. 
(2)  Side yard. No side yard is required except if the lot abuts a residential district, then there shall be a side yard the same as required in the residential district. 
(3)  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except if the lot abuts a residential district, then there shall be a rear yard the same as required in the residential district.  
Secs. 7-14—7-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - M-3 DISTRICT—HEAVY MANUFACTURING 
 
Sec. 7-21. - Uses permitted. 
Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted.  
Sec. 7-22. - Height. 
All structures shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that the height limit may be increased provided that all height greater than thirty-five (35) feet shall set back from all lot lines one (1) foot for each three (3) feet of such additional height.  
Sec. 7-23. - Setback regulations. 
(1)  Front yard. No front yard is required. 
(2)  Side yard. No side yard is required except if the lot abuts a residential district, then there shall be a side yard the same as required in the residential district. 
(3)  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except if the lot abuts a residential district then there shall be a rear yard the same as required in the residential district.  
Secs. 7-24—7-30. - Reserved.  
Chapter 8 - SPECIAL DISTRICTS  
ARTICLE I. - LANGLEY FLIGHT APPROACH DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Overall intent of Langley Flight Approach (LFA) Districts. 
The purpose of the LFA Districts is to provide reasonable regulation of land use for properties under the flight path of Langley Air Force Base. 
First, the LFA-1 and LFA-2 Districts provide reasonable land use regulations for those industrial and commercial uses which, by their nature, require large amounts of land but are minimally populated by either employees or customers. 
Second, the LFA-1 and LFA-2 Districts provide significant protection to the flight operations at Langley Air Force Base by allowing, in that area nearest the centerline of the runway and the end of the runway, only those uses that are not disrupted by, nor disrupting to, the Base operations. 
Third, the LFA-3, LFA-4, LFA-5 and LFA-6 Districts is to provide reasonable land use regulations for the portion of the flight approach to Langley Air Force Base west of Magruder Boulevard. The regulations limit the intensity of development, specifically the concentration of people living and working in the area within the flight approach, so that there is no negative impact on the flight operations at the Base, but also provide for a wide range of commercial and industrial activities, consistent with the City of Hampton's goals to develop the Magruder Corridor as an economically viable business center.  
Sec. 8-2. - LFA-1 District—Langley Flight Approach Manufacturing. 
(1)  Composition. LFA-1 contains those properties east of Magruder Boulevard and within the rectangle representing the Langley flight approach, fifteen hundred (1,500) feet on either side of the extended centerline of the runway, as it is defined in the Langley AFB Air Installation Compatibility Use Study, 1990, as amended. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. 
(a)  Any use involving the use or storage of flammable or combustible materials shall conform to all pertinent requirements of chapter 14, article II, of the city code, the Fire Prevention Code. 
(b)  No use shall be permitted in the LFA-1 District that has any of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Releases into the air any substance that would impair visibility or otherwise interfere with the operation of aircraft, such as steam, dust or smoke; 
(ii)  Produces fight emissions, either direct or indirect (reflective) that would interfere with pilot vision; 
(iii)  Produces electronic emissions that would interfere with the aircraft communication systems or navigational equipment; 
(iv)  Attracts concentrations of birds that would be hazardous to flight operations; or 
(v)  Involves the use or storage of explosive materials. 
(4)  Height. Structures shall be a maximum height of thirty (30) feet. 
(5)  Setbacks. 
(a)  Rights-of-way. 
(i)  No improvements, with the exception of signs and approved access, may be constructed within fifty (50) feet of Magruder Boulevard or Commander Shepard Boulevard. A landscape plan consistent with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" for the setback shall be submitted for review and approval by the director of community development or his designee prior to the issuance of a building permit for the main structure. 
(ii)  No improvements shall be constructed within ten (10) feet of any other existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
(b)  Side yards. The side yard setback shall be a minimum of three (3) feet when not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way; however, if the side property line abuts a residential district, then there shall be a side yard the same as required in the residential district. 
(c)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of three (3) feet when not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way; however, if the rear property line abuts a residential district, then there shall be a rear yard the same as required in the residential district. 
(6)  Nonconforming uses. Given the nature of the LFA-1 District and its stated purpose, nonconforming uses in the district shall be regulated. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 12, nonconforming uses shall not be permitted to expand beyond the square footage and lot area existing on September 9, 1992.  
Sec. 8-3. - LFA-2 District—Langley Flight Approach Mixed Business and Manufacturing. 
(1)  Composition. LFA-2 contains those properties located east of Magruder Boulevard between Commander Shepard Boulevard and Nettles Lane that are not within the rectangle representing the Langley flight approach, fifteen hundred (1,500) feet on either side of the extended centerline of the runway, as it is defined in the Langley AFB Air Installation Compatibility Use Study, 1990, as amended. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. 
(a)  Any use involving the use or storage of flammable or combustible materials shall conform to all pertinent requirements of chapter 14, article II, of the city code, the Fire Prevention Code. 
(b)  No use shall be permitted in the LFA-2 District that has any of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Releases into the air any substance that would impair visibility or otherwise interfere with the operation of aircraft, such as steam, dust or smoke; 
(ii)  Produces light emissions, either direct or indirect (reflective) that would interfere with pilot vision; 
(iii)  Produces electronic emissions that would interfere with the aircraft communication systems or navigational equipment; 
(iv)  Attracts concentrations of birds that would be hazardous to flight operations; or 
(v)  Involves the use or storage of explosive materials. 
(4)  Height. Structures shall have a maximum height of thirty (30) feet. 
(5)  Setbacks. 
(a)  Rights-of-way. 
(i)  No improvements, with the exception of signs and approved access, may be constructed within fifty (50) feet of Magruder Boulevard or Commander Shepand Boulevard. A landscape plan consistent with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" for the setback shall be submitted for review and approval by the director of community development or his designee prior to the issuance of a building permit for the main structure. 
(ii)  No improvements shall be constructed within ten (10) feet of any other existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
(b)  Side yards. The side yard setback shall be a minimum of three (3) feet when not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way; however, if the side property line abuts a residential district, then there shall be a side yard the same as required in the residential district. 
(c)  Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of three (3) feet when not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way; however, if the rear property line abuts a residential district, then there shall be a rear yard the same as required in the residential district. 
(6)  Nonconforming uses. Given the nature of the LFA-2 District and its stated purpose, nonconforming uses in the district shall be regulated. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 12, nonconforming uses shall not be permitted to expand beyond the square footage and lot area existing on September 9, 1992.  
Sec. 8-4. - LFA-3 District—Langley Flight Approach Hampton Roads Center. 
(1)  Composition. The LFA-3 District shall include use and density restrictions commensurate with the intent of the Langley Flight Approach Districts overall, incorporating appropriate regulations from the HRC-1 District to ensure the continuation of the Hampton Roads Center business park atmosphere. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. 
(a)  Any use involving the use or storage of flammable or combustible materials shall conform to all pertinent requirements of chapter 14, article II, of the city code, the Fire Prevention Code. 
(b)  No use shall be permitted in the LFA-3 District that has any of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Releases into the air any substance that would impair visibility or otherwise interfere with the operation of aircraft, such as steam, dust or smoke; 
(ii)  Produces light emissions, either direct or indirect (reflective) that would interfere with pilot vision; 
(iii)  Produces electronic emissions that would interfere with the aircraft communication systems or navigational equipment; 
(iv)  Attracts concentrations of birds that would be hazardous to flight operations; or 
(v)  Involves the use or storage of explosive materials. 
(c)  All uses shall be conducted within a wholly enclosed building. 
(4)  Building size regulations. 
(a)  All uses, exclusive of storage areas, shall be subject to the following maximum building area per acre: 
(i)  Retail, except furniture and appliance sales: maximum five thousand (5,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(ii)  Furniture and appliance sales—maximum ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(iii)  Personal services maximum five thousand (5,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(iv)  Manufacturing/processing/treatment 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5: maximum twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) gross square feet per acre. 
(v)  Office: maximum seven thousand five hundred (7,500) gross square feet per acre. 
(vi)  Banks: maximum six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) gross square feet per acre. 
(vii)  Private recreation centers: maximum five thousand (5,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(viii)  Brokerage, storage, warehousing, or distribution centers: no maximum. 
(b)  In addition to the limitations outlined above, all development shall conform to the following: 
(i)  No building or group of buildings shall be erected or placed on a lot containing less than three and one-half (3½) acres, unless a lot of lesser area has been recorded prior to May 1, 1985. 
(ii)  The minimum gross floor area of a building or a group of buildings on a lot shall be twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. 
(5)  Height. Structures shall have a maximum height of sixty (60) feet. 
(6)  Setback regulations. 
(a)  Building setbacks. 
(i)  For properties adjacent to the Magruder Boulevard right-of-way, the setback is a minimum of eighty (80) feet, or twice the building height, whichever is greater, from Magruder Boulevard. 
(ii)  For properties adjacent to an interior Hampton Roads Center right-of-way, the setback is a minimum of sixty (60) feet, or twice the building height, whichever is greater, from that right-of-way. 
(iii)  For any side yard not adjacent to said rights-of-way, the setback is a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
(iv)  For any rear yard not adjacent to said rights-of-way, the setback is a minimum of forty (40) feet. 
(v)  There is a setback of twenty (20) feet if adjacent to any lake maintenance easement in Hampton Roads Center. 
(b)  Setbacks for all other improvements, exclusive of entry ways: 
(i)  No parking shall be located within eighty (80) feet of the Magruder Boulevard right-of-way. 
(ii)  No parking shall be located within sixty (60) feet of the right-of-way of any interior Hampton Roads Center right-of-way. 
(iii)  No parking shall be permitted within any other side or rear yard, as described in subsection 8-4(6)(a) above. 
(iv)  No parking shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet of any lake maintenance easement in Hampton Roads Center. 
(7)  Nonconforming uses. Given the nature of the LFA-3 District and its stated purpose, nonconforming uses in the district shall be regulated. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 12, nonconforming uses shall not generally be permitted to expand beyond the square footage existing on September 9, 1992. However, if the specific use involved in the proposed expansion meets the general intent of this district, such expansion may be permitted according to the appropriate development limitations contained in this district.  
Sec. 8-5. - LFA-4 District—Langley Flight Approach Limited Business I. 
(1)  Composition. The LFA-4 District shall include use and density restrictions as described below. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. 
(a)  Any use involving the use or storage of flammable or combustible materials shall conform to all pertinent requirements of chapter 14, article II, of the city code, the Fire Prevention Code. 
(b)  No use shall be permitted in the LFA-4 District that has any of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Releases into the air any substance that would impair visibility or otherwise interfere with the operation of aircraft, such as steam, dust or smoke; 
(ii)  Produces light emissions, either direct or indirect (reflective) that would interfere with pilot vision; 
(iii)  Produces electronic emissions that would interfere with the aircraft communication systems or navigational equipment; 
(iv)  Attracts concentrations of birds that would be hazardous to flight operations; or 
(v)  Involves the use or storage of explosive materials. 
(4)  Building size regulations. 
(a)  All uses, exclusive of storage areas, shall be subject to the following maximum building area per acre: 
(i)  Retail except furniture and appliance sales: maximum five thousand (5,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(ii)  Furniture and appliance sales—maximum ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(iii)  Personal services: maximum five thousand (5,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(iv)  Manufacturing/processing/treatment 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5: maximum twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) gross square feet per acre. 
(v)  Office: maximum seven thousand five hundred (7,500) gross square feet per acre. 
(vi)  Banks: maximum six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) gross square feet per acre. 
(vii)  Private recreation centers: maximum five thousand (5,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(viii)  Brokerage, storage, warehousing, or distribution centers no maximum. 
(5)  Height. Structures shall be a maximum height of sixty (60) feet. 
(6)  Setback regulations. 
(a)  Rights-of-way. No improvements shall be constructed within ten (10) feet of any existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
(b)  Side yards. No improvements shall be constructed within three (3) feet of any side property line that is not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way; however, if the side property line abuts a residential district or the LFA-5 District, then there shall be a side yard the same as required in that district. 
(c)  Rear yard. No improvements shall be constructed within three (3) feet of a rear property line that is not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way; however, if the rear property line abuts a residential district or the LFA-5 District, then there shall be a rear yard the same as required in that district. 
(7)  Nonconforming uses. Given the nature of the LFA-4 District and its stated purpose, nonconforming uses in the district shall be regulated. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 12, nonconforming uses shall not generally be permitted to expand beyond the square footage existing on September 9, 1992. However, if the specific use involved in the proposed expansion meets the general intent of this district, such expansion may be permitted according to the appropriate development limitations contained in this chapter.  
Sec. 8-6. - LFA-5 District—Langley Flight Approach Limited Residential. 
(1)  Composition. LFA-5 District shall include use restrictions that allow for the continuance of the existing residential development, but no expansion of that residential use. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Height. Structures shall be a maximum height of sixty (60) feet. 
(4)  Setback regulations. 
(a)  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard along each side of each building and the sum of the sides thereof shall be not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot's width measured at the building setback lines. The minimum width of any such side yard shall be ten (10) percent of the lot's width, except that if the total required width of the two (2) side yards is twenty-five (25) feet or more, one (1) need not be more than ten (10) feet in width. The side yard along the side street of a corner lot shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(c)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet, provided if the depth of the lot is greater than seventy-five (75) feet, the required depth of the rear yards shall be increased by an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the excess depth over seventy-five (75) feet; however, no such rear yard need be more than thirty-five (35) feet; and every rear yard shall extend to and be measured from the rearmost portion of the main building. 
(5)  Nonconforming uses. Given the nature of the LFA-5 District and its stated purpose, nonconforming uses in the district shall be regulated. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 12, nonconforming uses shall not generally be permitted to expand beyond the square footage existing on September 9, 1992. However, if the specific use involved in the proposed expansion meets the general intent of this district, such expansion may be permitted according to the appropriate development limitations contained in this chapter.  
Sec. 8-7. - LFA-6 District—Langley Flight Approach Limited Business II. 
(1)  Composition. The LFA-6 District shall include use and density restrictions as described below. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. 
(a)  Any use involving the use or storage of flammable or combustible materials shall conform to all pertinent requirements of chapter 14, article II, of the city code, the Fire Prevention Code. 
(b)  No use shall be permitted in the LFA-6 District that has any of the following characteristics: 
(i)  Releases into the air any substance that would impair visibility or otherwise interfere with the operation of aircraft, such as steam, dust or smoke; 
(ii)  Produces light emissions, either direct or indirect (reflective) that would interfere with pilot vision; 
(iii)  Produces electronic emissions that would interfere with the aircraft communication systems or navigational equipment; 
(iv)  Attracts concentrations of birds that would be hazardous to flight operations; or 
(v)  Involves the use or storage of explosive materials. 
(c)  The only movie theater permitted in LFA-6 is that theater on site plan 34-96, approved October 29, 1996 (regardless of ownership), or its substantially equivalent replacement. Such theater is limited to the square footage shown on this site plan; no expansion of this theater within the LFA-6 boundaries is permitted. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection 8-7(4)(a) below, structures shown on site plan No. 47-96, approved August 7, 1997, that fall within the LFA-6 boundary shall be limited to the square footage shown on the site plan; expansion of these buildings within the LFA-6 boundaries is not permitted unless the expansion is for storage only. Any approved expansion for storage shall not be construed to allow any increase of allowable sales or service area within the LFA-6 boundary. 
(4)  Building size regulations. 
(a)  All uses, exclusive of storage areas, shall be subject to the following maximum building area per acre: 
(i)  Retail, except furniture and appliance sales: maximum five thousand (5,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(ii)  Furniture and appliance sales: maximum ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(iii)  Personal services: maximum five thousand (5,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(iv)  Manufacturing/processing/treatment 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5: maximum twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) gross square feet per acre, 
(v)  Office: maximum seven thousand five hundred (7,500) gross square feet per acre, 
(vi)  Banks: maximum six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) gross square feet per acre. 
(vii)  Private recreation centers: maximum five thousand (5,000) gross square feet per acre. 
(viii)  Brokerage, storage, warehousing, or distribution centers: no maximum. 
(5)  Building height. Structures shall be a maximum height of sixty (60) feet. 
(6)  Setback regulations. 
(a)  Rights-of-way. No improvements shall be constructed within ten (10) feet of any existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
(b)  Side yards. No improvements shall be constructed within three (3) feet of any side property line that is not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
(c)  Rear yard. No improvements shall be constructed within three (3) feet of a rear property line that is not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
(7)  Nonconforming uses. Given the nature of the LFA-6 District and its stated purpose, nonconforming uses in the district shall be regulated. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 12, nonconforming uses shall not generally be permitted to expand beyond the square footage existing on September 9, 1992. However, if the specific use involved in the proposed expansion meets the general intent of this district, such expansion may be permitted according to the appropriate development limitations contained in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Secs. 8-8—8-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 8-11. - Overall intent of Residential Transition (RT) Districts. 
It is the intent of this article to establish reasonable standards that permit and control development along corridors of the city identified in the city's comprehensive plan as appropriate for residential transition uses. The plan recognizes the need to implement a new land use designation that provides a transition between major thoroughfares and adjacent low density residential areas. This land use category would allow the properties along these corridors to develop, or redevelop, in a manner that best utilizes their frontage and access without detrimental impacts on surrounding residential development, This article recognizes that this transition may be accomplished differently, depending upon the corridor affected and the desires and needs of the surrounding community, and therefore allows for separate Residential Transition Districts, should they be necessary.  
Sec. 8-12. - RT-1 District—Residential Transition Todds Lane and Big Bethel Road. 
(1)  Intent. RT-1 is intended to accomplish four (4) specific objectives identified in the Todds Lane/Big Bethel Road Corridors Study: 
(a)  To create a district that serves as a buffer between single-family residential districts and major arterial streets; 
(b)  To create a district that allows only uses compatible with single-family development, recognizing that these uses may be interspersed with residential development along the corridors; 
(c)  To create a district that allows non-residential development, but which requires that development to maintain the existing residential scale along the corridors; and 
(d)  To create a district that will not significantly increase traffic along the corridors, by allowing only those uses that generate no more than two and one-half (2½) times the total average daily traffic trips generated by single-family development, or eighty-eight (88) trips per acre. 
The intent of the RT-1 District is to allow conversion of existing buildings or new construction in a manner that maintains the visual character and architectural scale of existing development within the area. It is also the intent of the RT-1 District to minimize visual and functional conflicts between residential and non-residential uses. 
(2)  Uses permitted. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Height. Buildings shall be permitted up to a height of thirty-five (35) feet; however the height limit for any building may be increased to forty-five (45) feet when side yards of at least twenty-five (25) feet are provided. 
(4)  Lot width. All newly created lots shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(5)  Setback regulations. Improvements, as referenced in this section, shall include buildings, parking areas, and other site construction, but shall not include walls, fences or signs, With the exception of existing improvements, any improvements necessary for ingress and egress to the property, and any accessory structures, all improvements shall be located outside these setbacks: 
(a)  Front. The front setback shall be at least thirty (30) feet; however lots recorded prior to adoption of this ordinance shall have a front setback equal to the average existing front yard on the block, with a minimum requirement of thirty (30) feet and a maximum requirement of sixty (60) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The rear building setback shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet; however, all other improvements shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet. 
(c)  Sides. The total of the two (2) side setbacks shall equal at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width; however, if that total exceeds fifty (50) feet, no more than fifty (50) feet shall be required. 
(i)  If the total required side setback is less than fifty (50) feet: 
(aa)  The minimum setback shall be ten (10) feet if not adjacent to any existing or proposed public right-of-way; and 
(bb)  The minimum setback shall be fifteen (15) feet if adjacent to any existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
(ii)  If the total required side setback equals fifty (50) feet, the minimum setback from any property line or existing or proposed public right-of-way shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
(6)  Accessory buildings or structures. 
(a)  Accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted in the rear yards only. 
(b)  Accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted within five (5) feet of any rear or side property line. 
(c)  Accessory structures shall be permitted up to one thousand (1,000) square feet in total floor area, and may cover up to twenty (20) percent of the rear yard. 
(d)  Height of accessory buildings or structures shall be governed by chapter 1, section 1-24. 
(7)  Development standards. It is the intent of this section to ensure that the introduction of non-residential uses takes place without negatively impacting existing residential uses. Site development standards are intended to embody the qualities of single-family residential design and construction in terms of open space, lawns and plantings, light and air, convenience and privacy of nearby structures, and other amenities of residential areas. 
(a)  Architectural standards: 
(i)  Only gable and hip-style roofs shall be permitted. 
 
(ii)  Roof pitch shall be a minimum of 1:3, horizontal to vertical, with a maximum of 1:1. 
 
(iii)  Roofs shall be designed with at least one (1) change or break in plane within every sixty-foot segment. Vertical roof changes, porch roofs and dormers are 
 
examples of acceptable plane changes. 
(iv)  Roof materials shall be those typical in residential construction Existing buildings undergoing expansion shall use materials similar in color, size and texture to the existing roof materials. Standing seam metal roofs shall not be permitted unless required due to the expansion of an existing roof. 
(v)  Building materials to be used for exterior finishes shall be those typical in residential construction. Concrete masonry units, precast concrete panels, vertical ribbed metal exteriors or highly reflective materials shall not be permitted unless required due to the expansion of an existing building. Existing buildings undergoing expansion shall use materials similar in color, size and texture to the existing building materials. 
(vi)  Windows shall cover between ten (10) percent and fifty (50) percent of any exterior wall fronting on an existing or proposed public right-of-way. Existing buildings undergoing expansion shall preserve the existing proportion of exterior wall and glazing on any new walls that front on an existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
(b)  Green area and landscape plan: 
(i)  At least twenty (20) percent of the total lot area shall be maintained as green area. 
(ii)  A landscape plan complying with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" shall be submitted to the director of the department of community development or his designee for review and approval prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. 
(c)  All development proposals shall be accompanied by evidence to the planning director that traffic generated by the use does not exceed the prescribed limit of eighty-eight (88) trips per day, per acre. 
(d)  All uses permitted shall be permitted up to a maximum building size of five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area per acre, except that religious facilities, funeral homes, hospitals, sanitariums, convalescent or nursing homes, or adult care residences shall be permitted up to a maximum building size of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of floor area per acre. 
(e)  In order to maintain a residential scale of development, at least forty (40) percent of the total square footage of any building shall be on the ground floor. 
(f)  The floor area of accessory structures, as permitted herein, shall not count toward the maximum floor areas in subsection 8-12(7)(d) above. 
(8)  Fences and screens. Fences and screens shall be permitted as provided in chapter 1; however, when a nonresidential use abuts a residentially used or residentially zoned property and an improvement is located within five (5) feet of that joint property line, the non-residential use shall provide an opaque screen along that joint property line that is between three (3) feet and six (6) feet in height. In no case shall the fence height exceed four (4) feet in the front setback. 
(9)  Consideration of rezoning applications. Within one (1) month of the adoption of this ordinance, and annually thereafter, the average daily traffic count and current traffic capacity shall be established for these road segments: 
(a)  Big Bethel Road from the York County line to Interstate 64; 
(b)  Big Bethel Road from Interstate 64 to Todds Lane; 
(c)  Todds Lane from Cunningham Drive to Big Bethel Road; and 
(d)  Todds Lane from Big Bethel Road to the Newport News city line. 
Given the recommendations of the Todds Lane/Big Bethel Road Corridors Study with regards to increases in traffic, the planning director shall consider the relationship between current traffic counts and current traffic capacity. Additional RT-1 zoning may not be advisable if current counts already exceed capacity; a reasonable increase may be one (1) percent over existing counts if capacity exists. Such information shall be made part of any staff report to the planning commission and city council relative to a request for the RT-1 District.  
Secs. 8-13—8-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUCKROE BAYFRONT DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 8-21. - Overall intent of Buckroe Bayfront (BB) Districts. 
(1)  The Buckroe Bayfront Districts are intended to be a tool for implementation of the recommendations and policies of the Buckroe Master Plan (2005, as amended), guiding development, redevelopment, and revitalization activities in the Buckroe Bayfront area. Buckroe is a unique place in the Hampton Roads region with a neighborhood and architectural character that is an asset that must be protected and enhanced as new development becomes a part of the Buckroe community. Buckroe's character is based on its dual role as both a Chesapeake Bay beachfront community that draws visitors from areas beyond the neighborhood, and as a primarily single-family residential neighborhood in the City of Hampton. The Buckroe Master Plan (2005, as amended) provides the design principles that reflect these aspects of Buckroe's character, balancing between its two (2) roles and guiding the scale and location for new development and public improvements. The Buckroe Bayfront Districts are also intended to reinforce Buckroe's compact, walkable environment and promote a community design that is environmentally and economically sustainable. 
(2)  The City of Hampton has been engaged in the revitalization of the Buckroe neighborhood since 1964 when the first of a series of redevelopment plans was generated. While the scale and nature of the proposed redevelopment in Buckroe has changed over time, the basic premise that the beach represents an asset that could be leveraged for new high quality development to spur revitalization in the greater Buckroe area has remained. The Buckroe Master Plan (2005, as amended) replaces these previous redevelopment plans and the Buckroe Bayfront Districts are a tool to achieve this longstanding objective of the city's efforts in Buckroe. 
(3)  As permitted by the Code of Virginia § 15.2-2283 "Purpose of Zoning Ordinances," the Buckroe Bayfront Districts establish standards for development in Buckroe in order to: 
(a)  Preserve and extend those elements of the Buckroe neighborhood which contribute to its neighborhood and architectural character through the design and placement of building types. 
(b)  Enhance the quality of street spaces through building placement, massing, and design in order to create a safe environment that supports pedestrians, bicyclists, and drivers. 
(c)  Create safe public streets, parks, and other areas by designing neighboring buildings to enhance an "eyes on the street/park" effect with windows and primary entrances facing onto public spaces. 
(d)  Provide a degree of predictability to property owners and community residents regarding what may be built on land in the community while also allowing for some flexibility in the mixture of land uses. 
(e)  Encourage a range of building types and sizes that will accommodate people at all stages of life and allow for an economically diverse community. 
(f)  Facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community whose planning and architectural design will support long term value and economic stability in the greater Buckroe community. 
(4)  There shall be five (5) Buckroe Bayfront Districts: 
(i)  BB-1—Single Family Residential. 
(ii)  BB-2—Mixed Residential. 
(iii)  BB-3—Optional Mixed-Use. 
(iv)  BB-4—Required Mixed-Use. 
(v)  BB-5—Special. 
(5)  Administration. Small variations in dimensional requirements, representing less than a five-foot change to required setbacks or a ten (10) percent change to area measurements, as appropriate, from any requirement described in the tables of "General Lot Standards," can be approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Green design. 
(a)  In an effort to set the standard in a highly visible area, green design should be included in all public projects, including private development resulting from the sale of public land. Green design is also encouraged for private development on privately owned land. 
(b)  Where green design is required, projects shall be designed and constructed to comply with green design standards prescribed for neighborhoods designed in accordance with the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Neighborhood Development (LEED-ND) green neighborhood development rating system, published by the United States Green Building Council, to achieve a LEED silver or higher rating. 
(Ord. No. Z16-15 , 9-14-2016)  
Sec. 8-22. - BB-1 District—Buckroe Bayfront Single Family Residential. 
(1)  Permitted uses shall be as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. In addition, no use shall be permitted to have a drive-through. 
(2)  The following lot types are permitted; in addition, to promote diversity and variety along residential blocks, no block face greater than three hundred (300) feet in length shall be composed of more than seventy-five (75) percent of the same lot type. 
(a)  Village Lot. 
(b)  Neighborhood Lot. 
(c)  Estate Lot. 
(d)  Duplex Lot. 
(3)  Table of Lot Standards. The following table describes the requirements for each lot type permitted. Lot widths are an allowable range; lot depth, interior side setback, rear setback, and façade zone coverage are minimum dimensions; street side setback and front setback are required build-to lines; the façade zone is a fixed required width; building coverage is a maximum. Small variations to the dimensional requirements found in this table can be allowed as per subsection 8-10(9) above. Flag lots are not permitted. 
	Village 	Neighborhood 	Estate 	Duplex 
Lot size, interior 	30'—39' front, 
80' deep 	40'—49' front, 
80' deep 	50'—59' front, 
100' deep 	22'—30' front, 
100' deep 
Lot size, corner 	45'—54' front, 
80' deep 	55'—64' front, 
80' deep 	65'—74' front, 
100' deep 	45'—50' front, 
100' deep 
Front setback 	15' A 	15' A 	15' A 	15' A 
Interior side 
setback 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' when detached 
Street side 
setback 	15' to house A , 
18' to garage 	15' to house A , 
18' to garage 	15' to house A , 
18' to garage 	15' to house A , 
18' to garage 
Rear setback 	15' to house, 
5' to garage 	15' to house, 
5' to garage A 	20' to house, 
5' to garage 	15' to house, 
5' to garage B 
Building coverage 	50% C 	50% C 	50% C 	50% C 
Façade zone 	10' deep, 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 
A The following encroachments are permitted: porches and balconies up to 5'; steps may encroach an additional 5' beyond porches, stoops and similar features; bay windows, patios and fireplaces =10' wide may encroach up to 2' 
B A garage placed on a corner lot shall abut the rear property line when the lot is adjacent to an alley to the rear of the property. The garage shall not be setback 5'. The garage shall face onto and be accessed from the side street. The garage shall be setback from the side street 18'. 
C Accessory structures (enclosed garages, sheds, etc.) shall be included in building coverage calculations. Open balconies, porches, decks, driveways, and parking pads shall not be included in building coverage calculations. 
 
 
 
 
 
(4)  Development standards. 
(a)  Variation. Adjacent buildings shall be visually distinct from each other. This distinction may be achieved by varying materials, architectural styles, massing, color, or lot type. At least two (2) of these elements must vary for each adjacent building along the same street frontage. 
(b)  Streets and alleys. 
(i)  If a lot is adjacent to only one (1) street, that street is considered the front street for that lot. 
(ii)  If a lot is adjacent to two (2) streets, the narrower lot frontage shall be considered the front street and the wider lot frontage the side street. 
(iii)  Alleys shall be created when it is physically feasible and in keeping with the recommendations of the Buckroe Master Plan (2005, as amended). 
(c)  Height. 
(i)  Total building heights will be measured in stories. 
(ii)  Buildings shall not be taller than three (3) stories. 
(iii)  Tower elements, cupolas, widow's walks, and similar building features may extend one (1) story above the allowable height for each lot type. These elements may only be used within the appropriate architectural style of building. 
(iv)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor for first floor residential shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(v)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor for first floor commercial buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
(vi)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor (floor-to-ceiling on the top floor) on any story above the first shall be twelve (12) feet. 
(vii)  Cathedral ceilings may be incorporated within the roof and shall not count toward floor height. 
(viii)  Floors that exceed the above standards shall be counted as greater than one (1) story. 
(d)  Architectural standards. 
(i)  All buildings shall be consistent with one (1) of the architectural styles identified in the Buckroe Bayfront Pattern Book. Consistency will be determined based on adherence to the design elements of each of the primary building features identified in the pattern book including massing and composition, eave details and wall section, windows and doors, porches, and materials and applications. 
(ii)  Primary access for all buildings shall be from a public street or open space. Primary access is not permitted from the parking area or alley. All street facing façades shall have an articulated primary access entrance. 
(iii)  The following shall be located in rear yards or side yards not facing a public street or open space: 
(aa)  Electrical utility meters. 
(bb)  Air conditioning compressors. 
(cc)  Irrigation and pool pumps. 
(iv)  The following shall be located in rear yards only: 
(aa)  Antennas. 
(bb)  Permanent barbecues. 
(cc)  Satellite dishes. 
(v)  The following are prohibited: 
(aa)  Undersized shutters (the shutter or shutters must be sized so as to equal the width that would be required to cover the window opening). 
 
(bb)  Inoperable shutters (the purpose of shutters is to provide protection from storms). 
(cc)  Shutters made of plastic. 
(dd)  Reflective and/or bronze-tint glass. 
(ee)  Plastic or PVC roof tiles. 
(ff)  Backlit awnings. 
(gg)  Glossy-finish awnings. 
(hh)  Fences made of chain link, barbed wire, vinyl, plain wire mesh, or coated chain link. 
(iv)  Where there is a building façade facing a park or street, the façade shall contain transparent windows covering from a minimum of twenty (20) percent to a maximum of seventy (70) percent of the wall area. 
(5)  Accessory buildings or structures. 
(a)  Accessory buildings or structures for residential uses may include a garage or covered parking, home occupation uses, storage space, and storage for trash receptacles. 
(b)  The footprint of accessory buildings or structures shall not be larger than fifty (50) percent of the main building's footprint. 
(c)  Accessory buildings or structures shall not be taller than the main roofline of the main building nor shall accessory structures be greater than two (2) stories regardless of the height of the main building. 
(d)  Accessory buildings or structures larger than one hundred (100) square feet shall architecturally complement the main building with shared exterior materials, colors, and roof lines. 
(e)  Accessory buildings or structures or trees on single-family lots shall be set back five (5) feet from the rear property line when adjacent to an alley. 
(f)  Accessory dwelling units are permitted under the following conditions: 
(i)  Accessory dwellings may only be located on a Village Lot, Neighborhood Lot, Estate Lot or Duplex Lot. There shall be no more than one (1) accessory dwelling unit per lot. 
(ii)  Accessory dwellings must be a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet in floor area. 
(iii)  The primary dwelling unit and accessory dwelling unit shall not be rented separately unless one (1) is owner occupied. 
(6)  Parking shall be provided as described in chapter 11. In addition, parking shall be subject to the following standards: 
(a)  All parking shall be provided at the rear of the lot either via a rear alley or a driveway from the street 
(b)  Where available, alleys shall be used to access parking, except in the case of single-family corner lots. 
(c)  When alley access is not available, driveways in the area from the street to the rear line of the house shall be a maximum of ten (10) feet wide. 
 
(d)  Single-family corner lot driveways shall be accessed from the side street and may be a maximum of fifteen (15) feet wide. 
 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 ); Ord. No. Z16-15 , 9-14-2016)  
Sec. 8-23. - BB-2 District—Buckroe Bayfront Mixed Residential. 
(1)  Permitted uses shall be as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. In addition, no use shall be permitted to have a drive-through. 
(2)  The following lot types are permitted; in addition, to promote diversity and variety along residential blocks, no block face greater than three hundred (300) feet in length shall be composed of more than seventy-five (75) percent of the same lot type. 
(a)  Village Lot. 
(b)  Neighborhood Lot. 
(c)  Estate Lot. 
(d)  Duplex Lot. 
(e)  Multifamily Lot. 
(3)  Table of Lot Standards. The following table describes the requirements for each lot type permitted. Lot widths are an allowable range; lot depth, interior side setback, rear setback, and façade zone coverage are minimum dimensions; street side setback and front setback are required build-to lines; the façade zone is a fixed required width; building coverage is a maximum. Small variations to the dimensional requirements found in this table can be allowed as per subsection 8-10(9) above. Flag lots are not permitted. 
	Village 	Neighborhood 	Estate 	Duplex 	Multifamily 
Lot size, 
interior 	30'—39' front, 
80' deep 	40'—49' front, 
80' deep 	50'—59' front, 
100' deep 	22'—30' front, 
100' deep 	60'—80' front, 
100' deep 
Lot size, 
corner 	45'—54' front, 
80' deep 	55'—64' front, 
80' deep 	65'—74' front, 
100' deep 	45'—50' front, 
100' deep 	70'—90' front, 
100' deep 
Front setback 	15' A 	15' A 	15' A 	15' A 	15' A 
Interior side setback 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' when detached 	10' when detached 
Street side setback 	15' to house A , 18' to garage 	15' to house A , 18' to garage 	15' to house A , 18' to garage 	15' to house A , 18' to garage 	15' A 
Rear setback 	15' to house, 
5' to garage 	15' to house, 
5' to garage A 	20' to house, 
5' to garage 	15' to house, 
5' to garage B 	5' 
Building coverage 	50% C 	50% C 	50% C 	50% C 	75% C 
Façade zone 	10' deep, 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, 80% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 
A The following encroachments are permitted: porches and balconies up to 5'; steps may encroach an additional 5' beyond porches, stoops and similar features; bay windows, patios and fireplaces =10' wide may encroach up to 2' 
B A garage placed on a corner lot shall abut the rear property line when the lot is adjacent to an alley to the rear of the property. The garage shall not be setback 5'. The garage shall face onto and be accessed from the side street. The garage shall be setback from the side street 18'. 
C Accessory structures (enclosed garages, sheds, etc.) shall be included in building coverage calculations. Open balconies, porches, decks, driveways, and parking pads shall not be included in building coverage calculations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4)  Development standards. 
(a)  Variation. Adjacent buildings shall be visually distinct from each other. This distinction may be achieved by varying materials, architectural styles, massing, color, or lot type. At least two (2) of these elements must vary for each adjacent building along the same street frontage. 
(b)  Streets and alleys. 
(i)  If a lot is adjacent to only one (1) street, that street is considered the front street for that lot. 
(ii)  If a lot is adjacent to two (2) streets, the narrower lot frontage shall be considered the front street and the wider lot frontage the side street. 
(iii)  Alleys shall be created when it is physically feasible and in keeping with the recommendations of the Buckroe Master Plan (2005, as amended). 
(c)  Height. 
(i)  Total building heights will be measured in stories. 
(ii)  Buildings shall not be taller than three (3) stories. 
(iii)  Tower elements, cupolas, widow's walks, and similar building features may extend one (1) story above the allowable height for each lot type. These elements may only be used within the appropriate architectural style of building. 
(iv)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor for first floor residential shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(v)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor for first floor commercial buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
(vi)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor (floor-to-ceiling on the top floor) on any story above the first shall be twelve (12) feet. 
(vii)  Cathedral ceilings may be incorporated within the roof and shall not count toward floor height. 
(viii)  Floors that exceed the above standards shall be counted as greater than one (1) story. 
(d)  Architectural standards. 
(i)  All buildings shall be consistent with one (1) of the architectural styles identified in the Buckroe Bayfront Pattern Book. Consistency will be determined based on adherence to the design elements of each of the primary building features identified in the pattern book including massing and composition, eave details and wall section, windows and doors, porches, and materials and applications. 
(ii)  Primary access for all buildings shall be from a public street or open space. Primary access is not permitted from the parking area or alley. All street facing façades shall have an articulated primary access entrance. 
(iii)  The following shall be located in rear yards or side yards not facing a public street or open space: 
(aa)  Electrical utility meters. 
(bb)  Air conditioning compressors. 
(cc)  Irrigation and pool pumps. 
(iv)  The following shall be located in rear yards only: 
(aa)  Antennas. 
(bb)  Permanent barbecues. 
(cc)  Satellite dishes. 
(v)  The following are prohibited: 
(aa)  Undersized shutters (the shutter or shutters must be sized so as to equal the width that would be required to cover the window opening). 
 
(bb)  Inoperable shutters (the purpose of shutters is to provide protection from storms). 
(cc)  Shutters made of plastic. 
(dd)  Reflective and/or bronze-tint glass. 
(ee)  Plastic or PVC roof tiles. 
(ff)  Backlit awnings. 
(gg)  Glossy-finish awnings. 
(hh)  Fences made of chain link, barbed wire, vinyl, plain wire mesh, or coated chain link. 
(vi)  Where there is a building façade facing a park or street, the façade shall contain transparent windows covering from a minimum of twenty (20) percent to a maximum of seventy (70) percent of the wall area. 
(5)  Accessory buildings or structures. 
(a)  Accessory buildings or structures for residential uses may include a garage or covered parking, home occupation uses, storage space, and storage for trash receptacles. 
(b)  The footprint of accessory buildings or structures shall not be larger than fifty (50) percent of the main building's footprint. 
(c)  Accessory buildings or structures shall not be taller than the main roofline of the main building nor shall accessory structures be greater than two (2) stories regardless of the height of the main building. 
(d)  Accessory buildings or structures larger than one hundred (100) square feet shall architecturally complement the main building with shared exterior materials, colors, and roof lines. 
(e)  Accessory buildings or structures or trees on single-family lots shall be set back five (5) feet from the rear property line when adjacent to an alley. 
(f)  Accessory dwelling units are permitted under the following conditions: 
(i)  Accessory dwellings may only be located on a Village Lot, Neighborhood Lot, Estate Lot or Duplex Lot. There shall be no more than one (1) accessory dwelling unit per lot. 
(ii)  Accessory dwellings must be a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet in floor area. 
(iii)  The primary dwelling unit and accessory dwelling unit shall not be rented separately unless one (1) is owner occupied. 
(6)  Parking shall be provided as described in chapter 11. In addition, parking shall be subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Village, Neighborhood, Estate, and Duplex Lots: 
(i)  All parking shall be provided at the rear of the lot either via a rear alley or a driveway from the street. 
(ii)  Where available, alleys shall be used to access parking, except in the case of single-family corner lots. 
(iii)  When alley access is not available, driveways in the area from the street to the rear line of the house shall be a maximum of ten (10) feet wide. 
 
(iv)  Single-family corner lot driveways shall be accessed from the side street and may be a maximum of fifteen (15) feet wide. 
 
(b)  Multifamily Lots. 
(i)  All off-street parking shall be in the mid-block area behind the main structures and all or a portion of such spaces may be provided as tuck-under parking on the ground floor but shall not be visible from the front street and shall be screened from the side street. All such parking areas shall be accessed via an alley and may be between two (2) alleys or the alley may serve as a central drive aisle for the parking area. Additionally, parking spaces may be aligned to allow double parking when the two (2) spaces are assigned to the same unit. 
 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 ; Ord. No. Z16-15 , 9-14-2016)  
Sec. 8-24. - BB-3 District—Buckroe Bayfront Optional Mixed Use. 
(1)  Permitted uses shall be as set forth in chapter 3-Uses Permitted. In addition, no use shall be permitted to have a drive-through. 
(2)  The following lot types are permitted; in addition, to promote diversity and variety along residential blocks, no block face greater than three hundred (300) feet in length shall be composed of more than seventy-five (75) percent of the same lot type. 
(a)  Village Lot. 
(b)  Neighborhood Lot. 
(c)  Estate Lot. 
(d)  Duplex Lot. 
(e)  Multifamily Lot. 
(f)  Mixed Use Lot. 
(3)  Table of Lot Standards. The following table describes the requirements for each lot type permitted. Lot widths are an allowable range; lot depth, interior side setback, rear setback, and façade zone coverage are minimum dimensions; street side setback and front setback are required build-to lines; the façade zone is a fixed required width; building coverage is a maximum. Small variations to the dimensional requirements found in this table can be allowed as per subsection 8-10(9) above. Flag lots are not permitted. 
	Village 	Neighborhood 	Estate 	Duplex 	Multifamily 	Mixed Use 
Lot size, 
interior 	30'—39' front, 80' deep 	40'—49' front, 80' deep 	50'—59' front, 100' deep 	22'—30' front, 100' deep 	60'—80' front, 100' deep 	60'—80' front, 100' deep 
Lot size, 
corner 	45'—54' front, 80' deep 	55'—64' front, 80' deep 	65'—74' front, 100' deep 	45'—50' front, 100' deep 	70'—90' front, 100' deep 	70'—90' front, 100' deep 
Front setback 	15' A 	15' A 	15' A 	15' A 	15' A 	15' A 
Interior side setback 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' when detached 	10' when 
detached 	10' when 
detached 
Street side setback 	15' to house A , 18' to garage 	15' to house A , 18' to garage 	15' to house A , 18' to garage 	15' to house A , 18' to garage 	15' A 	15' A 
Rear setback 	15' to house, 5' to garage 	15' to house, 5' to garage A 	20' to house, 5' to garage 	15' to house, 5' to garage B 	5' 	5' 
Building coverage 	50% C 	50% C 	50% C 	50% C 	75% C 	75% C 
Façade zone 	10' deep, 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, min. 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, 40% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, 80% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 	10' deep, 80% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 
A The following encroachments are permitted: porches and balconies up to 5'; steps may encroach an additional 5' beyond porches, stoops and similar features; bay windows, patios and fireplaces =10' wide may encroach up to 2' 
B A garage placed on a corner lot shall abut the rear property line when the lot is adjacent to an alley to the rear of the property. The garage shall not be setback 5'. The garage shall face onto and be accessed from the side street. The garage shall be setback from the side street 18'. 
C Accessory structures (enclosed garages, sheds, etc.) shall be included in building coverage calculations. Open balconies, porches, decks, driveways, and parking pads shall not be included in building coverage calculations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4)  Development standards. 
(a)  Variation. Adjacent buildings shall be visually distinct from each other. This distinction may be achieved by varying materials, architectural styles, massing, color, or lot type. At least two (2) of these elements must vary for each adjacent building along the same street frontage. 
(b)  Streets and alleys. 
(i)  If a lot is adjacent to only one (1) street, that street is considered the front street for that lot. 
(ii)  If a lot is adjacent to two (2) streets, the narrower lot frontage shall be considered the front street and the wider lot frontage the side street. 
(iii)  Alleys shall be created when it is physically feasible and in keeping with the recommendations of the Buckroe Master Plan (2005, as amended). 
(c)  Height. 
(i)  Total building heights will be measured in stories. 
(ii)  Buildings shall not be taller than three (3) stories. 
(iii)  Tower elements, cupolas, widow's walks, and similar building features may extend one (1) story above the allowable height for each lot type. These elements may only be used within the appropriate architectural style of building. 
(iv)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor for first floor residential shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(v)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor for first floor commercial buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
(vi)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor (floor-to-ceiling on the top floor) on any story above the first shall be twelve (12) feet. 
(vii)  Cathedral ceilings may be incorporated within the roof and shall not count toward floor height. 
(viii)  Floors that exceed the above standards shall be counted as greater than one (1) story. 
(d)  Architectural standards. 
(i)  All buildings shall be consistent with one (1) of the architectural styles identified in the Buckroe Bayfront Pattern Book. Consistency will be determined based on adherence to the design elements of each of the primary building features identified in the pattern book including massing and composition, eave details and wall section, windows and doors, porches, and materials and applications. 
(ii)  Primary access for all buildings shall be from a public street or open space. Primary access is not permitted from the parking area or alley. All street facing façades shall have an articulated primary access entrance. 
(iii)  The following shall be located in rear yards or side yards not facing a public street or open space: 
(aa)  Electrical utility meters. 
(bb)  Air conditioning compressors. 
(cc)  Irrigation and pool pumps. 
(iv)  The following shall be located in rear yards only: 
(aa)  Antennas. 
(bb)  Permanent barbecues. 
(cc)  Satellite dishes. 
(v)  The following are prohibited: 
(aa)  Undersized shutters (the shutter or shutters must be sized so as to equal the width that would be required to cover the window opening). 
 
(bb)  Inoperable shutters (the purpose of shutters is to provide protection from storms). 
(cc)  Shutters made of plastic. 
(dd)  Reflective and/or bronze-tint glass. 
(ee)  Plastic or PVC roof tiles. 
(ff)  Backlit awnings. 
(gg)  Glossy-finish awnings. 
(hh)  Fences made of chain link, barbed wire, vinyl, plain wire mesh, or coated chain link. 
(vi)  Where there is a building façade facing a park or street, the façade shall contain transparent windows covering from a minimum of twenty (20) percent to a maximum of seventy (70) percent of the wall area. 
(5)  Accessory buildings or structures. 
(a)  Accessory buildings or structures for residential uses may include a garage or covered parking, home occupation uses, storage space, and storage for trash receptacles. 
(b)  The footprint of accessory buildings or structures shall not be larger than fifty (50) percent of the main building's footprint. 
(c)  Accessory buildings or structures shall not be taller than the main roofline of the main building nor shall accessory structures be greater than two (2) stories regardless of the height of the main building. 
(d)  Accessory buildings or structures larger than one hundred (100) square feet shall architecturally complement the main building with shared exterior materials, colors, and roof lines. 
(e)  Accessory buildings or structures or trees on single-family lots shall be set back five (5) feet from the rear property line when adjacent to an alley. 
(f)  Accessory dwelling units are permitted under the following conditions: 
(i)  Accessory dwellings may only be located on a Village Lot, Neighborhood Lot, Estate Lot or Duplex Lot. There shall be no more than one (1) accessory dwelling unit per lot. 
(ii)  Accessory dwellings must be a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet in floor area. 
(iii)  The primary dwelling unit and accessory dwelling unit shall not be rented separately unless one (1) is owner occupied. 
(6)  Parking shall be provided as described in chapter 11. In addition, parking shall be subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Village, Neighborhood, Estate, and Duplex Lots. 
(i)  All parking shall be provided at the rear of the lot either via a rear alley or a driveway from the street. 
(ii)  Where available, alleys shall be used to access parking, except in the case of single-family corner lots. 
(iii)  When alley access is not available, driveways in the area from the street to the rear line of the house shall be a maximum of ten (10) feet wide. 
 
(iv)  Single-family corner lot driveways shall be accessed from the side street and may be a maximum of fifteen (15) feet wide. 
 
 
(b)  Multifamily and Mixed Use Lots. 
(i)  All off-street parking shall be in the mid-block area behind the main structures and all or a portion of such spaces may be provided as tuck-under parking on the ground floor but shall not be visible from the front street and shall be screened from the side street. All such parking areas shall be accessed via an alley and may be between two (2) alleys or the alley may serve as a central drive aisle for the parking area. Additionally, parking spaces may be aligned to allow double parking when the two (2) spaces are assigned to the same unit. 
 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 ; Ord. No. Z16-15 , 9-14-2016)  
Sec. 8-25. - BB-4 District—Buckroe Bayfront Required Mixed Use. 
(1)  Permitted uses shall be as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. In addition, no use shall be permitted to have a drive-through. 
(2)  The following lot types are permitted: 
(a)  Mixed Use Lot. 
(3)  Table of Lot Standards. The following table describes the requirements for each lot type permitted. Lot widths are an allowable range; lot depth, interior side setback, rear setback, and façade zone coverage are minimum dimensions; street side setback and front setback are required build-to lines; the façade zone is a fixed required width; building coverage is a maximum. Small variations to the dimensional requirements found in this table can be allowed as per subsection 8-10(9) above. Flag lots are not permitted. 
	Mixed Use 
Lot size, interior 	60'—80' front, 100' deep 
Lot size, corner 	70'—90' front, 100' deep 
Front setback 	15' A 
Interior side setback 	10' when detached 
Street side setback 	15' A 
Rear setback 	5' 
Building coverage 	75% B 
Façade zone 	10' deep, 80% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 
A The following encroachments are permitted: porches and balconies up to 5'; steps may encroach an additional 5' beyond porches, stoops and similar features; bay windows, patios and fireplaces =10' wide may encroach up to 2' 
B Accessory structures (enclosed garages, sheds, etc.) shall be included in building coverage calculations. Open balconies, porches, decks, driveways, and parking pads shall not be included in building coverage calculations. 
 
 
(4)  Development standards. 
(a)  Variation. Adjacent buildings shall be visually distinct from each other. This distinction may be achieved by varying materials, architectural styles, massing, color, or lot type. At least two (2) of these elements must vary for each adjacent building along the same street frontage. 
(b)  Streets and alleys. 
(i)  If a lot is adjacent to only one (1) street, that street is considered the front street for that lot. 
(ii)  If a lot is adjacent to two (2) streets, the narrower lot frontage shall be considered the front street and the wider lot frontage the side street. 
(iii)  Alleys shall be created when it is physically feasible and in keeping with the recommendations of the Buckroe Master Plan (2005, as amended). 
(c)  Height. 
(i)  Total building heights will be measured in stories. 
(ii)  Buildings shall not be taller than three (3) stories. 
(iii)  Tower elements, cupolas, widow's walks, and similar building features may extend one (1) story above the allowable height for each lot type. These elements may only be used within the appropriate architectural style of building. 
(iv)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor for first floor residential shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(v)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor for first floor commercial buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
(vi)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor (floor-to-ceiling on the top floor) on any story above the first shall be twelve (12) feet. 
(vii)  Cathedral ceilings may be incorporated within the roof and shall not count toward floor height. 
(viii)  Floors that exceed the above standards shall be counted as greater than one (1) story. 
(d)  Architectural standards. 
(i)  All buildings shall be consistent with one of the architectural styles identified in the Buckroe Bayfront Pattern Book. Consistency will be determined based on adherence to the design elements of each of the primary building features identified in the pattern book including massing and composition, eave details and wall section, windows and doors, porches, and materials and applications. 
(ii)  Primary access for all buildings shall be from a public street or open space. Primary access is not permitted from the parking area or alley. All street facing façades shall have an articulated primary access entrance. 
(iii)  The following shall be located in rear yards or side yards not facing a public street or open space: 
(aa)  Electrical utility meters. 
(bb)  Air conditioning compressors. 
(cc)  Irrigation and pool pumps. 
(iv)  The following shall be located in rear yards only: 
(aa)  Antennas. 
(bb)  Permanent barbecues. 
(cc)  Satellite dishes. 
(v)  The following are prohibited: 
(aa)  Undersized shutters (the shutter or shutters must be sized so as to equal the width that would be required to cover the window opening). 
 
(bb)  Inoperable shutters (the purpose of shutters is to provide protection from storms). 
(cc)  Shutters made of plastic. 
(dd)  Reflective and/or bronze-tint glass. 
(ee)  Plastic or PVC roof tiles. 
(ff)  Backlit awnings. 
(gg)  Glossy-finish awnings. 
(hh)  Fences made of chain link, barbed wire, vinyl, plain wire mesh, or coated chain link. 
(vi)  Where there is a building façade facing a park or street, the façade shall contain transparent windows covering from a minimum of twenty (20) percent to a maximum of seventy (70) percent of the wall area. 
(5)  Accessory buildings or structures. 
(a)  The footprint of accessory buildings or structures shall not be larger than fifty (50) percent of the main building's footprint. 
(b)  Accessory buildings or structures shall not be taller than the main roofline of the main building nor shall accessory structures be greater than two (2) stories regardless of the height of the main building. 
(c)  Accessory buildings or structures larger than one hundred (100) square feet shall architecturally complement the main building with shared exterior materials, colors, and roof lines. 
(6)  Parking shall be provided as described in chapter 11. In addition, parking shall be subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Mixed use lots shall have all off-street parking in the mid-block area behind the main structures and all or a portion of such spaces may be provided as tuck-under parking on the ground floor but shall not be visible from the front street and shall be screened from the side street. All such parking areas shall be accessed via an alley and may be between two (2) alleys or the alley may serve as a central drive aisle for the parking area. Additionally, parking spaces may be aligned to allow double parking when the two (2) spaces are assigned to the same unit. 
 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 ; Ord. No. Z16-15 , 9-14-2016)  
Sec. 8-26. - BB-5 District—Buckroe Bayfront Special. 
(1)  Permitted uses shall be as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. In addition, no use shall be permitted to have a drive-through. 
(2)  The following lot types are permitted: 
(a)  Special Lot. 
(3)  Table of Lot Standards. The following table describes the requirements for each lot type permitted. Lot widths are an allowable range; lot depth, interior side setback, rear setback, and façade zone coverage are minimum dimensions; street side setback and front setback are required build-to lines; the façade zone is a fixed required width; building coverage is a maximum. Small variations to the dimensional requirements found in this table can be allowed as per subsection 8-10(9) above. Flag lots are not permitted. 
	Special 
Lot size, interior 	N/A not permitted on interior lots 
Lot size, corner 	150'—175' wide, 100' deep 
Front setback 	15' A 
Interior side setback 	10' when detached 
Street side setback 	15' A 
Rear setback 	5' 
Building coverage 	None 
Façade zone 	10' deep, 80% of façade zone length must be occupied by the building 
A The following encroachments are permitted: porches and balconies up to 5'; steps may encroach an additional 5' beyond porches, stoops and similar features; bay windows, patios and fireplaces =10' wide may encroach up to 2' 
 
 
(4)  Development standards. 
(a)  Variation. Adjacent buildings shall be visually distinct from each other. This distinction may be achieved by varying materials, architectural styles, massing, color, or lot type. At least two (2) of these elements must vary for each adjacent building along the same street frontage. 
(b)  Streets and alleys. 
(i)  If a lot is adjacent to only one (1) street, that street is considered the front street for that lot. 
(ii)  If a lot is adjacent to two (2) streets, the narrower lot frontage shall be considered the front street and the wider lot frontage the side street. 
(iii)  Alleys shall be created when it is physically feasible and in keeping with the recommendations of the Buckroe Master Plan (2005, as amended). 
(c)  Height. 
(i)  Total building heights will be measured in stories. 
(ii)  Buildings shall not be taller than four (4) stories. 
(iii)  Tower elements, cupolas, widow's walks, and similar building features may extend one (1) story above the allowable height for each lot type. These elements may only be used within the appropriate architectural style of building. 
(iv)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor for first floor residential shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(v)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor for first floor commercial buildings shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
(vi)  The maximum floor height from floor-to-floor (floor-to-ceiling on the top floor) on any story above the first shall be twelve (12) feet. 
(vii)  Cathedral ceilings may be incorporated within the roof and shall not count toward floor height. 
(viii)  Floors that exceed the above standards shall be counted as greater than one (1) story. 
(d)  Architectural standards. 
(i)  All buildings shall be consistent with one (1) of the architectural styles identified in the Buckroe Bayfront Pattern Book. Consistency will be determined based on adherence to the design elements of each of the primary building features identified in the pattern book including massing and composition, eave details and wall section, windows and doors, porches, and materials and applications. 
(ii)  Primary access for all buildings shall be from a public street or open space. Primary access is not permitted from the parking area or alley. All street facing façades shall have an articulated primary access entrance. 
(iii)  The following shall be located in rear yards or side yards not facing a public street or open space: 
(aa)  Electrical utility meters. 
(bb)  Air conditioning compressors. 
(cc)  Irrigation and pool pumps. 
(iv)  The following shall be located in rear yards only: 
(aa)  Antennas. 
(bb)  Permanent barbecues. 
(cc)  Satellite dishes. 
(v)  The following are prohibited: 
(aa)  Undersized shutters (the shutter or shutters must be sized so as to equal the width that would be required to cover the window opening). 
 
(bb)  Inoperable shutters (the purpose of shutters is to provide protection from storms). 
(cc)  Shutters made of plastic. 
(dd)  Reflective and/or bronze-tint glass. 
(ee)  Plastic or PVC roof tiles. 
(ff)  Backlit awnings. 
(gg)  Glossy-finish awnings. 
(hh)  Fences made of chain link, barbed wire, vinyl, plain wire mesh, or coated chain link. 
(vi)  Where there is a building façade facing a park or street, the façade shall contain transparent windows covering from a minimum of twenty (20) percent to a maximum of seventy (70) percent of the wall area. 
(5)  Accessory buildings or structures. 
(a)  The footprint of accessory buildings or structures shall not be larger than fifty (50) percent of the main building's footprint. 
(b)  Accessory buildings or structures shall not be taller than the main roofline of the main building nor shall accessory structures be greater than two (2) stories regardless of the height of the main building. 
(c)  Accessory buildings or structures larger than one hundred (100) square feet shall architecturally complement the main building with shared exterior materials, colors, and roof lines. 
(6)  Parking shall be provided as described in chapter 11. In addition, parking shall be subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Special lots shall have all off-street parking in the mid-block area behind the main structures and all or a portion of such spaces may be provided as tuck-under parking on the ground floor but shall not be visible from the front street and shall be screened from the side street. All such parking areas shall be accessed via an alley and may be between two (2) alleys or the alley may serve as a central drive aisle for the parking area. Additionally, parking spaces may be aligned to allow double parking when the two (2) spaces are assigned to the same unit. 
 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 ; Ord. No. Z16-15 , 9-14-2016)  
Secs. 8-27—8-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HAMPTON ROADS CENTER DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 8-31. - Overall intent of Hampton Roads Center (HRC) Districts. 
The general purpose and intent of the HRC Districts is to promote a clearly superior level of development within Hampton Roads Center business parks relating to land uses, intensity of development, and aesthetic quality, than that which has been developed in the City of Hampton within the zoning classification of M-1, M-2, and M-3. The intent is also to permit development that allows Hampton to compete favorably with similar business parks within the Hampton Roads region. 
Hampton Roads Center represents the commitment on the part of the City of Hampton to invest funds to provide sites for the needs of businesses in Hampton for the next ten (10) to twenty (20) years, thereby insuring the city's growth and allowing for a broader and more economically diverse tax base. 
The objectives to be promoted by the HRC Districts are: 
(1)  To promote Hampton's economic growth and business development; 
(2)  To create a center of business and economic activity in Hampton; 
(3)  To encourage high quality development consistent with the locational advantage inherent in Hampton Roads Center; 
(4)  To allow for different types of development within Hampton Roads Center while avoiding detrimental uses and inconsistent siting of uses; 
(5)  To permit accessory uses and business support functions that enhance the primary uses; and 
(6)  To encourage a high level of quality in building design and construction, and in site landscaping. 
(7)  To define the development standards necessary to successfully implement the Hampton Roads Center North Campus Master Plan as adopted by the Hampton Industrial Development Authority and the City Council. 
(8)  To define the development standards necessary to implement the Hampton Roads Center West Master Plan, dated February 26, 1999.  
Sec. 8-32. - HRC-1 District—Hampton Roads Center South. 
(1)  Boundaries. The HRC-1 District shall include the area designated on the zoning map with the symbol HRC-1. 
(2)  Principal uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. The uses permitted in this district shall be subject to the following special conditions: 
(a)  Building coverage shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the lot area; total improvements, including all buildings, shall not cover more than sixty (60) percent of the lot area. The remaining forty (40) percent shall be landscaped green area; 
(b)  All uses shall be conducted within a wholly enclosed building; 
(c)  On any corner lot, there shall be no planting, shrubbery, or obstruction to vision more than three (3) feet higher than the curb level within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of any two (2) curb lines; 
(d)  Fences shall not be permitted in any yard which abuts a public right-of-way. The use of electrified fences is prohibited; and 
(e)  Noncommercial and commercial communication towers, and/or transmission antennas shall not be permitted within any front yard. 
(4)  Lot area and building size. 
(a)  No building or group of buildings shall be erected or placed on a lot containing less than three and one-half (3½) acres unless a lot of lesser area has been recorded prior to the passage of this ordinance. 
(b)  The minimum gross floor area of a building or group of buildings on a lot shall be thirty-eight thousand five hundred (38,500) square feet. 
(5)  Setbacks. 
(a)  Building setbacks. 
(i)  For property adjacent to Interstate 64, Hampton Roads Center Parkway, or Magruder Boulevard rights-of-way: 
(aa)  The building shall be set back at least eighty (80) feet or twice the building height, not to exceed two hundred (200) feet from said rights-of-way; 
(bb)  Any side yard not adjacent to said rights-of-way, shall be at least twenty (20) feet deep; and 
(cc)  Any rear yard not adjacent to said rights-of-way shall be at least forty (40) feet deep. 
(ii)  For property adjacent to an interior HRC right-of-way: 
(aa)  The building shall be set back at least sixty (60) feet or twice the building height, not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet from said right-of-way; 
(bb)  Any side yard not adjacent to said right-of-way shall be at least twenty (20) feet deep; and 
(cc)  Any rear yard not adjacent to said right-of-way shall be at least forty (40) feet deep. 
(iii)  No building shall be located within twenty (20) feet of any lake maintenance easement. 
(b)  Setbacks for all other improvements, exclusive of entry ways. 
(i)  No parking shall be located within eighty (80) feet of Interstate 64, Hampton Roads Center Parkway, or Magruder Boulevard rights-of-way. 
(ii)  No parking shall be located within sixty (60) feet of the right-of-way of any interior HRC road. 
(iii)  No parking shall be permitted within any other side or rear yard, as described above. 
(iv)  No parking shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet of any lake maintenance easement. 
(6)  Height. Buildings shall be a maximum of 120 feet in height. 
(7)  Green areas. 
(a)  A minimum of forty (40) percent of the land area of the lot shall be designated as green area for trees, shrubs and turf. 
(b)  Minimum green area provided immediately adjacent to any existing or future public right-of-way shall be four (4) feet from front, twenty (20) feet from side and forty (40) feet from rear property lines. 
(c)  Green areas within a parking area shall be no less than five (5) feet wide and contain at least sixty (60) square feet. No parking space shall be more than seventy (70) feet from a green area. 
(Ord. No. Z16-01 , 2-10-2016)  
Sec. 8-33. - HRC-2 District—Hampton Roads Center North. 
(1)  Boundaries. The HRC-2 District shall include the area designated on the zoning map with the symbol HRC-2. The HRC-2 District is comprised of subdistricts as depicted in Figure 1 (Hampton Roads Center North Campus Land Use Plan) for purposes of facilitating implementation of the HRCNC Master Plan. It shall be the responsibility of the IDA/DRC to steer individual uses to the appropriate use categories as identified in the master plan. 
 
(2)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. 
(a)  All construction within the HRC-2 District must be approved by the IDA/DRC prior to site plan approval. 
(b)  Outdoor material and equipment storage must be screened so that it is not visible from any existing or proposed public right-of-way, and so that it is not visible from adjacent properties. 
(c)  Building materials shall result in permanent and durable construction. Primary building materials shall be monochromatic (preferably earth tones) and shall be limited to brick, pre-cast concrete, natural stone, or architectural metal panels. Stucco, Exterior Insulating Finishing Systems (EIFS), corrugated metal or prefabricated/pre-engineered metal shall not be permitted as primary building materials. 
(d)  All fences shall be wood, masonry or vinyl coated chain link; the use of electrified fences, barbed or razor wire, and chain link with slats anywhere on site is expressly prohibited. 
(e)  Total lot coverage (building and improvements) shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of the total lot area; however, if the lot abuts a dedicated conservation area or stormwater management area that has a minimum dimension of at least fifty (50) feet, total lot coverage can be increased to seventy-seven (77) percent. 
(f)  Alternatives to the above requirements may be considered by the IDA/DRC. Approval of alternatives shall be based on the committee's determination that the intent of the district, as stated in section 8-33 herein, is met. 
(g)  Loading operations shall occur along the side and rear of buildings only. Loading areas shall be screened so that they are not visible from public rights of way and adjacent properties; however, no loading operations shall be visible from Magruder Boulevard, Commander Shepard Boulevard, or North Campus Parkway. 
(4)  Lot size, building size, and height. 
(a)  All lots shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2½) acres. 
(b)  Buildings shall be a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size, with the following exceptions: 
(i)  Accessory structures. 
(ii)  Primary structures with the express approval of the IDA/DRC. 
(c)  Buildings shall be a maximum of 120 feet in height. 
(5)  Green area. 
(a)  A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the total lot area shall be dedicated to green area; however, if the property abuts a dedicated conservation area or stormwater management area that has a minimum dimension of at least fifty (50) feet, this green area requirement may be reduced to twenty-three (23) percent. 
(b)  Improvements permitted in required green areas are: 
(i)  Signs. 
(ii)  Decorative walls and fences. 
(iii)  Security gates, guard houses, walls and fences. 
(iv)  Fountains and decorative ponds. 
(v)  Stormwater control structures and facilities. 
(vi)  Pedestrian walks and trails, fitness stations. 
(vii)  Gazebos, plazas, and observation areas. 
(viii)  Landscape irrigation systems, controllers, and backflow devices. 
(ix)  Public art and park identification features. 
(x)  Lighting. 
(xi)  Underground utilities. 
(c)  The minimum green area depth requirements along public rights-of-way and other property lines are as follows: 
(i)  Along Magruder Boulevard: Eighty (80) feet; 
(ii)  Along Commander Shepard Boulevard: 
(aa)  East of the intersection with the Virginia Power easement: Seventy-five (75) feet maintained as a landscape buffer; 
(bb)  West of the intersection with the Virginia Dominion Power transmission line easement: A minimum of thirty (30) feet with an average of fifty (50) feet; 
(iii)  Along North Campus Parkway, Floyd Thompson Boulevard and Institute Drive (as defined in the HRCNC Master Plan): A minimum of twenty (20) feet with an average of forty (40) feet; 
(iv)  Along other existing or proposed public rights-of-way: Twenty (20) feet; 
(v)  Along side and rear property lines not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way: 
(aa)  If said property line abuts residentially zoned property: Thirty-five (35) feet maintained as an undisturbed buffer. 
(bb)  In all other instances: Twenty (20) feet. 
(vi)  Green area requirements in parking areas containing twenty (20) or more spaces are as follows: 
(aa)  Ten (10) percent of the parking area (including drive aisles) shall be constructed and maintained as green area for the purpose of preserving existing and/or planting new trees and shrubs. 
(bb)  Parking lot green areas shall be sized no less than ten (10) feet by eighteen (18) feet. 
(vii)  All required green areas and buffers shall be landscaped in accordance with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". 
(6)  Building setbacks. The minimum building setbacks from public rights-of-way and other property lines are as follows: 
(a)  Magruder Boulevard: Twice the building height, but no less than eighty (80) feet and no more than one hundred (100) feet; 
(b)  Commander Shepard Boulevard (east of the Virginia Dominion Power transmission line easement): Twice the building height, but no less than fifty (50) feet and no more than one hundred (100) feet; 
(c)  North Campus Parkway, Floyd Thompson Boulevard, and Institute Drive (as defined in the HRCNC Master Plan): Twice the building height, but no less than forty (40) feet and no more than sixty (60) feet; 
(d)  Other existing and proposed public rights-of-way: Forty (40) feet; 
(e)  Side property lines not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way: Twenty (20) feet; however, if said property line abuts residentially zoned property: Thirty-five (35) feet; and 
(f)  Rear property lines not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way: Thirty (30) feet; however, if said property line abuts residentially zoned property: Thirty-five (35) feet. Required building setbacks abutting residentially zoned property shall be maintained as undisturbed buffers. 
(Ord. No. Z16-01 , 2-10-2016)  
Sec. 8-34. - HRC-3 District—Hampton Roads Center West. 
(1)  Boundaries. Boundaries shall be as shown on the official zoning map of the City of Hampton. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Design review. All construction within the HRC-3 District must be approved by the Hampton Industrial Development Authority's Design Review Committee (IDA/DRC) prior to site plan approval. The IDA/DRC shall review all plans with respect to the standards outlined in this article to ensure the visual integrity and quality of the project. 
(4)  Building and screening materials. 
(a)  All exterior building materials shall result in permanent and durable construction. Except for interior courtyards, all exterior walls shall be constructed of brick or other high quality finished masonry, precast concrete panels, high quality metal panels, granite, glass, or materials of similar quality and durability. Other materials shall be used only as accent elements. 
(b)  Primary building materials shall be monochromatic (preferably earth tones). Bright overall colors shall not be permitted as primary building colors, but may be used for accents. 
(c)  Outdoor material and equipment storage shall be screened in accordance with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". 
(d)  Loading docks and truck courts shall be screened in accordance with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". 
(e)  All dumpsters visible from the eastern or southern district boundaries, or within fifty (50) feet of the northern or western district boundaries, shall be enclosed on three (3) sides by an opaque fence. 
(f)  Fences adjacent to the Big Bethel Road right-of-way shall be located at the westernmost edge of the vegetated berm required under the provisions of the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". 
(5)  Height. Buildings shall be a maximum of fifty-five (55) feet in height. 
(6)  Lot coverage. Total lot coverage within the HRC-3 District shall not exceed eighty (80) percent of the total district area. However, to allow for maximum flexibility with respect to individual lots within the district, the total lot coverage on any individual lot may be as high as ninety (90) percent of the individual lot area, so long as the district lot coverage is maintained at or below eighty (80) percent. Lot coverage includes buildings and all other improvements on the site, with the exception of lakes. 
(7)  Setbacks. 
(a)  All buildings: 
(i)  Shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from any existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
(ii)  Shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any district boundary that is not an existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
(iii)  Shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from all lake maintenance easements. 
(iv)  With loading docks that face Big Bethel Road shall be set back at least three hundred (300) feet from the Big Bethel Road right-of-way. 
(v)  With loading docks that face Interstate 64 shall be set back at least one hundred forty (140) feet from the Interstate 64 right-of-way, 
(b)  All other improvements, with the exception of lakes: 
(i)  Shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the Big Bethel Road right-of-way. 
(ii)  Shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the Interstate 64 or North Park Lane rights-of-way. 
(iii)  Shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the western district boundary line. 
(iv)  Shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the northern district boundary line. 
(8)  Green areas. 
(a)  A minimum of ten (10) percent of each lot and twenty (20) percent of the district area shall be retained as green space for trees, shrubs and turf. 
(b)  The fifty (50) foot improvement setback along Big Bethel Road shall be retained as green space, which shall be counted toward the requirements of [subsection] (1) above. This green space shall be vegetated as set forth in the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". 
(c)  The twenty (20) foot improvement setbacks along North Park Lane and Interstate 64 shall be retained as green space, which shall be counted toward the requirements of [subsection] (1) above. This green space shall be vegetated as set forth in the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". 
(d)  All other required improvement setbacks shall be retained as green space, which shall be counted toward the requirements of subsection 8-34(8)(a) above. 
(e)  All improvement setbacks shall be planted in compliance with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". 
(f)  At least ten (10) percent of any parking lot designed for thirty (30) or more cars shall be retained as green space; this shall count toward the requirements of subsection 8-34(8)(a) above. 
(g)  No row of parking spaces shall exceed one hundred forty-four (144) feet in length without a green space island. Such islands shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide. This green area shall be counted toward the requirements of subsection 8-34(8)(f) above. 
(h)  Whenever two (2) rows of parking spaces abut, the required green space islands shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet wide. 
(i)  A green space strip at least ten (10) feet wide shall be provide between buildings and parking areas except at plazas, points of entry to the building, and loading dock areas; this shall count toward the requirements in subsection 8-34(8)(a) above. 
(9)  Lighting. 
(a)  All lighting will be color corrected for true white, with allowances for modest amounts of blue or green. 
(b)  Lighting levels will be determined by the recognized standard of the lighting industry, as specified in the "Lighting Handbook of the Illuminating Engineering Society." 
(c)  Fixtures will be located to provide uniform illumination along drives and walkways and not cause glare or excessive spillage onto neighboring sites. 
(d)  Light sources will be concealed and directed only to areas requiring illumination. 
(e)  The use of high and low pressure sodium sources will not be allowed and use of incandescent sources will be limited to building entrances only. 
(f)  Lighting in parking areas and truck courts will be pole mounted fixtures with a height of thirty-five (35) feet and provide a minimum lighting level of one-half (½) foot-candles. 
(g)  All lighting in driveways, pedestrian walkways and plazas will be achieved with bollards not exceeding three and one-half (3½) feet in height and/or low surface mounted fixtures. 
(h)  All special landscape areas and other accent elements will be illuminated with ground mounted, directed flood lights or low surface mounted fixtures. 
(i)  Lighting fixtures should be comparable to those illustrated below: 
 
(10)  Owners' association. All owners of property within the HRC-3 District shall belong to a property owners' association. Such association shall be responsible for the maintenance of all commonly held property, to include, but not be limited to, private streets, utilities, lakes, green areas, and lighting. A copy of the association by-laws and covenants shall be submitted to the IDA/DRC for review as to compliance with this article and final copies filed with the Hampton Industrial Development Authority. 
(Ord. No. Z16-01 , 2-10-2016)  
Secs. 8-35—8-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 8-41. - Overall intent of Downtown (DT) Districts. 
The DT Districts are of special and substantial public interest because Downtown Hampton has served as the community's cultural, economic, and governmental center for over three hundred (300) years; because it has acquired a unique atmosphere and charm, by virtue of its history and the influence of waterfront activities, which is not duplicated in the city and which is worthy of preservation and enhancement; because it has been the target of an on-going redevelopment effort which has sought to provide such preservation and enhancement; and because a significant capital commitment has been made already by the community in an effort to improve the physical character of the area. 
It is the intent of these regulations to continue and expand the guidance provided in the Old Hampton Redevelopment and Conservation Plan, as amended, for the preservation and enhancement of the historic character of Downtown Hampton; to protect against undesirable encroachment upon the district to encourage uses which are both compatible with past development and supportive of the character to be preserved; and to assure that new structures and uses within the district will maintain visual and functional harmony with past private development which has taken place within guidelines established by local public agencies. 
It is also the intent of these regulations to implement the recommendations contained in the 2004 Downtown Hampton Master Plan, as amended, which encourages a vibrant, mixed use downtown that is intimately connected to the waterfront, surrounding neighborhoods, and its heritage and that maintains its existing charm and intimacy. 
It is further intended that any site plan or other reviews required by these regulations shall be carried out in accordance with the objectives stated above, and that any required approvals shall not be withheld except where the proposed development is definably inappropriate or incompatible with such objectives. 
(1)  Boundaries. The DT Districts shall include the area designated on the zoning map with the symbol DT-1 (Business), DT-2 (Waterfront), or DT-3 (Residential), as delineated on the following map: 
  
Sec. 8-42. - DT-1 District—Downtown Business. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(2)  Development and lot size standards. 
(a)  Permitted retail sales, services, and office uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building except for: 
(i)  Bank, with drive-through; 
(ii)  Boat sales; 
(iii)  Gas station; 
(iv)  Outdoor dining, downtown; 
(v)  Parking lot; 
(vi)  Restaurant, including drive-through 
(vii)  Rummage sale, temporary; and 
(viii)  Those uses authorized by a Special Event Permit issued pursuant to the Hampton City Code; and 
(ix)  Seasonal sales authorized by Section 34-7 of the City Code. 
(b)  No more than fifty (50) percent of the floor area of any building shall be used for the storage of merchandise. 
(c)  There shall be no minimum lot areas or lot dimensions. 
(3)  Height. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the height of buildings on land shall be determined as prescribed in chapter 2, provided that the base point for measurement may be raised to an elevation of eight and one-half (8½) feet above mean sea level if such base point is otherwise below this elevation. The maximum height of buildings in the DT-1 District shall be seventy-five (75) feet, except as follows: 
(i)  The maximum height of buildings, any portion of which are located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of Kings Way between Lincoln Street and a point representing the southernmost right-of-way line of Queens Way and within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a point representing the westernmost right-of-way line of Wine Street and a line representing the easternmost right-of-way line of High Court Lane, shall be forty (40) feet. 
(ii)  Except for buildings fronting on Kings Way or Queens Way as described above, the maximum height may be increased up to twenty (20) additional feet when parking facilities are incorporated into the building design. When one (1) full level of parking is provided in the building, the maximum height shall be eighty-five (85) feet; when two (2) full levels of parking are provided, the maximum height shall be ninety-five (95) feet. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the maximum height of structures placed over the Hampton River or Salters Creek shall be thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories, whichever is shorter. This height shall be determined as prescribed in chapter 2, provided that the base point for measurement shall be an imaginary extension of the grade at the mean high water. 
(4)  Setbacks. There shall be no minimum setbacks, except: A twelve-foot yard shall be required between the Hampton River or Salters Creek and any building, regardless of which yard shall front the body of water. This required yard shall be measured from the mean high water line, the water's edge of any existing or proposed bulkhead, or the landward edge of any existing or proposed riprap. 
(Ord. No. Z15-23 , 11-12-2015)  
Sec. 8-43. - DT-2 District—Downtown Waterfront. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(2)  Development and lot size standards. 
(a)  Permitted retail sales, services, and office uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building except for: 
(i)  Bank, with drive-through; 
(ii)  Boat repair; 
(iii)  Boat sales; 
(iv)  Gas station; 
(v)  Outdoor dining, downtown; 
(vi)  Parking lot; 
(vii)  Restaurant, including drive-through; 
(viii)  Rummage sale, temporary; 
(ix)  Those uses authorized by a Special Event Permit issued pursuant to the Hampton City Code; and 
(x)  Seasonal sales authorized by Section 34-7 of the City Code. 
(b)  No more than fifty (50) percent of the floor area of any building shall be used for the storage of merchandise. 
(c)  There shall be no minimum lot areas or lot dimensions. 
(3)  Height. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the height of buildings on land shall be determined as prescribed in chapter 2, provided that the base point for measurement may be raised to an elevation of eight and one-half (8½) feet above mean sea level if such base point is otherwise below this elevation. The maximum height of buildings in the DT-2 District shall be as follows: 
(i)  Forty-five (45) feet within any parcel bounded on one (1) or more sides by the Hampton River or Salters Creek, including areas east of Bridge Street and south of Rudd Lane, and areas east of South King Street and south of Settlers Landing Road. 
(ii)  Fifty-five (55) feet within any parcel located within the Waterfront Area not included in subsection (i) above. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the maximum height of structures placed over the Hampton River or Salters Creek shall be thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories, whichever is shorter. This height shall be determined as prescribed in chapter 2, provided that the base point for measurement shall be an imaginary extension of the grade at the mean high water. 
(4)  Setbacks. There shall be no minimum setbacks, except: A twelve-foot yard shall be required between the Hampton River or Salters Creek and any building, regardless of which yard shall front the body of water. This required yard shall be measured from the mean high water line, the water's edge of any existing or proposed bulkhead, or the landward edge of any existing or proposed riprap. 
(Ord. No. Z15-23 , 11-12-2015)  
Sec. 8-44. - DT-3 District—Downtown Residential. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(2)  Lot size standards. Minimum lot area and lot dimensions in DT-3 shall be as prescribed in the district in which each use is first permitted. 
(3)  Height. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the height of buildings on land shall be determined as prescribed in chapter 2, provided that the base point for measurement may be raised to an elevation of eight and one-half (8½) feet above mean sea level if such base point is otherwise below this elevation. The maximum height of buildings in the DT-3 District shall be seventy-five (75) feet, except as follows: 
(i)  The maximum height may be increased up to twenty (20) additional feet when parking facilities are incorporated into the building design. When one (1) full level of parking is provided in the building, the maximum height shall be eighty-five (85) feet; when two (2) full levels of parking are provided, the maximum height shall be ninety-five (95) feet. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the maximum height of structures placed over the Hampton River or Salters Creek shall be thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories, whichever is shorter. This height shall be determined as prescribed in chapter 2, provided that the base point for measurement shall be an imaginary extension of the grade at the mean high water. 
(4)  Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as prescribed in chapter 6, articles 2 through 5, where such density is first permitted.  
Secs. 8-45—8-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PARKS AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 8-51. - Overall intent of Parks and Open Space (PO) Districts. 
The PO Districts establish special classifications for certain parcels of land which are intended to be conserved and protected and/or used for recreational purposes.  
Sec. 8-52. - PO-1 District—Parks and Open Space General. 
(1)  Intent. The principal purposes of the PO-1 District are: 
(a)  To conserve and protect open space, natural environmental features, and wildlife habitat; 
(b)  To enhance the quality of life with provision of space for walking, passive and active recreation, and aesthetic enjoyment; and 
(c)  To provide for recreational opportunities, where appropriate. 
Designating these areas as such will raise the degree of assurance that designated open space and recreational areas will remain. It is intended to identify those parcels, relate them to the land use element of the city's adopted comprehensive plan and major elements of existing land use characteristics, and permit the greatest certainty regarding the character of potential uses of this public land. 
(2)  Application of the district. To enable the district to operate in harmony with the plan for land use and populations embodied in these regulations, the PO-1 District shall be applied only to those lands owned or leased by the City of Hampton or any other governmental entity or political subdivision. 
(3)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(Ord. No. Z16-07 , 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 8-53. - PO-2 District—Parks and Open Space Buckroe Beachfront. 
(1)  Intent. Publicly-owned land at the Buckroe Beachfront is a special and unique public interest, in that it represents a unique and historical recreational and cultural asset to the Buckroe community, the City of Hampton, and the region as a whole. It is the intent of the PO-2 District to recognize the dual role that this property may serve in the future development of the Buckroe community, The fundamental and overriding role of this unique land asset is as public recreation and open space, in support of the enormous public use experienced by the Chesapeake Bay beachfront. 
While the district placed emphasis on the protection of this asset for public recreation and open space, there is recognition of the possible role some of this property may play in serving as the impetus for improving the overall condition of the housing stock in the Buckroe community. This district establishes a special zoning classification for the publicly held and unimproved property adjacent to the Buckroe Beachfront Park. Although it is intended that this property be publicly held and utilized as open area in perpetuity, if the objectives to improve the Buckroe area's housing stock are not actualized, then activities to spur new development and encourage upgrades to the existing housing stock will be implemented. These activities may include amending this zoning classification of the subject property to permit its development, condemnation of adjacent properties, private acquisition, and assembly of land for redevelopment, demolition, etc. Amending the special zoning designation of the subject property should be considered only after all efforts to effect a positive change in the community's housing stock conditions prove to be futile and are exhausted. 
(2)  Boundaries. The PO-2 District shall include the 3.28+ acres of city-owned property as shown on the official zoning map of the City of Hampton. 
(3)  Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(4)  Changes to PO-2 District. The boundaries and/or permitted uses of the PO-2 District may be changed by the city council under the following conditions: 
(a)  The condition of the Buckroe housing stock fails to meet the objectives outlined in the Buckroe Neighborhood Plan, adopted January 1995; or 
(b)  Upon request by the Buckroe community in response to a specific development proposal.  
Secs. 8-54—8-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PHOEBUS DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 8-61. - Overall intent of Phoebus (PH) Districts. 
The intent of this article is to define the development standards necessary to permit and encourage development which meets the recommendations of the Hampton Community Plan (2006, as amended) and Phoebus Master Plan (2007, as amended): 
(a)  Implement standards requiring new construction to be contextually sensitive to the existing main street form of the development found in the core of Phoebus while providing opportunities for a variety of commercial and residential uses. 
(b)  Establish development standards which create a safe and pedestrian-friendly environment. 
(c)  Concentrate urban-scaled commercial development to best serve the local community and visitors alike. 
(d)  Enhance downtown Phoebus to assert and reinforce its sense of place. 
(e)  Enhance downtown Phoebus and its entrances as gateways to Fort Monroe. 
(f)  Recognize and respect the neighborhood's listing on the National Register of Historic Places and Virginia Landmarks Register. 
(g)  Provide assurance to owners and investors that future development will be appropriate for the character of Phoebus. 
(Ord. No. Z15-20 , 10-14-2015; Ord. No. Z19-06 , 1-9-2019)  
Sec. 8-62. - PH-1 District—Phoebus Urban Core. 
(1)  Intent. The PH-1 District is intended to promote dense, pedestrian oriented, urban scale development with active street level uses that is in keeping with the historic development patterns of the mixed-use village center of Phoebus. PH-1 represents the most urban of the Phoebus Districts. The intent of this district's implementation is to encompass the key intersection of Mellen and Mallory Streets and neighboring blocks in support of the vision described in the Phoebus Master Plan (2007, as amended). 
(2)  Uses permitted. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in Chapter 3 - Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. 
(a)  For any newly-created lot, the minimum lot depth shall be ninety (90) feet. Where the lot can potentially be accessed via an alley or similar right-of-way to the rear, the lot shall be created to provide such access. 
(b)  Buildings in this district shall be subject to the following standards: 
(c)  Setbacks. 
(i)  Front. For buildings with ground floor commercial space, there shall be a maximum front setback of 0 (zero) feet unless one of the following optional pedestrian amenities is provided in accordance with the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards, in which case the maximum shall be fifteen (15) feet: 
(aa)  Courtyard. 
(bb)  Outdoor seating area. 
For buildings with residential uses on the ground floor, buildings may be setback no more than fifteen (15) feet from the property line. 
This setback exists for the purpose of allowing for steps up to the minimum first finished floor height, porches, and ground level areas meeting the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards, along with a pedestrian connection to the adjacent sidewalk. 
(ii)  Side, adjacent to a public right-of-way. For buildings with ground floor commercial uses, there shall be a maximum setback of 0 (zero) feet unless one (1) of the following optional pedestrian amenities is provided in accordance with the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards, in which case the maximum shall be fifteen (15) feet: 
(aa)  Courtyard. 
(bb)  Outdoor seating area. 
For buildings with residential uses on the ground floor, buildings may be setback no more than fifteen (15) feet from the property line. This setback exists for the purpose of allowing for steps up to the minimum first finished floor height, porches, and ground level areas meeting the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards, along with a pedestrian connection to the adjacent sidewalk. 
In the case that the lot is not square, the building shall be placed so that the requirements of subsection 8-63(3)(c)(i) shall be met, and shall match the side, adjacent to a public right-of-way to the greatest extent practicable per the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, or designee, based upon lot, not preferred building, characteristics. 
(iii)  Side, not adjacent to a public right-of-way. There shall be no minimum and no maximum setback, unless adjacent to a single-family or two-family residential district, in which case the minimum setback is five (5) feet. 
(iv)  Rear. There shall be no required setback unless adjacent to a single- family or two-family residential zone, in which case there shall be a minimum setback of 10 (ten) feet. 
(d)  Building footprint. 
(i)  The maximum width of a building with ground floor commercial uses shall be fifty (50) feet. 
(ii)  The maximum area of the footprint of the building, measured by the exterior perimeter of the foundation, shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(e)  Façade composition. 
(i)  A minimum of ninety (90) percent of the front setback line across the entire parcel must be occupied by the building façade, which has occupiable, wholly enclosed space directly behind and connected to it. 
(ii)  Primary entrance location. 
(aa)  The primary entrance to buildings shall directly face the adjacent public right-of-way. 
(bb)  Primary entrances to buildings with lot frontage abutting Mellen Street or Mallory Street shall be located on Mellen Street or Mallory Street, whichever is applicable. Entrances may be angled to directly face an intersection which includes Mellen Street or Mallory Street to meet this requirement. 
(iii)  Elevation of first floor. 
Where there are residential uses on the ground floor, the first finished floor shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches above the grade at the base of the steps or ramp approaching the entrance. 
(iv)  Fenestration. 
(aa)  Where ground floor commercial space fronts on a public right-of-way, a minimum of forty (40) percent of the first floor building façade containing the primary entrance shall be comprised of glass windows or glass doors that allow views at least four (4) feet into the interior building space. 
(bb)  Where ground floor commercial space fronts on both Mellen Street and Mallory Street, a minimum of forty (40) percent of the building façade adjacent to Mellen Street and Mallory Street shall be comprised of glass windows or glass doors that allow views at least four (4) feet into the interior building space on both façades. 
(cc)  Where ground floor residential space fronts on a public right-of-way, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the first floor building façade shall be comprised of glass windows and/or glass doors. 
(f)  Height. 
(i)  All buildings shall be a maximum of fifty (50) feet in height. 
(ii)  All buildings shall contain a minimum of two (2) stories of habitable/usable space with neither of the first two (2) floors providing less than fifty (50) percent of the gross square feet of the other floor. 
(g)  Accessory structures and equipment. 
(i)  Dumpsters, accessory structures, outdoor storage areas, and utility, stormwater, mechanical, or similar equipment shall be prohibited in the front yard on all lots and the side yard adjacent to public rights-of-way on corner lots. 
(aa)  All dumpsters and compaction devices shall be fully screened by an enclosure constructed of durable materials. 
(h)  If choosing to not meet the development standards as required by section 8-63(3) a use permit may be sought. Such a use permit shall be reviewed for conformance with adopted policies and achieving the intent of the PH-1 district to enhance the historically dense mixed-use development pattern of the Urban Core. 
(4)  Parking. Parking shall be provided as described in chapter 11 herein. 
(a)  Parking shall be prohibited in the area between the building and any adjacent public right-of-way, not to include any alleys and the following streets: 
(i)  Lancer Street 
(ii)  Williams Street 
(iii)  Tennis Lane 
(iv)  Larabee Lane 
(b)  On waterfront properties, parking shall be prohibited between the building and the water feature. 
(Ord. No. Z15-20 , 10-14-2015; Ord. No. Z17-01 , 8-9-2017; Ord. No. Z17-02 , 12-13-2017; Ord. No. Z19-06 , 1-9-2019)  
Sec. 8-63. - PH-2 District—Phoebus Town. 
(1)  Intent. The PH-2 District is intended to promote pedestrian oriented, urban scale development in keeping with the historic development patterns of the mixed-use village center of Phoebus. Unlike the Phoebus Urban Core, this district does not require ground floor commercial development and provides greater flexibility in the footprint of buildings. While not as dense as PH-1 and providing more flexibility, this district is intended to facilitate an expansion of a denser development pattern similar to that found in the historic mixed-use center of Phoebus. 
(2)  Uses permitted. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in Chapter 3 - Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. 
(a)  For any newly-created lot, the minimum lot depth shall be ninety (90) feet. Where the lot can potentially be accessed via an alley or similar right-of-way to the rear, the lot shall be created to provide such access. 
(b)  Buildings in this district shall be subject to the following standards: 
(c)  Setbacks. 
(i)  Front. For buildings with ground floor commercial space, there shall be a maximum front setback of zero (0) feet unless one of the following optional pedestrian amenities is provided in accordance with the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards, in which case the maximum shall be fifteen (15) feet: 
(aa)  Courtyard. 
(bb)  Outdoor seating area. 
For buildings with residential uses on the ground floor, buildings may be setback no more than fifteen (15) feet from the property line. This setback exists for the purpose of allowing for steps up to the minimum first finished floor height, porches, and ground level areas meeting the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards, along with a pedestrian connection to the adjacent sidewalk. 
(ii)  Side, adjacent to a public right-of-way. For buildings with ground floor commercial uses, there shall be a maximum setback of zero (0) feet unless one of the following optional pedestrian amenities is provided in accordance with the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards, in which case the maximum shall be fifteen (15) feet: 
(aa)  Courtyard. 
(bb)  Outdoor seating area. 
For buildings with residential uses on the ground floor, buildings may be setback no more than fifteen (15) feet from the property line. This setback exists for the purpose of allowing for steps up to the minimum first finished floor height, porches, and ground level areas meeting the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards, along with a pedestrian connection to the adjacent sidewalk. 
In the case that the lot is not square, meaning the sides that meet to form corners are not perpendicular, the building shall be placed so that the requirements of subsection 8-63(3)(c)(i) shall be met, and shall match the side, adjacent to a public right-of-way to the greatest extent practicable per the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, or designee, based upon lot, not preferred building, characteristics. 
(iii)  Side, not adjacent to a public right-of-way. There shall be no minimum and no maximum setback, unless adjacent to a single-family or two-family residential district, in which case the minimum setback is five (5) feet. 
(iv)  Rear. There shall be no required setback unless adjacent to a single-family or two-family residential zone, in which case there shall be a minimum setback of 10 (ten) feet. 
(d)  Building footprint. 
(i)  The maximum width of a building with ground floor commercial uses shall be seventy-five (75) feet. Width shall be measured at the front setback line. 
(ii)  The maximum width of a building with ground floor townhouses or multifamily uses shall be one hundred seventy-five (175) feet. Width shall be measured at the front setback line. 
(iii)  The maximum area of the footprint of a building, measured by the exterior perimeter of the foundation, shall be eight thousand (8,000) square feet. 
(e)  Façade composition. 
(i)  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the front setback line across the entire parcel must be occupied by the building façade. 
(ii)  Primary entrance location. 
(aa)  The primary entrance to buildings shall directly face the adjacent public right-of-way. 
(bb)  Primary entrances to buildings with lot frontage abutting Mellen Street or Mallory Street shall be located on Mellen Street or Mallory Street, whichever is applicable. Entrances may be angled to directly face an intersection which includes Mellen Street or Mallory Street to meet this requirement. 
(iii)  Elevation of first floor. 
Where there are residential uses on the ground floor, the first finished floor shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches above the grade at the base of the steps or ramp approaching the entrance. 
(iv)  Fenestration. 
(aa)  Where ground floor commercial space fronts on a public right-of-way, a minimum of forty (40) percent of the first floor building façade containing the primary entrance shall be comprised of glass windows or glass doors that allow views at least four (4) feet into the interior building space. 
(bb)  Where ground floor commercial space fronts on both Mellen Street and Mallory Street, a minimum of forty (40) percent of the building façade adjacent to Mellen Street and Mallory Street shall be comprised of glass windows or glass doors that allow views at least four (4) feet into the interior building space on both façades. 
(cc)  Where ground floor residential space fronts on a public right-of-way, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the first floor building façade shall be comprised of glass windows and/or glass doors. 
(f)  Height. 
(i)  All buildings shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet and a maximum of fifty (50) feet in height. 
(g)  Accessory structures and equipment. 
(i)  Dumpsters, accessory structures, outdoor storage areas, and utility, stormwater, mechanical, or similar equipment shall be prohibited in the front yard on all lots and the side yard adjacent to public rights-of-way on corner lots. 
(aa)  All dumpsters and compaction devices shall be fully screened by an enclosure constructed of durable materials. 
(h)  If choosing to not meet the development standards as required by section 8-63(3), a use permit may be sought. Such a use permit shall be reviewed for conformance with adopted policies and achieving the intent of the PH-2 district to enhance the mixed-use streetscape around the Urban Core. 
(4)  Parking. Parking shall be provided as described in chapter 11 herein. 
(a)  Parking shall be prohibited in the area between the building and any adjacent public right-of-way, not to include any alleys and the following streets: 
i.  Lancer Street 
ii.  Williams Street 
iii.  Tennis Lane 
iv.  Larabee Lane 
(b)  On waterfront properties, parking shall be prohibited between the building and the water feature. 
(Ord. No. Z19-07 , 1-9-2019)  
Sec. 8-64. - PH-3 District—Phoebus Commercial Transition. 
(1)  Intent. The PH-3 District is intended to create edges of the pedestrian oriented Phoebus mixed-use center while being more accommodating to vehicles and auto oriented commercial. 
(2)  Uses permitted. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in Chapter 3 - Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. 
(a)  For any newly-created lot, the minimum lot depth shall be ninety (90) feet. Where the lot can potentially be accessed via an alley or similar right-of-way to the rear, the lot shall be created to provide such access. 
(b)  Buildings in this district shall be subject to the following standards: 
(c)  Setbacks. 
(i)  Front. For buildings with ground floor commercial space, there shall be a maximum front setback of forty-five (45) feet. For buildings with residential uses on the ground floor, buildings may be setback no more than fifteen (15) feet from the property line. This setback exists for the purpose of allowing for steps up to the minimum first finished floor height, porches, and ground level areas meeting the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards. 
(ii)  Side, adjacent to a public right-of-way. For buildings with ground floor commercial uses, there shall be a maximum setback of forty-five (45) feet. For buildings with residential uses on the ground floor, buildings may be setback no more than fifteen (15) feet from the property line. This setback exists for the purpose of allowing for steps up to the minimum first finished floor height, porches, and ground level areas meeting the City of Hampton Pedestrian Amenity Design Standards. 
In the case that the lot is not square, means sides that meet to form a corner are not perpendicular, the building shall be placed so that the requirements of section 8-63(3)(c)(i) shall be met, and shall match the side, adjacent to a public right-of-way to the greatest extent practicable per the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, or designee, based upon lot, not preferred building, characteristics. 
(iii)  Side, not adjacent to a public right-of-way. There shall be no minimum and no maximum setback, unless adjacent to a single-family or two-family residential district, in which case the minimum setback is five (5) feet. 
(iv)  Rear. There shall be no required setback unless adjacent to a single-family or two-family residential zone, in which case there shall be a minimum setback of 10 (ten) feet. 
(d)  Façade composition. 
(i)  A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the front setback line across the entire parcel must be occupied by the building façade. 
(ii)  Primary entrance location. 
(aa)  The primary entrance to buildings shall directly face the adjacent public right-of-way. 
(bb)  Primary entrances to buildings with lot frontage abutting Mellen Street or Mallory Street shall be located on Mellen Street or Mallory Street, whichever is applicable. Entrances may be angled to directly face an intersection which includes Mellen Street or Mallory Street to meet this requirement. 
(iii)  Elevation of first floor. Where there are residential uses on the ground floor, the first finished floor shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches above the grade at the base of the steps or ramp approaching the entrance. 
(iv)  Fenestration. 
(e)  Height. 
(aa)  Where ground floor commercial space fronts on a public right-of-way, a minimum of thirty (30) percent of the first floor building façade containing the primary entrance shall be comprised of glass windows or glass doors that allow views at least four (4) feet into the interior building space. 
(bb)  Where ground floor residential space fronts on a public right-of-way, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the first floor building façade shall be comprised of glass windows and/or glass doors. 
(i)  All buildings shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet and a maximum of fifty (50) feet in height. 
(f)  Screening and connectivity. 
(i)  Dumpsters, accessory structures, outdoor storage areas, and utility, stormwater, mechanical, or similar equipment shall be prohibited in the front yard on all lots and the side yard adjacent to public rights-of-way on corner lots. 
(aa)  All dumpsters and compaction devices shall be fully screened by an enclosure constructed of durable materials. 
(ii)  Regardless of the depth of any setback greater than zero (0) feet, a clear, direct pedestrian access shall be installed and maintained between the sidewalk in the directly adjacent public right-of-way and any public entrance facing that right-of-way. Where the pedestrian access crosses a drive aisle, the pedestrian path shall be made clear by using material that is different in color and texture or pattern than the drive aisle it crosses. 
(g)  If choosing to not meet the development standards as required by section 8-63(3)(a) and/or (d), which pertain to dimensions and access to a new lot and building footprint, a use permit may be sought. Such a use permit shall be reviewed for conformance with adopted policies and achieving the intent of the PH-3 district to create edges to the Phoebus mixed-use center while being more accommodating to vehicles and auto oriented commercial. 
(i)  Applications shall specify the requested dimensional changes and include to-scale drawings of the site layout, including but not limited to showing lot boundaries, building footprint, pedestrian and vehicular access, parking, and adjacent sidewalk or similar adjacent public features, as well as all facades, including location of doors, windows, architectural features, roof or parapet line, and building materials. 
(Ord. No. Z19-08 , 1-9-2019)  
Secs. 8-65, 8-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FORT MONROE DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 8-67. - Overall intent of Fort Monroe (FM) Districts. 
In 2005, the Defense Base Realignment and Closure Commission recommended that Fort Monroe cease to be used as an Army installation, resulting in the closure of the Fort in 2011. Portions of the Fort property were transferred to the National Park Service with the establishment by Presidential proclamation in 2011 of the Fort Monroe National Monument. Most of the remaining property at Fort Monroe is now controlled by the Fort Monroe Authority ("FMA") a political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia. The FMA was created to manage the base closure and reuse process to include the transfer of some of the Commonwealth's Fort Monroe property to private ownership thereby making the property subject to the requirements of the City of Hampton's Zoning Ordinance. 
Fort Monroe was designated a National Historic Landmark while serving as a military base in 1960. The property was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1966. Due to the historical significance of the Fort, a Programmatic Agreement ("PA") was prepared for the closure of the base as required by Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act. The PA for Fort Monroe includes the establishment of the Fort Monroe Historic Preservation Manual and Design Standards ("FM Design Standards"). The FM Design Standards serve as legally enforceable regulations administered by the FMA to ensure that the rehabilitation of existing buildings and construction of new buildings is compatible with the character of the historic landmark district. The FM Design standards include regulations typically found in municipal zoning ordinances such as building height and building set back. 
The overall intent of the Fort Monroe ("FM") Districts is to define land use and development standards to implement the recommendations of the Hampton Community Plan (2006, as amended) and the Fort Monroe Land Use Plan (2016, as amended). It is also the intent of the FM Districts to recognize the FMA's obligations with respect to the FM Design Standards and to avoid duplication or conflict with these standards. As a result, the FM Districts do not include many of the development standards such as building height and setback found in other City of Hampton zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. Z16-08 , 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 8-68. - FM-1 District—Inner Fort. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of the FM-1 District is to protect the single-family character of the residential community within the Inner Fort while also promoting the enjoyment of the historical, recreational, cultural, and educational resources of the Fort Monroe National Monument, the Casemate Museum and related visitor attractions on Fort Monroe. 
(2)  Uses permitted. Uses shall be permitted as set forth in Chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. The FM Design Standards serve as legally enforceable regulations administered by the FMA to ensure that the rehabilitation of existing buildings and construction of new buildings is compatible with the character of the historic landmark district. The FM Design standards include regulations typically found in municipal zoning ordinances such as building height and setbacks. 
(4)  Parking. Parking shall be provided as described in Chapter 11 herein. 
(Ord. No. Z16-08 , 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 8-69. - FM-2 District—Historic Village. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of the FM-2 District is to protect the character of the residential community within the Historic Village and to promote new residential development. The district also provides limited options for retail and employment uses in appropriate locations and buildings as identified in the Fort Monroe Land Use Plan (2016, as amended). These non-residential uses are intended to serve both residents of Fort Monroe and visitors. Non-residential uses are directed by use permit to specific locations to promote shared parking, minimize impacts on single-family residential uses, and to provide multiple options for the reuse of contributing historic structures that were built for commercial or institutional purposes. 
(2)  Uses permitted. 
(a)  Uses shall be permitted as set forth in Chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(b)  Where required, use permits for non-residential uses (except day care 3) in the FM-2 District are directed to appropriate locations by the Fort Monroe Land Use Plan (2016, as amended). 
(c)  Standard use permit conditions for non-residential uses listed as permitted by use permit in the FM-2 District in use groups "retail sales, services, and office;" "institutional;" "recreational;" "industrial;" and "utilities and transportation" shall comply with Chapter 14 of the zoning ordinance and may include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(i)  Location of use and non-transferability of permit; 
(ii)  Hours of operation; 
(iii)  Building capacity; 
(iv)  Sound; 
(v)  Parking and circulation; 
(vi)  Screening and buffering; 
(vii)  Third-party promoters; 
(viii)  Permit revocation; 
(ix)  Permit nullification; and 
(x)  Review of use after 12 months of operation. 
(3)  Development standards. 
The FM Design Standards serve as legally enforceable regulations administered by the FMA to ensure that the rehabilitation of existing buildings and construction of new buildings is compatible with the character of the historic landmark district. The FM Design standards include regulations typically found in municipal zoning ordinances such as building height and building set back. 
(4)  Parking. Parking shall be provided as described in Chapter 11 herein. 
(Ord. No. Z16-08 , 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 8-70. - FM-3 District—North Gate. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of the FM-3 District is to promote employment uses on Fort Monroe through the re-use of existing buildings and new construction. The district also provides limited options for new single-family and multi-family development in appropriate locations as identified in the Fort Monroe Land Use Plan (2016, as amended). Residential uses are directed by use permit to specific locations to protect the character and value of these uses and to minimize encroachment into areas dominated by employment uses. 
(2)  Uses permitted. 
(a)  Uses shall be permitted as set forth in Chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(b)  Where required, use permits for residential uses in the FM-3 District are directed to appropriate locations by the Fort Monroe Land Use Plan (2016, as amended). 
(c)  Standard use permit conditions for residential uses listed as permitted by use permit in the FM-3 District in the use group "residential—1, 2, and multifamily" shall comply with Chapter 14 of the zoning ordinance and may include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(i)  Location of use and non-transferability of permit; 
(ii)  Parking and circulation; 
(iii)  Screening and buffering; 
(iv)  Permit revocation; and 
(v)  Permit nullification. 
(3)  Development standards. The FM Design Standards serve as legally enforceable regulations administered by the FMA to ensure that the rehabilitation of existing buildings and construction of new buildings is compatible with the character of the historic landmark district. The FM Design standards include regulations typically found in municipal zoning ordinances such as building height and building set back. 
(4)  Parking. Parking shall be provided as described in Chapter 11 herein. 
(Ord. No. Z16-08 , 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 8-71. - FM-4 District—Wherry Quarter. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of the FM-4 District is to promote uses that support the enjoyment of the historical, recreational, cultural and educational resources of the Fort Monroe National Monument and other visitor attractions on Fort Monroe. 
(2)  Uses permitted. 
(a)  Uses shall be permitted as set forth in Chapter 3—Uses Permitted. 
(3)  Development standards. The FM Design Standards serve as legally enforceable regulations administered by the FMA to ensure that the rehabilitation of existing buildings and construction of new buildings is compatible with the character of the historic landmark district. The FM Design standards include regulations typically found in municipal zoning ordinances such as building height and building set back. 
(4)  Parking. Parking shall be provided as described in Chapter 11 herein. 
(Ord. No. Z16-08 , 4-13-2016)  
Secs. 8-72—8-75. - Reserved.  
Chapter 9 - OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
ARTICLE I. - O-AICUZ DISTRICT—AIR INSTALLATION COMPATIBLE USE ZONE OVERLAY 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Airport noise and aircraft accident potential zones and boundaries. 
(1)  The intent of city council and the purpose of this section are to: 
(a)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare from the adverse impacts associated with excessive noise from flight operations at Langley Air Force Base and the potential for aircraft accidents associated with proximity to airport operations; and 
(b)  Ensure that the construction of residential use group buildings or portions thereof, located within those areas of Hampton likely to be affected by aircraft noise associated with flight operations at Langley Air Force Base provide for appropriate sound reduction to minimize the impact of such noise on occupants as set forth and enforced in chapter 22, article III of the city code, and pursuant to the provisions section 15.2-2295 of the Code of Virginia, which require that any airport noise zone contours be established as an amendment to the zoning ordinance and designated on the zoning map. 
(2)  The designation of any parcel of land as lying in an airport noise zone or in an aircraft accident potential zone, or both, shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the zoning district classification of such parcel, such that any parcel of land situated within an airport noise zone or in an aircraft accident potential zone, or both, shall also lie in one (1) or more of the zoning districts as set forth in the zoning ordinance and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  The boundaries of the airport noise zones shall be as shown on the Noise Contour District map as adopted and amended by city council. 
(4)  For purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this ordinance and the provisions of chapter 22, article III of the city code as applicable to sound attenuation measures, there shall be three (3) airport noise zones and three (3) aircraft accident potential zones. Airport noise zones shall be as follows: 
(a)  Noise zone sixty-five (65) to seventy (70) dB DNL, 
(b)  Noise zone seventy (70) to seventy-five (75) dB DNL; 
(c)  Noise zone greater than seventy-five (75) dB DNL; 
(5)  Aircraft accident potential zones shall be as shown on the air installation compatible use zones (AICUZ) map and shall be as follows: 
(a)  CZ—Clear zone (an area extending outward from the threshold of an active runway which possesses a high potential for accidents); 
(b)  APZ-I—Aircraft accident potential zone I (an area extending outward from a clear zone which possesses a significant potential for accidents); and 
(c)  APZ-II—Aircraft accident potential zone II (an area extending outward from aircraft accident potential zone I which possesses a measurable potential for an accident). 
(6)  The purpose of the establishment of three (3) airport noise zones and three (3) aircraft accident potential zones is to distinguish between the severities of the level of noise impacts so that appropriate acoustical performance standards can be employed to mitigate the adverse impacts of aircraft noise and to facilitate accurate identification of such zones for land use purposes. Each of the three (3) airport noise zones and three (3) aircraft accident potential zones shall be designated on the maps as adopted and amended by city council and made part of the zoning map.  
Sec. 9-2. - Required disclosures in certain real property transactions. 
(1)  The provisions of Virginia Residential Property Disclosure Act (sections 55-517 through 55-525 of the Code of Virginia), as applicable to required disclosures regarding real property in localities in which a military air installation is located, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(2)  The provisions of section 55-248.12:1 of the Code of Virginia, pertaining to required disclosures in rentals of residential property in localities in which a military air installation is located, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(3)  Any person who fails to provide the disclosure required by this section shall be subject to the remedies provided in section 55-524 or section 55-248.12:1 of the Code of Virginia, as the case may be.  
Sec. 9-3. - Avigation easements. 
Any owner of property located wholly or partially in an airport noise zone of sixty-five (65) dB DNL or greater is encouraged to provide the United States Air Force with an avigation easement prior to development of the property, either as a proffer made as part of a conditional zoning application or as part of the subdivision review process. The avigation easement shall be in a form recommended by the director of the department of community development and shall be approved by the city attorney.  
Sec. 9-4. - Special regulations in air installations compatible use zones (AICUZ). 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to regulate, in a manner consistent with the rights of individual property owners and the requirements of military operations at Langley Air Force Base (LAFB), development of uses and structures that are incompatible with military operations; to sustain the economic health of the city and Hampton Roads Region; to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare from the adverse impacts associated with high levels of noise from flight operations at LAFB and the potential for aircraft accidents associated with proximity to airport operations; and to maintain the overall quality of life of those who live, work and recreate in the City of Hampton. 
(2)  Findings. The city council hereby finds that: 
(a)  Langley Air Force Base is among the oldest continuously active air bases in the United States and its history parallels the history of military aviation in the United States, first as an element of the Army and then as a separate military department. In December 1916, the land that became Langley Field was the first property ever purchased by the United States for aviation purposes. In 1916, the National Advisory Council for Aeronautics (NACA), predecessor to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), established the need for a joint airfield and proving ground for Army, Navy and NACA aircraft. With the advent of World War I, Langley Field became an air station with coastal defense responsibilities. Langley Air Force Base has historically functioned as a headquarters, first for the Army and later for the Air Force major command, responsible for fighter aircraft. With the arrival of the Tactical Air Command and jet aircraft, in 1948 Langley Field officially became Langley Air Force Base. Over its history, units at LAFB have been tapped to assist in virtually all the nation's military engagements. LAFB is a vital component in the architecture of the Defense Department's joint service method of operational planning and execution and in the newly-emerging inter-agency approach to meeting homeland defense requirements; 
(b)  Langley Air Force Base generates a significant economic impact on the economies of Hampton and the surrounding jurisdictions. The installation's economic impact analysis for FY08 indicates that LAFB had a financial impact of nearly $1.3 billion. Just over half of that figure was attributed to annual payroll to military and civilian personnel, while over one-third ( 1/3 ) was in local expenditures (construction, services, materials, supplies, and equipment). LAFB estimated that six thousand five hundred seventy-seven (6,577) indirect jobs were created by the installation and its activities, which equated to a value of nearly two hundred three million dollars ($203,000,000.00). For fiscal year (FY) 2008, LAFB supported nearly twenty-six thousand (26,000) personnel. This number includes almost eleven thousand (11,000) active duty military, Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard personnel and nearly thirteen thousand (13,000) active duty military dependents, There were two thousand three hundred thirty-one (2,331) civilians employed at LAFB making LAFB one of the single largest employers in the City of Hampton; 
(c)  The closure or realignment of Langley Air Force Base would have serious adverse economic consequences to the city and the region; and 
(d)  In 2010, the City of Hampton along with the cities of Poquoson, Newport News and York County, joined with the Air Force and LAFB to undertake the "Hampton-Langley Joint Land Use Study" (JLUS) as a proactive and preventative effort to ensure mutual beneficial growth and development at LAFB and the jurisdictions it encompasses and abuts. In furtherance of the Hampton-Langley JLUS and to avoid conflicts previously experienced between the United States military and local communities in Hampton Roads, the city council hereby adopts general regulations applicable in all airport noise zones greater than seventy (70) dB DNL and aircraft accident potential zones to help prevent any additional encroachment at LAFB.  
Sec. 9-5. - Applicability. 
(1)  The provisions of sections 9-5 and 9-6 shall apply to discretionary development applications for any property located within an accident potential zone (APZ) or seventy (70) to seventy-five (75) dB DNL or greater than seventy-five (>75) dB DNL noise zones, as shown on the official zoning map, that have not been approved or denied by the city council as of the date of adoption of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter and the zoning ordinance, discretionary development applications shall include applications for: 
(a)  Rezonings, including conditional zonings; 
(b)  Conditional use permits and conditional privileges for new uses or structures, or for alterations or enlargements of existing conditional uses and uses having an existing conditional privilege where the occupant load would increase; 
(c)  Conversions or enlargements of nonconforming uses or structures, except where the application contemplates the construction of a new building or structure or expansion of an existing use or structure where the total occupant load would not increase; and 
(d)  Vacation of public streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way where the application contemplates the construction of a new building or structure or the expansion of a use or structure where the total occupant load is increased.  
Sec. 9-6. - Discretionary development applications. 
(1)  In addition to the provisions of chapter 8, article 1, Langley Flight Approach Districts, it shall be the policy of the city council that no application for discretionary development included within the provisions of this chapter shall be approved unless the uses and structures it contemplates are designated as compatible uses under Table 1 below and, if applicable, Table 2, unless the city council finds that no reasonable use designated as compatible or allowed under the applicable table or tables can be made of the property. In such cases, the city council shall approve the proposed use of the property at the lowest density or intensity of development that is reasonable. In the event of conflict between the provisions of the aforesaid zoning districts and this section, this section shall control. 
(2)  Tables. The following tables show the uses designated as compatible (Y) and those designated as not compatible (N) in each listed noise zone (Table 1) or accident potential zone (Table 2). The designation of any use as compatible shall not be construed to allow such use in any zoning district in which it is not permitted as either a principal or conditional use. 
TABLE 1—AIR INSTALLATIONS COMPATIBLE USE ZONES
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY IN NOISE ZONES 
Land Use 	Land Use 
Compatibility 
Land Use Name 	70—75 dB DNL 	>75 dB DNL 
Residential and Related 		
Single-family dwellings 	N 	N 
Semidetached dwellings 	N 	N 
Attached dwellings/townhouses 	N 	N 
Duplexes 	N 	N 
Multiple-family dwellings 	N 	N 
Dormitories and other group quarters 	N 	N 
Mobile home parks 	N 	N 
Hotels and motels 	N 	N 
Other residential uses 	N 	N 
Manufacturing 		
Food and kindred products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Textile mill products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Apparel and other finished products; products made from fabrics, leather and similar materials; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Lumber and wood products (except furniture); manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Paper and allied products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Printing, publishing and allied industries 	Y 	Y 
Chemicals and allied products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Petroleum refining and related industries 	Y 	Y 
Rubber and misc. plastic products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Stone, clay and glass products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Primary metal products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Fabricated metal products; manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Professional scientific, and controlling instruments; photographic and optical goods; watches and clocks 	Y 	Y 
Miscellaneous manufacturing 	Y 	Y 
Transportation, Communication and Utilities 		
Railroad, rapid rail transit, and street railway transportation 	Y 	Y 
Motor vehicle transportation 	Y 	Y 
Aircraft transportation 	Y 	Y 
Marine craft transportation 	Y 	Y 
Highway and street right-of-way 	Y 	Y 
Automobile parking 	Y 	Y 
Communication 	Y 	Y 
Utilities 	Y 	Y 
Other transportation, communication and utilities 	Y 	Y 
Trade 		
Wholesale trade 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade—Building materials, hardware and farm equipment 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade—General merchandise 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade—Food 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade—Automotive, marine craft, aircraft and accessories 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade—Apparel and accessories 	Y 	Y 
Services 		
Retail trade—Furniture, home furnishings and equipment 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade—Eating and drinking establishments 	Y 	Y 
Other retail trade 	Y 	Y 
Finance, insurance and real estate services 	Y 	Y 
Personal services 	Y 	Y 
Cemeteries 	Y 	Y 
Business services 	Y 	Y 
Warehousing and storage 	Y 	Y 
Repair services 	Y 	V 
Professional services 	Y 	Y 
Hospitals, other medical facilities 	Y 	N 
Nursing homes 	N 	N 
Contract construction services 	Y 	Y 
Government services 	Y 	Y 
Educational services 	Y 	N 
Miscellaneous services 	Y 	Y 
Cultural, Entertainment and Recreational 		
Cultural activities (including churches) 	Y 	N 
Nature exhibits 	N 	N 
Public assembly halls 	N 	N 
Auditoriums, concert halls 	Y 	N 
Outdoor music shells, amphitheaters 	N 	N 
Outdoor sports arenas, spectator sports 	Y 	N 
Other outdoor recreational facilities 	Y 	Y 
Indoor recreational facilities 	Y 	Y 
Campgrounds 	Y 	N 
Parks 	Y 	N 
Other cultural, entertainment and recreation 	Y 	N 
Resource Production and Extraction 		
Agriculture (except livestock) 	Y 	Y 
Livestock farming 	Y 	N 
Animal breeding 	Y 	N 
Agriculture related activities 	Y 	Y 
Forestry activities 	Y 	Y 
Fishing activities 	Y 	Y 
Mining activities 	Y 	Y 
Other resource production or extraction 	Y 	Y 
 
TABLE 2—AIR INSTALLATIONS COMPATIBLE USE ZONES
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY IN ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONES 
Land Use 	Land Use Compatibility 
Land Use Name 	Clear Zone 	APZ-I 	APZ-II 
Residential and Related 			
Single-family dwellings 	N 	N 	Y 
Semidetached dwellings 	N 	N 	N 
Attached dwellings/townhouses 	N 	N 	N 
Duplexes 	N 	N 	N 
Multiple-family dwellings 	N 	N 	N 
Dormitories and other group quarters 	N 	N 	N 
Mobile home parks 	N 	N 	N 
Hotels and motels 	N 	N 	N 
Other residential uses 	N 	N 	N 
Manufacturing 			
Food and kindred products; manufacturing 	N 	N 	Y 
Textile mill products, manufacturing 	N 	N 	Y 
Apparel and other finished products; products made from fabrics, leather and similar materials; manufacturing 	N 	N 	N 
Lumber and wood products (except furniture): manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Paper and allied products; manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Printing publishing and allied industries 	N 	Y 	Y 
Chemicals and allied products; manufacturing 	N 	N 	N 
Petroleum refining and related industries 	N 	N 	N 
Rubber and misc. plastic products; manufacturing 	N 	N 	N 
Stone, clay and glass products; manufacturing 	N 	N 	Y 
Primary metal products; manufacturing 	N 	N 	Y 
Fabricated metal products; manufacturing 	N 	N 	Y 
Professional scientific, and controlling instruments; photographic and optical goods, watches and clocks 	N 	N 	N 
Miscellaneous manufacturing 	N 	Y 	Y 
Transportation, Communication and Utilities 			
Railroad, rapid rail transit, and street railway transportation 	N 	Y 	Y 
Motor vehicle transportation 	N 	Y 	Y 
Aircraft transportation 	N 	Y 	Y 
Marine craft transportation 	N 	Y 	Y 
Automobile parking 	N 	Y 	Y 
Communication 	N 	Y 	Y 
Utilities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Other transportation, communication and utilities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Trade 			
Wholesale trade 	N 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade—Building materials, hardware and farm equipment 	N 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade—General merchandise 	N 	N 	Y 
Retail trade—Food 	N 	N 	Y 
Retail trade—Automotive, marine craft, aircraft and accessories 	N 	Y 	Y 
Retail trade—Apparel and accessories 	N 	N 	Y 
Services 			
Retail trade—Furniture, home furnishings and equipment 	N 	N 	Y 
Retail trade—Eating and drinking establishments 	N 	N 	N 
Other retail trade 	N 	N 	Y 
Finance, insurance and real estate services 	N 	N 	Y 
Personal services 	N 	N 	Y 
Cemeteries 	N 	Y 	Y 
Business services 	N 	N 	Y 
Warehousing and storage 	N 	Y 	Y 
Repair services 	N 	Y 	Y 
Professional services 	N 	N 	Y 
Hospitals, other medical facilities 	N 	N 	N 
Nursing homes 	N 	N 	N 
Contract construction services 	N 	Y 	Y 
Government services 	N 	N 	Y 
Educational services 	N 	N 	N 
Miscellaneous services 	N 	N 	Y 
Cultural, Entertainment and Recreational 			
Cultural activities (including churches) 	N 	N 	N 
Nature exhibits 	N 	Y 	Y 
Public assembly halls 	N 	N 	N 
Auditoriums, concert halls 	N 	N 	N 
Outdoor music shells, amphitheaters 	N 	N 	N 
Outdoor sports arenas, spectator sports 	N 	N 	N 
Other outdoor recreational facilities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Indoor recreational facilities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Campgrounds 	N 	N 	N 
Parks 	N 	Y 	Y 
Other cultural, entertainment and recreation 	N 	Y 	Y 
Resource Production and Extraction 			
Agriculture (except livestock) 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Livestock farming 	N 	Y 	Y 
Animal breeding 	N 	Y 	Y 
Agriculture related activities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Forestry activities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Fishing activities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Mining activities 	N 	Y 	Y 
Other resource production or extraction 	N 	Y 	Y 
 
(3)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to discretionary development applications for the redevelopment of property where the proposed dwelling unit density is the same as or lower than the actual dwelling unit density existing at the time the application is submitted. 
(4)  Nothing sections 9-5 and 9-6 shall be construed to require the city council to approve any application solely because it meets the requirements of sections 9-5 and 9-6, it being the intention that the city council shall be entitled to exercise its authority in such applications to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
(5)  The provisions of sections 9-5 and 9-6 shall be severable, it being the intention of the city council that in the event one (1) or more of the provisions of these sections shall be adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the validity and enforceability of the remaining provisions of these sections shall be unaffected by such adjudication.  
Secs. 9-7—9-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - O-CBP DISTRICT—CHESAPEAKE BAY PRESERVATION OVERLAY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. Z18-03 , adopted January 10, 2018 in effect, repealed Art. II, §§ 9-11—9-16 and reenacted a new Art. II, §§ 9-11—9-19. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the zoning ordinance adopted February 1, 1960; and Ord. No. Z15-15, adopted August 12, 2015. 
 
Sec. 9-11. - Purpose and intent. 
The health of the Chesapeake Bay is vital to the economy of the City of Hampton and the Commonwealth of Virginia. Degradation of the bay from both point and non-point source pollution must be curtailed if the city and state are to continue to benefit, both socially and economically, from their close association with the bay. The purpose of this article is to implement the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act at the local level, and to protect the quality of state waters pursuant to 9 VAC 10-20-10 et seq. and as authorized under section 10.1-2100 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended; specifically: 
(1)  To protect existing high quality state waters; 
(2)  To restore all other state waters to a condition or quality that will permit all reasonable public uses and will support the propagation and growth of all aquatic life, including game fish, which might reasonably be expected to inhabit them; 
(3)  To safeguard the clean waters of the Commonwealth from pollution; 
(4)  To prevent any increase in pollution; 
(5)  To reduce existing pollution; and 
(6)  To promote water resource conservation in order to protect the quality of life of the present and future citizens of Hampton. 
It is not the intent of this article to impair the vested rights of property owners in Hampton. To the extent possible, and without violating the intent of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, development within the O-CBP should be permitted at the same density, although not necessarily in the same manner, as was permitted prior to the adoption of the district. 
(Ord. No. Z18-03 , 1-10-2018)  
Sec. 9-12. - Components and boundaries. 
(1)  The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Overlay District (O-CBP) shall be composed of three (3) subdistricts: the Resource Protection Area (RPA), the Intensely Developed Area (IDA), and the Resource Management Area (RMA). 
(a)  IDA shall consist of lands designated by the city that are within portions of the landward component of the RPA where little of the natural environment remains and at least one (1) of the following conditions existed on or before October 1, 1989: 
(i)  Impervious surface exceeding fifty (50) percent of the area; 
(ii)  Constructed and functioning public sewer and water systems, or a constructed stormwater drainage system, or both, serving the area; or 
(iii)  Housing density equal to or greater than four (4) dwelling units per acre. 
(2)  The general boundaries of such subdistricts are shown on the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Overlay District map, which shall act as a supplement to the city's zoning map. Site-specific boundaries shall be confirmed by the submittal of a resource delineation, subject to the confirmation and approval of such resource delineation by the zoning administrator by means including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Verification of information by site visit. 
(b)  Requests for additional information necessary to verify such boundaries. 
(3)  The regulations of this article shall augment those of the underlying zoning districts. In cases where the regulations stated herein conflict with those of the underlying zoning district, the more stringent regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. Z18-03 , 1-10-2018)  
Sec. 9-13. - General regulations for development, redevelopment, and land disturbing in all subdistricts. 
All development, redevelopment, and land disturbing within all O-CBP subdistricts shall be governed by the following general requirements: 
(1)  No more land shall be disturbed than is necessary. Such land disturbance shall be allowed only to provide a building site, necessary parking, necessary access, positive site drainage, stormwater best management practices (BMPs), and the installation of utilities, as approved by the zoning administrator or the director of public works, as appropriate. Any land disturbance exceeding two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet: 
(a)  Shall comply with the requirements of the land disturbance ordinance as set forth in chapter 13.1 of the city code. 
(b)  Shall comply with the requirements of the erosion and sediment control ordinance as set forth in chapter 13.1 of the city code. 
(c)  Shall comply with the requirements of the stormwater ordinance as set forth in chapter 33.2 of the city code. 
(d)  Shall comply with the requirements of the site plan ordinance as set forth in chapter 35.1 of the city code. 
(2)  Indigenous vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
(3)  Impervious cover shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable. 
(4)  The developer shall provide copies of all wetlands permits that are required by local, state, and federal law prior to the issuance of a zoning, building or land disturbing permit where alteration or filling of wetlands is proposed. 
(5)  Onsite sewage treatment systems not requiring a Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit shall be in accordance with section 30-69 of the city code. A reserve sewage disposal site with a capacity equal to or greater than that of the primary sewage disposal site shall be provided, in accordance with section 30-69 of the city code. Any lot or parcel recorded prior to October 1, 1989 shall not be required to provide such reserve disposal site if the size of such lot or parcel, as determined by the health department, is not sufficient in capacity to accommodate a reserve sewage disposal site. Construction of any impervious surface shall be prohibited on the area of all sewage disposal sites or over an on-site sewage treatment system which operates under a permit issued by the state water control board, until the property is served by public sewer and the site is no longer needed for this purpose. 
(6)  Land upon which agricultural activities are being conducted, including but not limited to crop production, pasture, and dairy and feedlot operations, or lands otherwise defined as agricultural land by the local government, shall have a soil and water quality conservation assessment conducted that evaluates the effectiveness of existing practices pertaining to soil erosion and sediment control, nutrient management, and management of pesticides, and, where necessary, results in a plan that outlines additional practices needed to ensure that water quality protection is being accomplished consistent with the Act and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. Z18-03 , 1-10-2018)  
Sec. 9-14. - Specific regulations for development, redevelopment, and land disturbing in the RPA. 
All development, redevelopment, and land disturbing within the RPA shall be governed by the following: 
(1)  RPA buffer requirement. The 100-foot wide RPA buffer area shall be the landward component of the RPA as defined in Chapter 2 of the Zoning Ordinance and as identified by a site-specific Resource Delineation. Notwithstanding permitted uses, encroachments, and vegetation clearing, as set forth in this section, the 100-foot wide buffer area is not to be reduced in width. The 100-foot wide buffer area shall be deemed to achieve a seventy-five (75) percent reduction of sediments and a forty (40) percent reduction of nutrients. To minimize the adverse effects of human activities on the other components of the RPA, state waters, and aquatic life, a 100-foot wide buffer area of vegetation that is effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff shall be retained if present and established where it does not exist. To the greatest extent possible, the 100-foot wide buffer area of vegetation shall be reestablished in the following circumstances in accordance with the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality Riparian Buffers Modification and Mitigation Guidance Manual: 
(a)  New subdivisions or changes of use requiring a site plan in accordance with chapter 35.1 of the city code. 
(b)  Where agriculture or silviculture within the area of the buffer cease and the lands are proposed to be converted to other uses, the full 100-foot wide buffer shall be reestablished. In reestablishing the buffer, management measures shall be undertaken to provide woody vegetation that assures the buffer functions as set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  Permitted encroachments in the RPA. Land development, redevelopment, and land disturbing may be allowed in the RPA only if it is one or more of the following permitted encroachments. If all applicable requirements set forth in this subsection are not satisfied, an exception request in accordance with subsection 9-19(1) shall be required. Such permitted encroachments include: 
(a)  A water-dependent facility that satisfies the following: 
(i)  It does not conflict with the comprehensive plan; 
(ii)  It complies with the general performance criteria set forth in section 9-13; 
(iii)  Any non-water-dependent component is located outside the RPA; and 
(iv)  Access to the water-dependent facility will be provided with the minimum disturbance necessary. Where practicable, a single point of access will be provided. 
(b)  Redevelopment that satisfies the following: 
(i)  There is no increase in the amount of impervious cover in the RPA and there is no further encroachment in the RPA; or 
(ii)  The proposal is an expansion to a structure that was in existence prior to November 14, 1990 that satisfies the provisions of subsection 9-19(3). 
(c)  A new use on a lot recorded prior to October 1, 1989 that satisfies the following: 
(i)  Encroachments into the buffer area shall be the minimum necessary to achieve a reasonable buildable area for a principal structure and necessary utilities; 
(ii)  Where practicable, a vegetated area that will maximize water quality protection, mitigate the effects of the buffer encroachment, and is equal to the area of encroachment into the buffer area shall be established elsewhere on the lot or parcel; and 
(iii)  The encroachment may not extend into the seaward fifty (50) feet of the buffer area. 
(d)  A new use on a lot recorded between October 1, 1989 and March 1, 2002 that satisfies the following: 
(i)  The requirements of subsections 9-14(2)(c)(i) through 9-14(2)(c)(iii) above; 
(ii)  The lot or parcel was created as a result of a legal process conducted in conformity with the local government's subdivision regulations; 
(iii)  Conditions or mitigation measures imposed through a previously approved exception shall be met; and 
(iv)  If the use of a best management practice (BMP) was previously required, the BMP shall be evaluated to determine if it continues to function effectively and, if necessary, the BMP shall be reestablished or repaired and maintained as required. 
(e)  A road or driveway crossing that satisfies the following: 
(i)  There are no reasonable alternatives to aligning the road or driveway in or across the RPA; 
(ii)  The alignment and design of the road or driveway are optimized, consistent with other applicable requirements, to minimize (i) encroachment in the RPA and (ii) adverse effects on water quality; 
(f)  Flood control or stormwater management facilities that drain or treat water from multiple development projects or from a significant portion of a watershed may be allowed in RPAs provided such facilities are allowed and constructed in accordance with the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and its attendant regulations, and that satisfy the following: 
(i)  The local government has conclusively established that location of the facility within the RPA is the optimum location; 
(ii)  The size of the facility is the minimum necessary to provide necessary flood control or stormwater treatment, or both; 
(iii)  The facility must be consistent with a comprehensive stormwater management plan developed and approved in accordance with Chapter 33.2 of the city code; 
(iv)  All applicable permits for construction in state or federal waters must be obtained from the appropriate state and federal agencies, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the department, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission; 
(v)  Approval must be received from the local government prior to construction; and 
(vi)  Routine maintenance is allowed to be performed on existing facilities to assure that they continue to function as designed. It is not the intent of this subdivision to allow a BMP that collects and treats runoff from only an individual lot or some portion of the lot to be located within an RPA. 
(3)  Required mitigation in the RPA. All permitted development, redevelopment, and land disturbing in the RPA that results in new impervious area or removal of indigenous vegetation shall provide mitigation consistent with the requirements of a minor water quality impact assessment unless a major water quality impact assessment is required by subsection 9-19(1). 
(a)  A structure encroachment permit as described in chapter 33.1 of the city code is required for any structure or impervious area in the RPA buffer area. 
(4)  Subdivisions, boundary line adjustments, and property line vacations in the RPA. Parcels proposed as part of a new subdivision shall provide for sufficient buildable area outside of the RPA and special green area. Vacant parcels proposed to be altered through a boundary line adjustment or property line vacation shall provide for sufficient buildable area outside of the RPA and special green area or, on existing parcels lacking such sufficient area, the proposed parcels shall maintain the same or greater square footage of existing area outside of the RPA and special green area. 
(5)  Removal of vegetation in the RPA. 
(a)  In order to maintain the functional value of the buffer area, existing vegetation may be removed, subject to approval by the zoning administrator, only to provide for reasonable sight lines, access paths, general woodlot management, and best management practices, including those that prevent upland erosion and concentrated flows of stormwater, as follows: 
(i)  A plan and additional materials as required by the zoning administrator must be submitted for review prior to removal of existing vegetation. 
(ii)  Trees may be pruned or removed as necessary to provide for sight lines and vistas, provided that where removed, they shall be replaced with other vegetation that is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff. 
(iii)  Any path shall be constructed and surfaced so as to effectively control erosion. 
(iv)  Dead, diseased, or dying trees or shrubbery and noxious weeds (such as Johnson grass, kudzu, and multiflora rose) may be removed and thinning of trees may be allowed pursuant to sound horticultural practice incorporated into locally-adopted standards. 
(v)  For shoreline erosion control projects, trees and woody vegetation may be removed, necessary control techniques employed, and appropriate vegetation established to protect or stabilize the shoreline in accordance with the best available technical advice and applicable permit conditions or requirements. 
(b)  On agricultural lands the agricultural buffer area shall be managed to prevent concentrated flows of surface water from breaching the buffer area and appropriate measures may be taken to prevent noxious weeds (such as Johnson grass, kudzu, and multiflora rose) from invading the buffer area. Agricultural activities may encroach into the buffer area as follows: 
(i)  Agricultural activities may encroach into the landward fifty (50) feet of the 100-foot wide buffer area when at least one agricultural best management practice which, in the opinion of the local soil and water conservation district board, addresses the more predominant water quality issue on the adjacent land—erosion control or nutrient management—is being implemented on the adjacent land, provided that the combination of the undisturbed buffer area and the best management practice achieves water quality protection, pollutant removal, and water resource conservation at least the equivalent of the 100-foot wide buffer area. If nutrient management is identified as the predominant water quality issue, a nutrient management plan, including soil tests, must be developed consistent with the Virginia Nutrient Management Training and Certification Regulations (4VAC5-15) administered by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation. 
(ii)  Agricultural activities may encroach within the landward seventy-five (75) feet of the 100-foot wide buffer area when agricultural best management practices which address erosion control, nutrient management, and pest chemical control, are being implemented on the adjacent land. The erosion control practices must prevent erosion from exceeding the soil loss tolerance level, referred to as "T," as defined in the "National Soil Survey Handbook" of November 1996 in the "Field Office Technical Guide" of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service. A nutrient management plan, including soil tests, must be developed, consistent with the Virginia Nutrient Management Training and Certification Regulations (4VAC5-15) administered by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation. In conjunction with the remaining buffer area, this collection of best management practices shall be presumed to achieve water quality protection at least the equivalent of that provided by the 100-foot wide buffer area. 
(iii)  The buffer area is not required to be designated adjacent to agricultural drainage ditches if at least one best management practice which, in the opinion of the local soil and water conservation district board, addresses the more predominant water quality issue on the adjacent land—either erosion control or nutrient management—is being implemented on the adjacent land. 
(iv)  If specific problems are identified pertaining to agricultural activities that are causing pollution of the nearby water body with perennial flow or violate performance standards pertaining to the vegetated buffer area, the local government, in cooperation with soil and water conservation district, shall recommend a compliance schedule to the landowner and require the problems to be corrected consistent with that schedule. This schedule shall expedite environmental protection while taking into account the seasons and other temporal considerations so that the probability for successfully implementing the corrective measures is greatest. 
(v)  In cases where the landowner or his agent or operator has refused assistance from the local soil and water conservation district in complying with or documenting compliance with the agricultural requirements of this chapter, the district shall report the noncompliance to the local government. The local government shall require the landowner to correct the problems within a specified period of time not to exceed eighteen (18) months from their initial notification of the deficiencies to the landowner. The local government, in cooperation with the district, shall recommend a compliance schedule to the landowner. This schedule shall expedite environmental protection while taking into account the seasons and other temporal considerations so that the probability for successfully implementing the corrective measures is greatest. 
(Ord. No. Z18-03 , 1-10-2018)  
Sec. 9-15. - Specific regulations for development, redevelopment, and land disturbing in the IDA. 
All development, redevelopment, and land disturbing within the IDA shall be governed by the following: 
(1)  Vegetation in the IDA that is effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff shall be retained if present to the maximum extent practicable. 
(2)  Development and redevelopment in the IDA. On existing parcels designated as IDA, development and redevelopment shall be sited outside of the IDA to the greatest extent possible. The following guidelines shall be used to review and permit development and redevelopment within the IDA: 
(a)  Main buildings and required impervious pavement surface improvements may encroach into the IDA when a reasonable buildable area cannot be provided outside of the IDA and encroachment is the minimum relief necessary to enable a reasonable buildable area. Required green areas shall be located to maximize protection of the IDA and water quality. 
(b)  Accessory structures, decks, and discretionary pavement surface improvements may encroach into the IDA provided that: 
(i)  The encroachment is the minimum necessary to afford relief while adhering to required yard setbacks; and 
(ii)  Preference shall be given to previously disturbed areas, poor quality green areas, or existing impervious area; and 
(iii)  The applicant shall demonstrate there is no feasible location outside of the IDA while adhering to required yard setbacks. 
(c)  Stormwater BMPs may be located in the landward fifty (50) feet of the IDA provided that existing vegetation that is effective at preventing runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution is not removed from the IDA and that the impact to water quality from the proposed development is demonstrated through a major water quality impact assessment. 
(d)  No structure or impervious area, other than those exempt pursuant to subsection 9-19(2) shall be built within ten (10) feet of an RPA feature. 
(3)  Required mitigation in the IDA. All permitted development and redevelopment within the IDA that results in new impervious area or removal of indigenous vegetation shall provide mitigation consistent with the requirements of a minor water quality impact assessment unless a major water quality impact assessment is required by subsection 9-19(1). 
(a)  A structure encroachment permit as described in chapter 33.1 of the city code is required for any structure or impervious area in the IDA. 
(4)  Subdivisions, boundary line adjustments, and property line vacations in the IDA. Parcels proposed as part of a new subdivision shall provide for sufficient buildable area outside of the IDA and special green area. Vacant parcels proposed to be altered through a boundary line adjustment or property line vacation shall provide for sufficient buildable area outside of the IDA and special green area or, on existing parcels lacking such sufficient area, the proposed parcels shall maintain the same or greater square footage of existing area outside of the IDA and special green area. 
(5)  Removal of vegetation in the IDA. 
(a)  In order to maintain the functional value of the buffer area, existing vegetation may be removed, subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator, only to provide for reasonable sight lines, access paths, general woodlot management, and best management practices, including those that prevent upland erosion and concentrated flows of stormwater, as follows: 
(i)  A plan and additional materials as required by the zoning administrator must be submitted for review prior to removal of existing vegetation. 
(ii)  Trees may be pruned or removed as necessary to provide for sight lines and vistas, provided that where removed, they shall be replaced with other vegetation that is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff. 
(iii)  Any path shall be constructed and surfaced so as to effectively control erosion. 
(iv)  Dead, diseased, or dying trees or shrubbery and noxious weeds (such as Johnson grass, kudzu, and multiflora rose) may be removed and thinning of trees may be allowed pursuant to sound horticultural practice incorporated into locally-adopted standards. 
(v)  For shoreline erosion control projects, trees and woody vegetation may be removed, necessary control techniques employed, and appropriate vegetation established to protect or stabilize the shoreline in accordance with the best available technical advice and applicable permit conditions or requirements. 
(b)  On agricultural lands the agricultural buffer area shall be managed to prevent concentrated flows of surface water from breaching the buffer area and appropriate measures may be taken to prevent noxious weeds (such as Johnson grass, kudzu, and multiflora rose) from invading the buffer area. Agricultural activities may encroach into the buffer area as follows: 
(i)  Agricultural activities may encroach into the landward fifty (50) feet of the 100-foot wide buffer area when at least one agricultural best management practice which, in the opinion of the local soil and water conservation district board, addresses the more predominant water quality issue on the adjacent land—erosion control or nutrient management—is being implemented on the adjacent land, provided that the combination of the undisturbed buffer area and the best management practice achieves water quality protection, pollutant removal, and water resource conservation at least the equivalent of the 100-foot wide buffer area. If nutrient management is identified as the predominant water quality issue, a nutrient management plan, including soil tests, must be developed consistent with the Virginia Nutrient Management Training and Certification Regulations (4VAC5-15) administered by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation. 
(ii)  Agricultural activities may encroach within the landward seventy-five (75) feet of the 100-foot wide buffer area when agricultural best management practices which address erosion control, nutrient management, and pest chemical control, are being implemented on the adjacent land. The erosion control practices must prevent erosion from exceeding the soil loss tolerance level, referred to as "T," as defined in the "National Soil Survey Handbook" of November 1996 in the "Field Office Technical Guide" of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service. A nutrient management plan, including soil tests, must be developed, consistent with the Virginia Nutrient Management Training and Certification Regulations (4VAC5-15) administered by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation. In conjunction with the remaining buffer area, this collection of best management practices shall be presumed to achieve water quality protection at least the equivalent of that provided by the 100-foot wide buffer area. 
(iii)  The buffer area is not required to be designated adjacent to agricultural drainage ditches if at least one best management practice which, in the opinion of the local soil and water conservation district board, addresses the more predominant water quality issue on the adjacent land—either erosion control or nutrient management—is being implemented on the adjacent land. 
(iv)  If specific problems are identified pertaining to agricultural activities that are causing pollution of the nearby water body with perennial flow or violate performance standards pertaining to the vegetated buffer area, the local government, in cooperation with soil and water conservation district, shall recommend a compliance schedule to the landowner and require the problems to be corrected consistent with that schedule. This schedule shall expedite environmental protection while taking into account the seasons and other temporal considerations so that the probability for successfully implementing the corrective measures is greatest. 
(v)  In cases where the landowner or his agent or operator has refused assistance from the local soil and water conservation district in complying with or documenting compliance with the agricultural requirements of this chapter, the district shall report the noncompliance to the local government. The local government shall require the landowner to correct the problems within a specified period of time not to exceed eighteen (18) months from their initial notification of the deficiencies to the landowner. The local government, in cooperation with the district, shall recommend a compliance schedule to the landowner. This schedule shall expedite environmental protection while taking into account the seasons and other temporal considerations so that the probability for successfully implementing the corrective measures is greatest. 
(Ord. No. Z18-03 , 1-10-2018)  
Sec. 9-16. - Specific regulations for development, redevelopment, and land disturbing in the RMA. 
(1)  The general performance criteria set forth in section 9-13 shall apply to all development, redevelopment, and land disturbing in the RMA. 
(Ord. No. Z18-03 , 1-10-2018)  
Sec. 9-17. - Special green area requirements. 
(1)  All one- and two-family, duplex, townhouse, and multifamily developments or additions thereto, which are located on lots wholly or partially in the RPA buffer or IDA, shall have the following required Special Green Areas extending outward from the primary structure: 
(a)  In the front: 
(i)  For all one- and two-family and duplex developments: Thirty (30) feet 
(ii)  For all townhouse and multifamily developments: Twenty (20) feet 
(b)  In the sides: Five (5) feet 
(c)  In the rear: Twenty (20) feet 
(2)  Special green area shall not be required where the natural riparian buffer has been cleared in accordance with provisions of this article or was cleared prior to November 14, 1990, per city records. 
(3)  Special green area shall not be located in the 100-foot RPA buffer or IDA. 
(4)  Accessory structures are permitted in required special green area in accordance with regulations in underlying zoning districts. 
(5)  Relief from special green area requirements shall be provided, in the case that a lot, existing or newly created, has less than the standard minimum buildable area provided under the applicable zoning district due to the existence of RPA buffer or IDA, by reducing the required setbacks to: 
(a)  Front yard setback: minimum of fifteen (15) feet 
(b)  Side yard setback: minimum of five (5) feet 
(c)  Rear yard setback: minimum of twenty (20) feet 
(Ord. No. Z18-03 , 1-10-2018)  
Sec. 9-18. - Plan requirements. 
(1)  Required submittals for development and redevelopment in all O-CBP subdistricts: 
(a)  A plan of development consistent with ch. 1, section 1-7 or section 1-8 of the zoning ordinance, supplemented with a resource delineation. The resource delineation shall be submitted to the city for review, which may include physical verification of such findings on the site. 
(b)  Other plans as may be required by ch. 13.1, ch. 33.2, or other applicable sections of the city code. 
(2)  Additional required submittals for development and redevelopment in the RPA. 
(a)  A minor water quality impact assessment for permitted encroachments as defined in subsection 9-14(2) unless such development or redevelopment requires a site plan in accordance with ch. 35.1 of the city code, which shall require a major water quality impact assessment. 
(b)  A major water quality impact assessment for exceptions as defined in subsection 9-19(1). 
(3)  Additional required submittals for development and redevelopment in the IDA. 
(a)  A minor water quality impact assessment for development and redevelopment as defined in section 9-15 unless such development or redevelopment requires a site plan in accordance with ch. 35.1 of the city code, which shall require a major water quality impact assessment. 
(b)  A major water quality impact assessment for exceptions as defined in subsection 9-19(1). 
(Ord. No. Z18-03 , 1-10-2018)  
Sec. 9-19. - Exceptions, exemptions, and nonconformities. 
(1)  Exceptions. 
(a)  Exceptions to the requirements of section 9-13, section 9-14, section 9-15, and section 9-16 may be granted, provided that all of the following findings are made: 
(i)  The requested exception to the criteria is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
(ii)  Granting the exception will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied by this part to other property owners who are subject to its provisions and who are similarly situated; 
(iii)  The exception is in harmony with the purpose and intent of the district and is not of substantial detriment to water quality; 
(iv)  The exception request is not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed; 
(v)  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed, as warranted, that will prevent the allowed activity from causing a degradation of water quality; and 
(vi)  A major water quality impact assessment has been reviewed and approved by city staff. 
(b)  Exceptions from the requirements of section 9-13 and section 9-16 shall be reviewed under the criteria of subsection 9-19(1)(a) and may be granted by the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Exceptions from the requirements of section 9-14, and section 9-15 shall be reviewed under the criteria of subsection 9-19(1)(a) and shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the procedures for a variance request in ch. 13, section 13-11 of the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Exceptions from the requirements of section 9-17 shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the procedures for a variance request in ch. 13, section 13-11 of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following types of development are exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
(a)  Public roads, railroads, and public facilities provided that: 
(i)  Construction, installation, operation and maintenance of public roads, railroads, and public facilities and their appurtenant structures are in accordance with the following: 
(aa)  Public roads shall be optimally designed and aligned, consistent with all applicable requirements, to prevent or otherwise minimize the encroachment in the resource protection area and to minimize the adverse effects on water quality. 
(b)  City of Hampton or regional service authority or public utility including electric, natural gas, fiber-optic, telephone transmission lines, water, sewer, and underground telecommunications and cable television lines provided that: 
(i)  To the degree possible, the location of such utilities and facilities are sited outside of resource protection areas; 
(ii)  No more land shall be disturbed than is necessary to provide for installation of the proposed utility; 
(iii)  All such construction, installation and maintenance of such utilities and facilities shall be in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal permits and designed and conducted in a manner that protects water quality; and, 
(iv)  Any land disturbance exceeding an area of two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet complies with all erosion and sediment control requirements in accordance with chapter 13.1 of the Hampton City Code. 
(c)  Silvicultural activities, provided that such operations adhere to the water quality protection procedures prescribed by the Virginia Department of Forestry in "Virginia's Forestry Best Management Practices for Water Quality." 
(d)  Home gardens under two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet in areas where the natural riparian buffer has been cleared in accordance with provisions of this article or was cleared prior to November 14, 1990, per city records. 
(3)  Nonconformities. 
(a)  The lawful use of buildings or structures which existed in the O-CBP district prior to November 14, 1990, or which exists in an O-CBP district at the time of any amendment to this article, and which is on a legal nonconforming lot and not in conformity with the provisions of the district may be continued; however, any alteration, replacement or expansion of a nonconforming building or structure in the RPA shall require a development waiver. This provision shall not be construed to prevent the reconstruction of pre-existing structures within the O-CBP district occurring as a result of casualty loss. 
(b)  Such development waiver may be issued by the zoning administrator provided that: 
(i)  The pre-existing structure is the main building; 
(ii)  A minor water quality impact assessment is submitted; 
(iii)  Any development or land disturbance exceeding two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet in area shall comply with the provisions of the erosion and sediment control ordinance; 
(iv)  Relief from the requirements of section 9-13 are the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
(v)  Granting the waiver does not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied by this article to similarly situated property owners in the district; 
(vi)  The approval is consistent with the purpose and intent of the district and is not of substantial detriment to water quality; 
(vii)  The request is not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed; 
(viii)  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed, as warranted, that will prevent the allowed activity from causing degradation of water quality; and, 
(ix)  Other findings, as appropriate and required by the zoning administrator, are met. 
(c)  Such application for a development waiver shall be made to the zoning administrator and shall include the following: 
(i)  Name and address of applicant and property owner; 
(ii)  Legal description of the property; 
(iii)  Proposed use; 
(iv)  Minor water quality impact assessment; 
(v)  Sketch of property, including location of buildings and proposed additions, and RPA boundaries; and 
(vi)  Location and description of any existing private water supply or sewage system. 
(d)  Any development waiver shall become null and void twelve (12) months from the date of issue if no substantial work has commenced. 
(Ord. No. Z18-03 , 1-10-2018)  
Sec. 9-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - O-CC DISTRICT—COLISEUM CENTRAL OVERLAY 
 
Sec. 9-21. - Intent. 
The O-CC District is an overlay district that augments the underlying base zoning of properties within the Coliseum Central area. The intent of the district is to raise the overall quality of development in the city's main retail area through creative design and high quality materials. In those instances where there is a conflict between the requirements of the base zoning and this overlay, the overlay requirements shall prevail.  
Sec. 9-22. - Boundary and application. 
The O-CC District and the standards herein shall be applicable only to properties within the boundaries of the Coliseum Central Business Improvement District (CCBID), as illustrated below: 
 
However, the standards of the O-CC District shall not be applied to any residentially zoned or residentially developed properties within the boundaries shown above.  
Sec. 9-23. - Modifications to permitted uses. 
(1)  Permitted uses shall be defined by the base zoning of the individual properties with the following modifications: 
(a)  Prohibited uses: 
(i)  Boarding house; 
(ii)  Funeral home; 
(iii)  Mobile/manufactured home park and subdivision; 
(iv)  Pawnshop; 
(v)  Rooming house; 
(vi)  Sign painting shop; 
(vii)  Tattoo parlor; 
(viii)  Turkish bath; 
(ix)  Detention facility; 
(x)  Group home 2; 
(xi)  Halfway house; 
(xii)  Juvenile residence; 
(xiii)  Orphanage; 
(xiv)  Shelter; 
(xv)  Mental health/substance abuse treatment facility; 
(xvi)  Shooting range, trap or skeet; 
(xvii)  Boathouse, pier, dock, ramp; commercial (public or private); 
(xviii)  Marina, including boat sales, rental, storage and fuel. 
(b)  Permitted uses: 
(i)  Micro-brewery /distillery/winery 
(ii)  Live entertainment 1, in conjunction with a restaurant or micro-brewery/distillery/winery. Live entertainment 1 venues are defined as venues providing live entertainment only within the building, without a dance floor or similar gathering area, and having performance space of 75 square feet or less. Any other live entertainment venue is considered a live entertainment 2 venue. 
Live entertainment 1 is subject to a live entertainment zoning administrator permit with the following attached conditions: 
(aa)  Live entertainment shall be conducted inside the building only; 
(bb)  A floor plan shall be provided and approved showing the arrangement of tables, chairs, and performance area. The layout shall remain in place for live entertainment performances and no dance floor or similar open gathering space shall be permitted; 
(cc)  The hours of operation for live entertainment shall not extend past 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 11:59 p.m. Friday and Saturday; 
(dd)  The live entertainment shall comply with section 22-9 of the City Code, as amended, pertaining to noise. 
(ee)  Each ingress/egress point in the building shall be monitored by an attendant during the hours of operation, and additional attendants may be required to monitor vehicle parking areas that serve the building and maintain and control patron behavior upon exit of the building into the parking areas; 
(ff)  The restaurant or micro-brewery/distillery/winery shall meet the minimum requirements for parking as established in Chapter 11 herein; 
(gg)  The restaurant or micro-brewery/distillery/winery shall maintain compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and requirements of licensing agencies, including but not limited to ABC licensing; 
(hh)  The live entertainment permit shall be valid for eighteen (18) months from the date of approval by the zoning administrator. After twelve (12) months of operation, prior to the expiration date, the live entertainment permit will be scheduled for review by the zoning administrator to consider if the continuation of the live entertainment permit would not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and that to continue the activities under the live entertainment permit would not cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land in the zoning district. The review will be based, in part, upon a physical site review, traffic flow and control, access to and circulation within the property, off-street parking and loading, hours and manner of operation, noise, light, neighborhood complaints, police service calls, and any violations of any federal, state or local law. If, after review, the zoning administrator determines that the live entertainment permit would not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and that to continue the activities under the live entertainment permit would not cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land in the zoning district, the zoning administrator may administratively extend the live entertainment permit in five-year increments. Each such extension shall be subject to the same administrative review. If the zoning administrator determines that that the live entertainment permit would be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and that to continue the activities under the live entertainment permit would cause public inconvenience, annoyance, disturbance or have an undue impact on the community or be incompatible with other uses of land the zoning district, the zoning administrator will notify the permittee of a denial of the extension in writing in the same manner as required under chapter 1 of the zoning ordinance. A permittee aggrieved by the decision of the zoning administrator may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator to the board of zoning appeals in the manner set forth in chapter 13 of the zoning ordinance. Nothing contained herein shall limit the rights of a permittee to seek a new live entertainment permit; and 
(ii)  The zoning administrator, or appointed designee, shall have the ability to revoke the live entertainment permit upon violation of any of the above conditions. 
(2)  Permitted retail sales, services, and office uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building except for: 
(a)  Car wash, self-service or automated; 
(b)  Gas station; 
(c)  Motorcycle sales; 
(d)  Outdoor dining; 
(e)  Parking lots; 
(f)  Vehicle sales, new; 
(g)  Vehicle storage; and 
(h)  Those uses authorized by a Special Event Permit issued pursuant to the Hampton City Code; 
(i)  Seasonal sales authorized by Section 34-7 of the City Code. 
(j)  Permanent outdoor sales, displays, and storage, which shall be permitted only within a physically defined area that is shown on the site plan, and all physical improvements defining that area must be constructed of materials comparable to the primary building(s) on the site. 
(k)  Mobile food vendors that are an accessory use to a hospital primary use. 
(3)  No more than fifty (50) percent of the floor area of any building shall be used for the storage of merchandise. 
(4)  Noncommercial and commercial communication towers, satellite dishes and transmission antennas (with exception of building mounted antennas) shall not be located between any buildings and an existing or proposed public right-of-way. All noncommercial communication towers in excess of seventy-five (75) feet in height and all commercial communication towers shall be subject to securing a use permit. 
(Ord. No. Z15-11, 6-10-2015; Ord. No. Z-15-14, 8-12-2015 ; Ord. No. Z15-23 , 11-12-15; Ord. No. Z15-25 , 12-9-2015; Ord. No. Z18-11 , 7-11-2018; Ord. No. Z19-02 , 1-9-2019)  
Sec. 9-24. - Site design. 
(1)  The purpose of the following design guidelines is to ensure a consistent, integrated development pattern that will support the efforts of the CCBID to create a distinct sense of place for Coliseum Central, The site design objectives are as follows: 
(a)  Establish the image of Coliseum Central as a contemporary, vibrant, retail/mixed use area that is harmoniously integrated into the indigenous water-oriented ecosystem unique to Hampton; 
(b)  Promote economic growth in the Coliseum Central District; 
(c)  Encourage high quality development, allowing for the diversity of uses while avoiding detrimental uses and poor location of appropriate uses; 
(d)  Encourage high quality of the design and materials used in public open spaces, gateways, streetscape parcel development, buildings and signage; 
(e)  Create a sense of place through the use of physical improvements that clearly define the geographic district (i.e., edge treatments, landmarks and repetitive design elements) and 
(f)  Visually and functionally connect and define the Coliseum Central District, 
(2)  As a means of implementing the objectives stated above, the following minimum standards shall be met: 
(a)  Green area on the site must meet the following: 
(i)  At least ten (10) percent of the total site area, or the percentage required by the parking setbacks and parking lot green area requirements, whichever is greater. 
(ii)  At least ten (10) percent of the paved parking surface, including drive aisle and access. Such green space shall be located within the paved parking area and aggregated into areas of not less than five hundred eighty-five (585) square feet; with a minimum dimension of twelve (12) feet. This interior parking green area shall count toward the overall green area requirements for the site, as required above. 
(iii)  All green areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines". 
(b)  All buildings, including parking structures, shall be set back: 
(i)  At least fifty (50) feet, or twice the building height, whichever is greater, from any property line abutting Interstates 64 or 664; however, this setback shall not be required to exceed one hundred (100) feet; 
(ii)  At least twenty-five (25) feet, or twice the building height, whichever is greater, from any property line abutting access ramps to Interstates 64 or 664; however, this setback shall not be required to exceed fifty (50) feet; 
(iii)  At least thirty-five (35) feet, or twice the building height, whichever is greater, from any property line abutting Mercury Boulevard, Hampton Roads Center Parkway or Magruder Boulevard; however, this setback shall not be required to exceed eighty (80) feet; 
(iv)  At least twenty (20) feet from any property line abutting any other existing or proposed right-of-way; and 
(v)  At least fifteen (15) feet from any property line not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
(c)  All surface parking areas shall be set back: 
(i)  At least fifty (50) feet from any property line abutting Interstates 64 or 664, Hampton Roads Center Parkway, or Magruder Boulevard; 
(ii)  At least twenty-five (25) feet from any property line abutting an access ramp to Interstates 64 or 664; 
(iii)  At least fifteen (15) feet from any property line abutting any other existing or proposed public right-of-way; 
(iv)  At least ten (10) feet from any side property line not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way; 
(v)  At least ten (10) feet from any rear property line not abutting an existing or proposed public right-of-way; and 
(vi)  At least fifteen (15) feet from any rear or side property line that abuts property that is either zoned or developed residentially. 
(d)  All buildings should be faced on all sides with durable, attractive, high quality materials, comparable to brick masonry unit, architectural concrete masonry unit (e.g., regal stone, split face, precision, ground face), precast concrete panels, stone, or architectural metal panels. In general, the elevations that are visible from existing or proposed public right-of-way should have a combination of primary and accent materials. In no instance shall EIFS, corrugated metal, pre-engineered metal or exposed metal wall systems be used as primary exterior finish. Where parking structures are used, the exterior trades shall be comparable to adjacent structures on the same property with respect to materials, accents, color, etc. 
(e)  Architectural elements (e.g. awnings, canopies and arcades) shall be incorporated into the building design to achieve pedestrian shelter, add prominence to building entrances, or enliven the building facade at the pedestrian level. Awnings and canopies are exempted from the building setbacks in (b) above; however, this exemption does not include canopies over gasoline pumps. 
(f)  With the exception of flat roofs, all roof materials shall be durable, high quality materials, comparable to standing seam metal, wood shakes or architectural grade asphalt shingles. 
(g)  Rooftop equipment shall be positioned and/or screened from public view. Screening shall be accomplished through use of parapets or other opaque walls constructed of materials complementary to the exterior walls. 
(h)  Fencing shall be of durable materials that incorporate architectural features from the primary building(s) on the site; however, the use of chain link fencing, electrified fencing, barbed wire or razor wire is expressly prohibited. 
(i)  All exterior ground mounted equipment (e.g. HVAC, utility boxes, control boxes) shall be screened from public view with fences, walls, and/or landscaping. 
(j)  Stormwater facilities shall be designed for both environmental effectiveness and aesthetic impact on the overall development. 
(k)  When lighting is deemed necessary to provide a sense of comfort and security to a site development, lighting shall be designed for environmental effectiveness as well as aesthetic impact on the overall development, including but not limited to walkways, green areas, parking areas, exterior sales and display areas, building facades, canopies, awnings, and signage. The minimum standards for site lighting are as follows: 
(i)  Parking areas/streets: 
(aa)  All lighting shall be directed downward and inward to the site. 
(bb)  All lighting fixtures shall be "cut-off" fixtures as defined by IESNA. 
(cc)  The light source of all light fixtures shall be shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the site to minimize spillover to adjacent properties and road rights-of-way. Recessed light fixtures may be use as an alternative. 
(dd)  Lighting poles and fixtures shall be no more than forty (40) feet above grade and provide a minimum light level of one-half (0.5) foot-candles and the uniformity ratio (ratio of average to minimum illuminance) shall be no greater than 4:1. 
(ii)  Gasoline pump island canopies: 
(aa)  Canopy light fixtures shall be recessed so that the lens cover is recessed or flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the canopy and/or shielded by the fixture or the edge of the canopy so the light source is not visible from adjacent properties and road rights-of-way. 
(bb)  As an alternative (or supplement) to recessed ceiling lights, indirect lighting may be used where light is beamed upward and then reflected down from the underside of the canopy. In such case, light fixtures must be shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the underside of the canopy. 
(cc)  Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of canopies, and the canopy sides shall not be illuminated. 
(dd)  Light levels of 1.0 foot-candles shall be permitted, but no more than five (5.0) foot-candles and the uniformity ratio (ratio of average to minimum illuminance) shall be no greater than 4:1. 
(iii)  Exterior sales/display areas: 
(aa)  All lighting fixtures shall be "cut-off' fixtures as defined by IESNA. 
(bb)  Areas designated as parking or passive vehicle storage/vehicle or recreational vehicle sales shall meet the minimum requirements for parking areas. 
(cc)  Light fixtures shall be located, mounted, aimed, and shielded so that direct light is not cast onto adjacent properties and road rights-of-way. 
(dd)  Fixtures shall be mounted no more than twenty-five (25) feet above grade and light levels of one (1.0) foot-candles shall be permitted but no more than five (5.0) foot-candles and the uniformity ratio (ratio of average to minimum illuminance) shall be no greater than 4:1. 
(iv)  Building lighting: 
(aa)  Lighting fixtures shall be located, aimed, and shielded so that light is directed only onto the building facade. Lighting fixtures shall not be directed toward adjacent properties or road rights-of-way. 
(bb)  Illumination levels on any vertical surface or angular roof shall not exceed five (5.0) foot-candles. 
(v)  Landscape lighting: Permanent "twinkle" lights, which emit a non-blinking white light, shall be permitted in trees as an aesthetic enhancement for pedestrian areas. Such lights shall not be attached with nails, staples or other hardware, which would penetrate a tree's bark. Periodic maintenance shall be required to ensure that such lights remain in proper operating condition, including periodic re-stringing of the lights to prevent girdling of tree branches. 
(3)  In an effort to allow maximum utilization of the site, alternatives to the requirements of subsection (2) above may be permitted through an administrative design review process wherein the city staff will work with the applicant to obtain city approval of the development proposal. Such approval shall be based on the development proposal's ability to meet the overall intent of subsection (1) above, and may include the following: 
(a)  The provision of an alternative building design in place of the typical franchise requirement, including form, style, materials, and colors. However, building materials shall meet the minimum standards as described in subsection (2) above. 
(b)  Pitched roof design with a slope between 4:12 and 12:12 (rise:run) along the primary building facade, and a variable roof line which may include raised accent elements such as dormer windows, chimneys, etc. 
(c)  The provision of a solid-to-void ratio 1:1 (forty (40) to sixty (60) percent solid walls and sixty (60) to forty (40) percent windows or doors) for the primary facades of commercial storefronts and 3:1 sixty-five (65) to eighty-five (85) percent solid walls and thirty-five (35) to fifteen (15) percent windows or doors) for the primary facade of all other buildings, with the exception of parking structures. 
(d)  The provision of water features, fountains, and/or sculptures in keeping with the theme set forth in the coliseum central business improvement district master plan. 
(e)  The provision of site furnishings (e.g. benches, trash receptacles, decorative bollards, planters, etc.) and bus shelters. Furnishing placement shall be consistent throughout the subject site in relation to adjacent buildings and pavement edges and will not be required to meet minimum setback requirements. 
(f)  The provision of wrought iron, steel, or aluminum picket fence sections between masonry columns for fencing within the front yards of properties which are not intended to screen areas from public view. 
(g)  Use of alternative pavement materials and treatments to create a unified appearance, to emphasize special site characteristics, to provide porous parking surface, or to designate various pedestrian/circulation routes. Alternate paving types include but are not necessarily limited to modular pavers (brick, stone, concrete), colored concrete, patterned concrete, porous concrete and geoblock. 
(h)  The provision of a uniform lighting design that enhances site aesthetics. Design consideration should include fixture type, light source type, height of mounted fixtures, lighting levels, glare, sky glow, and color (CRI value). 
(i)  The provision of pedestrian corridors (i.e. paved pathways and landscaped green areas) through parking areas. 
If the applicant and city staff are unable to reach agreement over the provision of appropriate design alternatives in lieu of the minimum standards for the development proposal, the director of the department of community development, or his designee, shall convene the Coliseum Central Design Review Committee (CCDRC) to evaluate and take action on the development proposal. The CCDRC shall review the submitted design alternative(s) for the development and evaluate whether or not the development proposal is an acceptable substitute for the minimum design standards in achieving the overall design intent of the district as set forth in subsection (1) above. A tie vote of the CCDRC constitutes a denial of the development proposal. 
The decision of the CCDRC may be appealed by an aggrieved applicant to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with chapter 13 of the zoning ordinance. An applicant may pursue a variance from the board of zoning appeals pursuant to chapter 13 of the zoning ordinance in the event the applicant disagrees with a decision of the CCDRC involving solely dimensional site requirements.  
Secs. 9-25—9-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - O-FZ DISTRICT—FLOOD ZONE OVERLAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. Z16-03 , adopted April 13, 2016, repealed former art. IV., §§ 9-31—9-36, and enacted a new art. IV., §§ 9-31—9-37. Former art. IV. pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original Code and Ord. No. Z15-15, adopted August 12, 2015. 
 
Sec. 9-31. - General provisions. 
(1)  Statutory authorization and purpose. This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to localities by section 15.2-2280 of the Code of Virginia. The purpose of these provisions is to prevent: the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
(a)  Regulating uses, activities, and development which, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies; 
(b)  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within districts subject to flooding; 
(c)  Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone districts to be protected and/or flood-proofed against flooding and flood damage; and 
(d)  Protecting individuals from buying land and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
(2)  Applicability. These provisions shall apply to all privately and publicly owned lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Hampton (city) and identified as special flood hazard areas (SFHA) or other flood areas or shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or included in the flood insurance study (FIS) that are provided to the city by FEMA. 
(3)  Compliance and liability. 
(a)  No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this article. 
(b)  The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study, but does not imply total flood protection. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that districts outside the floodplain district or land uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(c)  This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(4)  Records. Records of actions associated with administering this ordinance shall be kept on file and maintained by or under the direction of the floodplain administrator in perpetuity. 
(5)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. To the extent that the provisions are more restrictive, this article supersedes any article or ordinance currently in effect in flood-prone districts, however, any such existing article or ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive than this article or do not conflict. 
(6)  Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. The remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. 
(7)  Administration and enforcement. The provisions of this article shall be enforced in accordance with chapter 1 of the zoning ordinance. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this article. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with this article may be declared by the city to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Flood insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. Z16-03 , 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 9-32. - Administration. 
(1)  Designation of the floodplain administrator. The zoning administrator or his designee shall act as floodplain administrator to administer and implement the flood plain regulations. The floodplain administrator may delegate duties and responsibilities to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees and enter into a written agreements with other communities and private sector entities to administer specific provisions of these regulations. 
(2)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include those set forth in the code of federal regulations, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed activities will be located in the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). 
(b)  Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide available base flood elevation and flood hazard information. 
(c)  Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be reasonably safe from flooding and require new construction and substantial improvements to meet the requirements of these regulations. 
(d)  Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from the federal, state or local agencies from which prior or concurrent approval is required; in particular, permits from state agencies for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts, structures), any alteration of a watercourse, or any change of the course, current, or cross section of a stream or body of water, including any change to the 100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing non-tidal waters of the State. 
(e)  Require applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse to provide proof that they have notified adjacent communities, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management), and other appropriate agencies (VADEQ, USACE) and have submitted copies of such notifications to FEMA. 
(f)  Advise applicants for new construction or substantial improvement of structures regarding whether or not the proposed development is within an area of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act where Federal flood insurance is not available; areas subject to this limitation are shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas (CBRS) or Otherwise Protected Areas (OPA). 
(g)  Review applications to develop in flood hazard areas for compliance with this article. 
(h)  In accordance with chapter 1, administer and enforce the terms of this article, including but not limited to inspections of buildings, structures, and other development subject to this article. 
(i)  Review elevation certificates and require incomplete or deficient certificates to be corrected. 
(j)  Submit to FEMA, or require applicants to submit to FEMA, data and information necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by or for the city, within six months after such data and information becomes available if the analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations. 
(k)  Maintain and permanently keep records that are necessary for the administration of these regulations, including: 
(i)  Flood insurance studies, flood insurance rate maps (including historic studies and maps and current effective studies and maps) and Letters of Map Change; and 
(ii)  Documentation supporting issuance and denial of permits, elevation certificates, documentation of the elevation (in relation to the datum on the FIRM) to which structures have been floodproofed, inspection records, other required design certifications, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken to correct violations of these regulations. 
(l)  In accordance with chapter 1, administer and enforce the terms of this article. 
(m)  Upon application for a variance from this article, prepare a staff report to the board of zoning appeals containing an analysis of the variance requirements applicable to this article. 
(n)  Administer the requirements related to proposed work on existing buildings: 
(i)  Make determinations as to whether buildings and structures that are located in flood hazard areas and that are damaged by any cause have been substantially damaged. 
(ii)  Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a permit to repair, rehabilitate, or reconstruct. Prohibit the non-compliant repair of substantially damaged buildings except for temporary emergency protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a building or structure to prevent additional damage. 
(o)  Undertake, as determined appropriate by the floodplain administrator due to the circumstances, other actions which may include but are not limited to: issuing press releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related to permit requests and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and assisting property owners with documentation necessary to file claims for increased cost of compliance coverage under NFIP flood insurance policies. 
(p)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the city have been modified and: 
(i)  Provide a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries or the new area for which the authority to regulate pursuant to these regulations has either been assumed or relinquished through annexation; and 
(ii)  If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in these regulations, prepare amendments to these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the governing body for adoption; such adoption shall take place at the same time as or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended regulations shall be provided to Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and FEMA. 
(q)  Upon the request of FEMA, complete and submit a report concerning participation in the NFIP which may request information regarding the number of buildings in the SFHA, number of permits issued for development in the SFHA, and number of variances issued for development in the SFHA. 
(3)  Use and interpretation of FIRMs. The floodplain administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries, and floodway boundaries based upon the applicable FIRM. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the floodplain administrator's interpretation may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of chapter 13 of the zoning ordinance. The following shall apply to the use and interpretation of FIRMs and data: 
(a)  Where field surveyed topography indicates that adjacent ground elevations are: 
(i)  Below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of these regulations; 
(ii)  Above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the SFHA. 
(b)  In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified SFHAs, any other flood hazard data available from a Federal, State, or other source shall be reviewed and reasonably used. 
(c)  Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs and in FISs shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other sources if such sources show reduced floodway widths and/or lower base flood elevations. 
(d)  Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources show increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FIRMs and in FISs. 
(e)  If a Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map and/or a Preliminary Flood Insurance Study has been provided by FEMA, the City will advise applicants for proposed development in a SFHA of the impact of the preliminary map changes. 
(i)  Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the city will prepare a statement, under FEMA's direction, which will be signed by all parties confirming flood insurance implications regarding any decision to proceed with development based on the current FIRM and FIS. The statement will be used until adoption of the new FIRM and FIS. 
(4)  District boundary changes. The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the city where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Emergency Management Agency as evidenced by a completed LOMR. 
(5)  Submitting model backed technical data. A community's base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. The community may submit data via a LOMR. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and flood plain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
(6)  Letters of map revision. When development in the floodplain will cause or causes a change in the base flood elevation, the applicant, including state agencies, must notify FEMA by applying for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) and then a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
Example cases: 
(a)  Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway. 
(b)  Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation. 
(c)  Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges) 44 Code of Federal Regulations §65.3 and §65.6(a)(12). 
(Ord. No. Z16-03 , 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 9-33. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
(1)  Description of special flood hazard districts. 
(a)  Basis of districts. 
(i)  The various special flood hazard districts shall include the special flood hazard areas and other flood areas. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the FIS and the FIRM for the city prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated May 16, 2016, and any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto. 
(ii)  The city may identify and regulate local flood hazard or ponding areas that are not delineated on the FIRM. These areas may be delineated on a "Local Flood Hazard Map" using best available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of record, historic high water marks or approximate study methodologies. 
(iii)  The boundaries of the SFHA Districts are established as shown on the FIRM which is declared to be a part of this ordinance and which shall be kept on file at the office of the floodplain administrator. 
(b)  The floodway district is in an AE Zone and is delineated, for purposes of this article, using the criterion that certain areas within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the one percent annual chance flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. The areas included in this district are specifically defined in Table 5 of the above-referenced FIS and shown on the accompanying FIRM. The following provisions shall apply within the floodway district of an AE zone: 
(i)  Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
(aa)  Development activities which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies—with the city's endorsement—for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR), and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(bb)  If Section 9-33(1)(b)(i) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 9-34. 
(ii)  The placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) is prohibited, except when replacing an existing manufactured home in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring, elevation, and encroachment standards are met. 
(c)  The AE, or AH Zones on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas for which one-percent annual chance flood elevations have been provided and the floodway has not been delineated. The following provisions shall apply within an AE or AH zone where FEMA has provided base flood elevations. 
(i)  Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, designated as Zones A1-30, AE, or AH on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. 
(aa)  Development activities in Zones Al-30, AE, or AH on the city's FIRM which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies—with the city's endorsement—for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision, and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(d)  The A Zone on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but the one percent annual chance floodplain boundary has been approximated. For these areas, the following provisions shall apply: 
(i)  The approximated floodplain district shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a one percent annual chance floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown as Zone A on the maps accompanying the FIS. For these areas, the base flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used, when available. Where the specific one percent annual chance flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports, U. S. Geological Survey Flood—Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this base flood elevation. For development proposed in the approximate floodplain the applicant must use technical methods that correctly reflect currently accepted practices, such as point on boundary, high water marks, or detailed methodologies hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
(aa)  The floodplain administrator reserves the right to require a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for any development. When such base flood elevation data is utilized, the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the base flood level plus eighteen inches. 
(bb)  During the permitting process, the floodplain administrator shall obtain: 
1.  The elevation of the lowest floor (in relation to the datum specified on the effective FIRM), including the basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; and, 
2.  If the structure has been flood-proofed in accordance with the requirements of this article, the elevation (in relation to the datum specified on the effective FIRM) to which the structure has been flood-proofed. 
(e)  The AO Zone on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas of shallow flooding identified as AO on the FIRM. For these areas, the following provisions shall apply: 
(i)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood depth specified on the FIRM, above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(ii)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
(aa)  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood depth specified on the FIRM, above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or, 
(bb)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood-proofed to the specified flood level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(iii)  Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(f)  The Coastal A Zone is labelled as AE on the FIRM; it is those areas that are shoreward of the limit of moderate wave action (LiMWA) line. As defined by the VA USBC, these areas are subject to wave heights between 1.5 feet and 3 feet. For these areas, the following provisions shall apply: 
(i)  Buildings and structures within this zone shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the design flood elevation, and must comply with the provisions in sections 9-33(1)(c), 9-34(2) and 9-34(3). 
(g)  The VE or V Zones on FIRMs accompanying the FIS shall be those areas that are known as Coastal High Hazard areas, extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast or other areas subject to high velocity waves. For these areas, the following provisions shall apply: 
(i)  All new construction and substantial improvements in Zones V and VE shall be elevated on pilings or columns so that: 
(aa)  The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the design flood elevation. 
(bb)  The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water loading values shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (one-percent annual chance). 
(ii)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of Section 9-33(1)(g)(i). 
(iii)  The floodplain administrator shall obtain an elevation certificate, which shall identify the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all new and substantially improved structures in Zones V and VE. 
(iv)  All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(v)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood-lattice work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions: 
(aa)  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
(bb)  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any give year. 
(vi)  The enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Such space shall not be partitioned into multiple rooms, temperature-controlled, or used for human habitation. The enclosed space shall be no more than 299 square feet. 
(vii)  The use of fill for structural support of buildings is prohibited. When non-structural fill is proposed in a coastal high hazard area, appropriate engineering analyses shall be conducted to evaluate the impacts of the fill prior to issuance of a development permit. 
(viii)  The man-made alteration of sand dunes, which would increase potential flood damage, is prohibited. 
(ix)  New, replacement, or substantially improved manufactured homes are prohibited within Zones V1—V30, V and VE on the city's Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
(x)  Recreational vehicles to be placed within Zones V1—V30, V, and VE on the city's Flood Insurance Rate Map on sites must meet the standards of section 9-34(3)(d) and sections 9-33(1)(g)(i) through 9-33(1)(g)(ix). 
(h)  Other flood areas shall be those areas identified as X (Shaded) or X500 on the FIRM for which there is a one-fifth percent (0.2%) annual chance of flooding. 
(i)  All new construction as of September 10, 2014 shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or flood-proofed to one and one-half (1.5) feet above the highest grade immediately adjacent to the structure except as described below: 
(aa)  When fill is placed to raise a structure at least one and one-half (1.5) feet above the highest existing grade immediately adjacent to the structure, as shown on a development plan prepared and stamped by a certified land surveyor or professional engineer. 
(2)  Overlay Concept. The floodplain districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as shown on the official zoning ordinance map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions. If there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the Floodplain Districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply. In the event any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic underlying provisions shall remain applicable. 
(Ord. No. Z16-03 , 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 9-34. - District provisions. 
(1)  Permit and application requirements. 
(a)  Permit requirement. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any special flood hazard area and other flood areas, including placement of manufactured homes, shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a zoning permit, land disturbance permit, or building permit when such a permit is required. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this article, all other applicable codes and ordinances, as amended, such as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VA USBC). Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the floodplain administrator shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. 
(b)  Site plans and building permit applications. All site plan and building permit applications within any special flood hazard area or other flood areas shall incorporate the following information: 
(i)  The elevation of the base flood at the site, or the elevation of the highest adjacent grade in other flood areas where no base flood elevation is provided. 
(ii)  The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or, in V zones, the lowest horizontal structural member. 
(iii)  For structures to be flood-proofed (non-residential only), the elevation to which the structure will be flood-proofed. 
(iv)  Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations. 
(c)  Small projects considered compliant with flood zone requirements. 
(i)  Individual permits shall not be required for activities, uses, and development (collectively "Small Projects") which have been reviewed, assessed, and documented by the City of Hampton and approved by FEMA in accordance with federal regulations as having low-to-no impact on the flood plain. A list of Small Projects meeting this criteria entitled, "City Review of Development in Flood Zones - Permit Requirements," is hereby adopted by reference as part of this article as if fully set forth herein, shall be kept on file in the office of the department of community development, and may be administratively amended as deemed necessary by the floodplain administrator in accordance with all federal requirements. 
(ii)  Notwithstanding the foregoing section 9-34(c)(i), Small Projects which constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this article shall require submission of a zoning permit or building permit, as applicable, prior to commencement of construction or land disturbance. The floodplain administrator may require submittal of all plans, documents, and information deemed necessary to determine whether the Small Project is a substantial improvement and otherwise complies with this article. 
(2)  General standards. In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  The freeboard shall be three (3) feet. The freeboard, in addition to the base flood elevation, shall constitute the design flood elevation. 
(b)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be built according to this ordinance and the VA USBC, and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(c)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(d)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(e)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(f)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including duct work, shall be: 
(i)  Elevated and installed at or above the design flood elevation; or 
(ii)  Designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(g)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(h)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(i)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(j)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this article shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this article. 
(k)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(l)  Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction a permit shall be obtained from the U. S. Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission (a joint permit application is available from any of these organizations). Furthermore, in riverine areas, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management), other required agencies, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(m)  The flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained. 
(n)  For residential construction, the lowest floor shall not be below grade on all sides. 
(3)  Elevation and construction standards. In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS or generated by a certified professional in accordance with Section 9-33(1)(d), the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Residential construction. 
(i)  New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) in Zones A1-30, AE, AH and A with detailed base flood elevations shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the design flood elevation. See sections 9-33(1)(f) and 9-33(1)(g) for requirements in the Coastal A and VE zones. 
(b)  Non-residential construction. 
(i)  New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the design flood elevation. See sections 9-33(1)(f) and 9-33(1)(g) for requirements in the Coastal A and VE zones. 
(ii)  Non-residential buildings located in all A1-30, AE, and AH zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building components below the design flood elevation are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification, including the specific elevation (in relation to the datum specified on the effective FIRM) to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(c)  Space below the lowest floor. In zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-A30, fully enclosed areas, of new construction or substantially improved structures, which are below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall: 
(i)  Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
(ii)  Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the design flood elevation; 
(iii)  Include measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum design criteria: 
(aa)  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding. 
(bb)  The total net area of all openings must be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding or the flood openings shall be engineered flood openings that are designed and certified by a licensed professional engineer to automatically allow entry and exit of floodwaters; the certification requirement may be satisfied by an individual certification or issuance of an evaluation report by the ICC Evaluation Service, Inc. 
(cc)  If a building has more than one (1) enclosed area, each area must have openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit. 
(dd)  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the adjacent grade. 
(ee)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
(ff)  Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as outlined above. 
(d)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
(i)  In zones A, AE, AH, and AO, all manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the elevation and anchoring requirements in sections 9-34(2) and 9-34(3). 
(ii)  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision in which a manufactured home has not incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood shall be elevated so that: 
(aa)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than design flood elevation; and 
(bb)  The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(iii)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(aa)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions); or 
(bb)  Meet all the requirements for manufactured homes in Section 9-34(3)(d)(i). 
(4)  Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be obtained from other sources or developed using detailed methodologies, hydraulic and hydrologic analysis, comparable to those contained in a flood insurance study for subdivision proposals and other proposed development proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that exceed five lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(Ord. No. Z16-03 , 4-13-2016; Ord. No. Z18-9 , 7-11-2018)  
Sec. 9-35. - Existing structures in floodplain areas. 
(1)  Any structure or use of a structure or premises must be brought into conformity with these provisions when it is changed, repaired, or improved unless one of the following exceptions is established before the change is made: 
(a)  The floodplain administrator has determined that: 
(i)  Change is not a substantial repair or substantial improvement; 
(ii)  No new square footage is being built in the floodplain that is not compliant; 
(iii)  No new square footage is being built in the floodway; and 
(iv)  The change complies with this ordinance. 
(b)  The changes are required to comply with a citation for a health or safety violation. 
(c)  The structure is a historic structure and the change required would impair the historic nature of the structure. 
(Ord. No. Z16-03 , 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 9-36. - Variances—Factors to be considered. 
(1)  Additional factors to be considered. In considering applications for variances to this article, the board of zoning appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in chapter 13 of the zoning ordinance and consider the following additional factors: 
(a)  The showing of good and sufficient cause. 
(b)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant. 
(c)  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. 
(d)  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
(e)  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. 
(f)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
(g)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(h)  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
(i)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
(j)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
(k)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
(l)  The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood. 
(m)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. 
(n)  The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(o)  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this article. 
(2)  Technical assistance. The board of zoning appeals may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters. 
(3)  Additional criteria to be applied. 
(a)  Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the granting of such variance will not result in (1) unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights, (2) additional threats to public safety, (3) extraordinary public expense; and will not (4) create nuisances, (5) cause fraud or victimization of the public, or (6) conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the variance will be the minimum required to provide relief from exceptional hardship to the applicant. The variance shall minimize changes to the requirements of this article, and maximize flood protection of the structure. No variance shall be granted by the board of zoning appeals for any proposed use, development, or activity within any floodway district that will cause any increase in the one hundred (100) year flood elevation. 
(c)  Prior to the consideration of an application for a variance to the provisions of this article, the board of zoning appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance, in writing, that the grant of a variance to construct a structure below the one hundred (100) year flood elevation (a) increases the risks to life and property and (b) will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
(d)  A record shall be maintained of the above notification as well as all variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any variances that are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial report submitted to the federal insurance administrator. 
(Ord. No. Z16-03 , 4-13-2016)  
Sec. 9-37. - Definitions. 
To the extent that the following definitions conflict with chapter 2 of the zoning ordinance, they will prevail. 
Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation. The water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the community's flood insurance rate map. For the purposes of this section, the base flood is the 1% annual chance flood. 
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Board of zoning appeals. The board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the zoning administrator in the interpretation of this chapter. 
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Coastal A Zone. Flood hazard areas that have been delineated as subject to wave heights between 1.5 feet and 3 feet. 
Coastal high hazard area. A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. 
Design Flood Elevation. The base flood elevation plus the freeboard required by this chapter. 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers). 
Encroachment. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion of an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Existing construction. For the purposes of the insurance program, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or before December 31, 1974. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures" and "pre-FIRM." 
Flood or flooding. 
1.  A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(c)  Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
2.  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph 1 (a) of this definition. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM). 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). A report by FEMA that examines, evaluates and determines flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudflow and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
Flood proofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. 
Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed. 
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(a)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(b)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis. Analyses performed by a licensed professional engineer, in accordance with standard engineering practices that are accepted by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation and FEMA, used to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway information and boundaries, and flood profiles. 
Letters of Map Change (LOMC). A Letter of Map Change is an official FEMA determination, by letter, that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include: 
1.  Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a land as defined by meets and bounds or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
2.  Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. A Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F), is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
3.  Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. 
Lowest adjacent grade. The lowest natural elevation of the ground surface next to the walls of a structure. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal Code 44CFR §60.3. 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level. An elevation point that represents the average height of the ocean's surface (such as the halfway point between the mean high tide and the mean low tide) which is used as a standard in reckoning land elevation. 
New construction. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after January 1, 1975, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. Such structure is also referred to as "post-FIRM." 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the city. 
Other flood areas. Those areas identified as X (Shaded) or X500 on the FIRM for which there is a one-fifth percent (0.2%) annual chance of flooding. 
Post-FIRM structures. A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or after January 1, 1975. 
Pre-FIRM structures. A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974. 
Primary frontal dune. A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory flood protection elevation. An elevation equivalent to the design flood elevation. 
Repetitive loss structure. A building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions in a 10-year period, in which the cost of the repair, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the structure at the time of each such flood event; and at the time of the second incidence of flood-related damage, the contract for flood insurance contains increased cost of compliance coverage. 
Severe repetitive loss structure. A structure that: (a) Is covered under a contract for flood insurance made available under the NFIP; and (b) Has incurred flood related damage (i) For which 4 or more separate claims payments have been made under flood insurance coverage with the amount of each such claim exceeding $5,000, and with the cumulative amount of such claims payments exceeding $20,000; or (ii) For which at least 2 separate claims payments have been made under such coverage, with the cumulative amount of such claims exceeding the market value of the insured structure. 
Shallow flooding area. A special flood hazard area with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Special flood hazard area. The land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in section 9-33(1) of this article. 
Start of construction. For other than new construction and substantial improvement, under the Coastal Barriers Resource Act (P.L. - 97-348), means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the city's assessed value or the market value of the structure before the damage occurred as established by an independent, unbiased, third party appraiser licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the city's assessed value or the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement as established by an independent, unbiased, third party appraiser licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. This term includes structures which have incurred or substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, or 
3.  Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined above, must comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the state historic preservation officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Watercourse. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. Z16-03 , 4-13-2016; Ord. No. Z18-9 , 7-11-2018)  
Secs. 9-38—9-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - O-IH DISTRICT—INFILL HOUSING OVERLAY 
 
Sec. 9-41. - Intent. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure that new housing construction on legally platted substandard lots is developed in a manner that maintains the scale and visual character of existing single-family homes in the surrounding area. The zoning ordinance requires a minimum dwelling area, lot frontage, and lot area for newly constructed single-family homes based on the underlying zoning district In many of the older neighborhoods in the city, existing lot size and dwelling sizes are well below these minimums. primarily because the lot existed prior to the regulation of the Zoning Ordinance. In this instance, it is vital to protect neighborhoods by ensuring that new development is compatible with existing development patterns of the neighborhood. To address these occurrences, the Infill Housing Overlay District (O-IH) permits a by-right reduction from the underlying zoning district in terms of lot frontage and/or lot area on infill lots provided that the proposed development meet the standards set forth in this ordinance. This method promotes quality development in the City by allowing development provided that specific development criteria are met  
Sec. 9-42. - Application and boundaries. 
The O-IH district shall apply to all infill lots located in R-8, R-9, R-11, and R-13 zoning districts that are determined to be substandard lots, as defined by the zoning ordinance. However, recognizing the unique coastal character, development pattern, and limitations on development of individual properties which are affected by numerous local, state, and federal environmental regulations, the following areas are excluded from this district: 
(1)  Those properties located east of North 1st Street between Pilot Avenue on the southern end and the northern terminus of North 1st Street at the northern end. 
(2)  Those properties located east of State Park Drive between Beach Road on the southern end and the Grandview Nature Preserve at the northern end. 
The district shall act as an overlay district, augmenting rather than replacing the underlying zoning district. All regulations of the underlying zoning district shall apply except as modified by the regulations for the O-IH. 
(Ord. No. Z16-12 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 9-43. - Development standards. 
(1)  Height. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and two (2) stories. 
(2)  Dwelling Area. A reduction in dwelling size is permitted if the minimum dwelling size required by the base zone district cannot be met with the height restrictions and setback requirements of this chapter. In such a case, the required dwelling area shall be reduced to meet the largest square footage possible on that lot while meeting the minimum setback requirements of the base zone district and not exceeding the building height regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(3)  Front yard setback and façade zone. There shall be a front yard setback equal to the average of the front yard setbacks for single family residences on the same block. A block shall be defined as three hundred (300) feet in both directions on the same side of the street. The façade zone shall be drawn as a polygon starting from the front setback line, back along the side property lines towards the interior of the property, with a fixed depth of ten (10) feet. Buildings shall meet the following provisions: 
(a)  A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the width of the proposed structure shall be located within the façade zone. 
(b)  The main entry door must be located within the façade zone and shall not be located on the furthest most exterior side walls. 
(c)  Any street facing façade within the façade zone shall include a minimum of twenty (20) percent fenestration. 
(4)  Green area. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the front yard shall be green area. 
(5)  Garage location. If constructed, an attached garage shall be located a minimum of eighteen inches (18") behind the front door. 
(Ord. No. Z19-11 , 4-10-2019)  
Secs. 9-44—9-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - O-MVC DISTRICT—MAGRUDER VISUAL CORRIDOR OVERLAY 
 
Sec. 9-51. - Intent. 
The Magruder Visual Corridor, which generally encompasses property visible from Magruder Boulevard, has a significant role in the economic well-being of the City of Hampton. As the heart of the high-tech corridor which extends from NASA to Newport News, Magruder Boulevard links Langley/NASA, the industrial/business parks on Magruder Boulevard, and the Coliseum Central Business District. 
Strong public policy has emphasized the importance of the visual environment in furthering the economic well-being of the city. This policy, as embodied in the Hampton Roads Center aesthetic controls, supports the establishment of the Magruder Visual Corridor District to guide the visual character of the corridor so that private development will match the standards set by the public sector initiative. 
The Magruder Visual Corridor Overlay (O-MVC) District is intended to protect the visual environment along Magruder Boulevard in order to allow planned economic development to occur in a manner which provides a positive visual impact along the major roads in the Magruder Corridor. 
Positive visual impact will occur through the control of the number, size, and location of signs, the establishment of a landscaped setback to buffer the visual and environmental impacts of the built environment, and the restriction of certain uses.  
Sec. 9-52. - Application of the district. 
The O-MVC District is created as a special district to be superimposed by a special symbol for its boundaries on the zoning district map. All regulations of the underlying districts shall apply except as modified by the regulations in the O-MVC District.  
Sec. 9-53. - Boundaries. 
The Magruder Visual Corridor District will include all areas on the map labeled O-MVC. This area comprises a corridor extending fifteen hundred (1,500) feet to either side of the Magruder Boulevard right-of-way, from Interstate 64 north to the city line east of Magruder Boulevard, and from the northernmost HRC-1 boundary north to the city line west of Magruder Boulevard, and fifteen hundred (1,500) feet to either side of Commander Sheppard Boulevard right-of-way between Magruder Boulevard and Armistead Avenue. For the purpose of this article, the right-of-way boundaries of Magruder Boulevard and Commander Sheppard Boulevard shall constitute major roads.  
Sec. 9-54. - Development standards. 
(1)  All fences, masonry walls, or other similar facilities shall receive approval as to location, design, and size by the director of planning prior to the issuance of a building permit. The use of chain link fence is prohibited unless screened completely from view by a natural screening treatment such as berms and/or vegetation. 
(2)  All storage areas shall be screened completely from any major road by fences, masonry walls, or other similar facilities in combination with vegetation and in accordance with subsection 9-54(1). 
(3)  A minimum setback of twenty (20) feet is required from any property line which abuts a major road. No type of construction, except signs, will be permitted in the setback. A landscape plan consistent with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines" for the setback shall be approved by the director of the department of community development prior to the issuance of a building permit for the main structure. 
(4)  Within one hundred (100) feet of any major road right-of-way and within one hundred (100) feet of any intersecting street right-of-way for a distance of three hundred (300) feet to either side of Magruder Boulevard right-of-way, the following are prohibited: 
(a)  Storage areas. 
(b)  Accessory structures.  
Secs. 9-55—9-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - O-HP DISTRICT—HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY 
 
Sec. 9-61. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is the preservation of Hampton's cultural and architectural past through the protection of individual sites and areas that reflect this significant heritage. The following regulations are intended to serve this purpose by protecting against the destruction of or encroachment upon such areas, encouraging uses that lead to the area's economic continuance while maintaining the character to be preserved, preventing the creation of adverse environmental influence and protecting property values in the area. 
It is intended that the preservation district shall act as an overlay, augmenting rather than replacing the underlying zoning.  
Sec. 9-62. - Boundaries. 
The district shall apply to all properties designated on the zoning map with the symbol O-HP.  
Sec. 9-63. - Creation of preservation review board. 
(1)  City council shall appoint a review board for each district consisting of five (5) persons with interest, competence or knowledge of preservation, and the following qualifications: one (1) professionally licensed architect; one (1) member of the planning commission; with the remaining members to be residents or business operators in the district. 
(2)  The term of office is three (3) years; provided, however, that of the original members two (2) are appointed for three (3) years; two (2) are appointed for two (2) years; and one (1) is appointed for one (1) year. Members can serve no more than two (2) full consecutive terms. Vacancies shall be filled within sixty (60) days. 
(3)  The review board shall elect a chairman and other officers as necessary annually, and shall meet on a regularly scheduled basis, not to be less often than every sixty (60) days. A quorum of three (3) members shall be necessary for any decision of the review board, although a lesser number may conduct public meetings, provided no binding action is taken. Decisions of the review board require a majority vote of those members present. All meetings and records of the review board shall be public. 
(4)  The planning department shall provide technical assistance to the review board.  
Sec. 9-64. - Duties and powers of the preservation review board. 
(1)  The review board shall prepare design guidelines to be applied to both land and buildings in the O-HP. 
(a)  Guidelines shall be in written form, available to all property owners in the historic preservation district, and adopted only after a duly advertised public hearing. 
(b)  The review board shall review the guidelines annually at a public hearing and may make changes necessary to fulfill the purpose of this article. 
(2)  The review board shall have authority over all plans for new construction, alteration, removal, or demolition of improvements to properties in the O-HP. 
(a)  Applicants for building, demolition or sign permits, and those property owners undertaking exterior maintenance within a preservation district shall first apply to the review board for a certificate of appropriateness. Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be accompanied by plans and specifications of those improvements or alterations that are subject to public view. The review board, where it deems it necessary in order to properly review an application, may require the submission of any of the following: architectural plans, site plans, landscaping plans, plans for off-street parking, proposed signs, elevations of those portions of the structure facing public streets, elevation photographs or perspectives that include adjoining properties, or color schemes. 
(b)  The review board shall notify all contiguous property owners of the application and the scheduled public hearing. The review board shall hold a public hearing on the application within sixty (60) days of receiving a complete application. If no action is taken by the review board within ninety (90) days of the completed application date and the applicant does not agree to an extension, the application for certificate of appropriateness shall be considered approved. The certificate of appropriateness will be issued eleven (11) days after the review board's approval. 
(c)  The applicant or any property owners within the district can appeal the decision of the review board to the city council. Such appeal must be filed with the clerk of council within ten (10) days of the review board's decision. Filing an appeal stays the review board's decision, except for cases where demolition of an improvement has been denied. City council shall have thirty (30) days from the filing of such appeal to take action. No decision within thirty (30) days shall constitute upholding the review board's decision. 
(d)  The applicant or any property owners within the district can appeal the decision of the city council to the circuit court. Such appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days of the city council decision. Filing an appeal stays the city council's decision except for cases where demolition of an improvement has been denied. 
(e)  The review board has the authority to administratively issue a certificate of appropriateness without public hearing in those cases where the alteration is identified in the district guidelines as an administrative item, such as basic maintenance, and does not, in any manner, deviate from the approved design guidelines. 
(3)  The review board shall consider the following in its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness: 
(a)  The historical or architectural significance of the property and its relationship to the entire historic preservation district; 
(b)  The appropriateness of the existing features to the historic preservation district; 
(c)  The appropriateness of the proposed alterations to the historic preservation district; and 
(d)  The effect of the alterations on the general design of the existing improvements to the property. 
(4)  The review board shall not consider any interior improvements or changes to the building or structure in its review process. 
(5)  The review board reserves the right to issue a certificate of appropriateness in those cases where the alteration, demolition, removal, or construction of the improvements is not in accord with the design guidelines, but where the alteration, demolition, removal, or construction will not negatively affect the value or importance of other properties in the preservation district, and denial of the certificate will cause a clearly demonstrable hardship rather than a deprivation of economic privilege or convenience. 
(6)  The review board shall have the responsibility of investigating and delineating individual properties and areas having historical interest and value which should be preserved and protected according to the purpose of this article. The review board shall bring these properties to the attention of the city council for possible inclusion in the O-HP.  
Sec. 9-65. - Application of certain provisions of zoning ordinance and building code. 
(1)  The height and area regulations, off-street parking and loading regulations and provisions relating to the location and number of main buildings, and the number and use of accessory buildings shall not apply to properties in a preservation district when it is demonstrated by competent evidence to the review board that it is necessary to deviate from such regulations and provisions in order to accomplish the purpose set out in this article. 
(2)  Any demolition required by the city building official for the health and safety of the community supersedes the review board process and does not require a certificate of appropriateness.  
Sec. 9-66. - Demolition of improvements to properties. 
Demolition of any improvement to property within a historic preservation district shall be a matter of right for the owner of such property when: 
(1)  The owner has applied for permission to demolish from the review board; and 
(2)  Such permission is granted; or 
(3)  Such permission is denied; and 
(4)  The owner has put the property on the market within one (1) year of the final decision to deny demolition, at a price reasonably related to its fair market value, for the required time period as set out below: 
(a)  Offering price less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)—Three (3) months; 
(b)  Offering price greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) but less than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00)—Four (4) months; 
(c)  Offering price greater than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) but less than fifty-five thousand dollars ($55,000,00)—Five (5) months; 
(d)  Offering price greater than fifty-five thousand dollars ($55,000.00) but less than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00)—Six (6) months; 
(e)  Offering price greater than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) but less than ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00)—Seven (7) months; 
(f)  Offering price greater than ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00)—Twelve (12) months; and 
(5)  No bona fide contract with any person, firm, corporation, government or agency thereof, or political subdivision or agency thereof, willing to preserve and restore the structure, has been executed within the required time period.  
Sec. 9-67. - Application fee. 
The sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), payable to the City of Hampton, shall accompany applications for certificates of appropriateness, to be applied to the cost of advertising. The fee shall be waived if the certificate is administratively approved.  
Secs. 9-68—9-70. - Reserved.  
Chapter 10 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. Z16-14 , adopted July 13, 2016, in effect repealed former ch. 10, §§ 10-1—10-15, and enacted a new ch. 10, §§ 10-1—10-18 and 10-31—10-33. Former ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. Z15-07, adopted May 13, 2015; Ord. No. Z16-09 , adopted April 13, 2016; Ord. No. Z15-16 , adopted October 14, 2015; Ord. No. Z15-21 , adopted October 14, 2015; and Ord. No. Z16-02 , adopted March 9, 2016. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Intent of sign regulations generally. 
The purpose of this article is to create the legal framework for a comprehensive but balanced system of signs, and thereby to facilitate harmonious and effective communication between people and their environment and to alleviate the proliferation of signs that are detrimental to the visual environment and economic vitality of Hampton. Further, the purposes of these sign regulations are also: 
(1)  To encourage the use of signs which are compatible with their surroundings; 
(2)  To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic growth; 
(3)  To minimize adverse impacts of signs on nearby public and private properties; 
(4)  To protect property values; 
(5)  To protect against inappropriate or hazardous visual encroachment and complement the characters of the city's various neighborhoods and zoning districts. 
(6)  To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations; and 
(7)  To protect the public's health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-2. - Applicability, administration, and enforcement of sign regulations. 
(1)  Applicability of articles. The regulations contained in article I shall apply to all zoning districts in the city, unless expressly superseded by the specific provisions set forth in articles II or III. If there is a conflict between the requirements of the articles herein, the requirement of the more specific article shall apply. 
(2)  Administration and enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to display, erect, paint, or otherwise maintain a sign except in conformance with this chapter. 
(b)  The definitions contained in chapter 2 of the zoning ordinance shall control except where specifically modified by this chapter. 
(c)  Characterization of contiguous zoning for purposes of applying the Table of Freestanding Signage Permitted shall be the following: contiguous zoning shall be the zoning classification of the properties which share a common property line with the subject property along a right-of-way, but not across any right-of-way. In cases where contiguous zoning is different, the more restrictive zoning classification shall be considered the contiguous zoning classification. In cases where there is no contiguous zoning, the maximum sign area for the district shall be permitted. 
(d)  This chapter, and the various parts, sections and clauses hereof, are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section or clause is adjudged invalid, the remainder shall remain in full force and effect. 
(3)  Permit required. Except where expressly provided, a permit shall be required prior to the erection, display, alteration, repair, or relocation of any sign, including sign face replacement. A permit shall not be required for routine maintenance or a change in changeable copy to a legally existing sign that results in no alteration to the sign structure. 
(a)  Permits for permanent signage shall be governed by the Uniform Statewide Building Code as set forth in chapter 9 of the city code of the City of Hampton. 
(b)  Permits for temporary signage, and any other signage exempt from the Uniform Statewide Building Code, shall be required to obtain a zoning permit as set forth in section 1-10 of the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  A complete permit application shall include the following: 
(i)  A fully completed sign permit application in a form set forth by the City of Hampton, which shall include all information necessary to ascertain compliance with the city code and zoning ordinance; and 
(ii)  A non-refundable fee as set forth in section 9-42(i) of the city code for permanent signage and section 1-10 of the zoning ordinance for all other signage. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-3. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited: 
(a)  Signs not expressly permitted in, or which violate any provision of, this chapter. 
(b)  Signs located on a public right-of-way or other city-owned property without a permitted encroachment agreement, which are subject to immediate removal without notice. 
(c)  Signs displayed on any vehicle unless the vehicle is licensed in accordance with state and local requirements and has a current state inspection. 
(d)  Abandoned nonconforming signs, which the city may order removal of provided the city gives the owner of the property on which the sign is located written notice to remove the sign. Such notice may not be given until the expiration of the two-year period necessary for the nonconforming sign to be considered abandoned. If, following such two-year period, the city has made a reasonable attempt to notify the property owner, the city through its own agents or employees may enter the property upon which the sign is located and remove any such sign whenever the owner has refused to do so. The cost of such removal shall be chargeable to the owner of the property. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from applying to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order requiring the removal of such abandoned nonconforming sign by the owner by means of injunction or other appropriate remedy. 
(e)  Discontinued signs, which shall require the owner of the property on which the discontinued sign is located to: 
(i)  Remove the copy from the sign face, 
(ii)  Replace the sign face with a blank face, or 
(iii)  Remove the sign structure. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-4. - Requirements generally applicable to all permitted signs. 
(1)  Height. No sign shall project above the building part to which it is attached, except for roof signs where expressly permitted. 
(2)  Illumination. 
(a)  All signs may be externally or internally lighted unless such lighting is prohibited in this chapter. When externally illuminated, the light source shall be shielded so that it illuminates only the face of the sign and minimizes glare and light trespass on adjacent properties. 
(b)  In residential zones, signs may be internally illuminated, but if illuminated from external sources, shall be shielded so as to protect adjoining properties from glare. 
(3)  Movement. No part of any sign may be in motion, such as by fluttering or rotating, whether by internal means or when set in motion by movement of the atmosphere. This prohibition shall not apply to feather or inflatable signs or the changing copy on electronic signs where permitted. 
(4)  Emissions. No sign may produce odor, sound, smoke, flame, or other emissions. 
(5)  Traffic and pedestrian safety. No sign may obstruct or impair access to a public sidewalk, public or private street or driveway, traffic control sign, bus stop, fire hydrant, or any other type of traffic or safety device. 
(6)  Maintenance. All signs and sign structures must be maintained in good and safe structural condition and repair in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(7)  Location. 
(a)  All signs must comply with zoning ordinance section 1-17 regarding vision clearance of corner lots. 
(b)  No less than 8 feet of clearance shall be provided between a sidewalk or pedestrian area and the lowest point of a hanging or projecting sign. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-5. - Freestanding and wall signs permitted. 
(1)  Freestanding and wall signs shall be permitted in accordance with the "Table of Freestanding Signage Permitted" and "Table of Wall Signage Permitted" as applicable and set forth in article III of this chapter. 
(2)  An additional Interstate/Arterial sign shall be permitted in all commercial districts as an optional incentive, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The sign is located within a 1,000' radius of the intersection of the centerline of an interstate highway right-of-way and the centerline of an arterial street right-of-way (as listed in the comprehensive plan) with direct access to that interstate. 
(b)  The sign complies with the City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines. 
(c)  All non-conforming signage otherwise located on the subject property is removed prior to approval of the sign permit. 
(d)  The property upon which the sign is to be located has direct access to the applicable arterial street. 
(e)  The sign shall not exceed 45' in height. 
(3)  Additional signage incidental to certain primary uses. In addition to the other permitted signs set forth in this section, the following signs are permitted in conjunction with certain permitted primary uses. 
(a)  In conjunction with an establishment with a drive-thru lane, two (2) freestanding signs per drive-thru lane, provided that the following provisions are met: 
(i)  The area of each additional freestanding sign shall not exceed 16 square feet when located in a front yard or a side yard and 24 square feet when located in a rear yard. 
(ii)  The maximum height of each freestanding sign shall be six (6) feet. 
(iii)  Each sign shall be located immediately adjacent to the applicable drive-thru lane. 
(b)  In conjunction with an automobile dealer, one (1) freestanding sign for each franchise provided that the signs are 100 linear feet apart. 
(c)  In conjunction with a gasoline supply station, the permitted sign set forth in the Table of Freestanding Signage Permitted may be increased by 24 square feet in sign area. In addition, each gasoline pump shall be permitted one (1) additional sign not to exceed two (2) square feet in sign area located on the pump. 
(d)  In conjunction with an educational or medical campus encompassing 50 or more acres that are contiguous or separated by a street: 
(i)  Up to two (2) freestanding signs may be permitted at each principal entrance provided that no more than one (1) sign shall be permitted at each side of the road or driveway. 
(ii)  Such signs shall not exceed 110 square feet in sign area and 12 feet in height. 
(iii)  Walls integrated into the design of a sign at the entrance to a campus shall not exceed 15 feet in height provided that no more than 25 percent of the wall shall be permitted at the maximum height. 
(iv)  All signs comply with the City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines. 
(e)  In conjunction with a home occupation, one wall sign not to exceed one (1) square foot in sign area. 
(f)  In conjunction with a public art display, one wall or freestanding sign not to exceed two (2) square feet in sign area. 
(g)  In conjunction with outdoor seating areas, one (1) sign located within the designated outdoor seating area, provided that the sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height, shall not contain lighting, and shall be movable with flat footing. 
(h)  In conjunction with a building containing multiple establishments, one wall sign affixed to each establishment's door or immediately adjacent thereto, not to exceed two (2) square feet in sign area. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-6. - Temporary signs permitted. 
(1)  Intent. Temporary signs permitted in proximity to certain events or in conjunction with certain uses shall not be construed to regulate the message displayed on any sign. 
(2)  Temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance with the "Table of Temporary Signage Permitted" set forth in article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-7. - Non-commercial signs permitted. 
The following non-commercial signs are permitted in every zoning district in conformance with the general requirements of this chapter and do not require a sign permit: 
(1)  Traffic control devices and signs related to safety and circulation on public or private property, erected and maintained in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, if applicable, not to exceed two (2) square feet of sign area unless required by law. 
(2)  Where a federal, state, or local law requires a property owner to post a sign on the owner's property, not to exceed two (2) square feet of sign area unless required by law. 
(3)  Address numerals necessary for public safety officials to readily identify the address from the public street, which shall be proportional to the size of the building and the distance from the street to the building. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-8. - Off-premises advertising signs. 
Off-premises advertising signs shall be permitted provided that the following provisions are met: 
(1)  Off-premises advertising signs shall be considered a permitted use upon those properties which contain such use as of September 1, 1988. Each site shall be identified as an "off-premises advertising site" on the official zoning maps of the City of Hampton and shall be available for public inspection in the offices of the zoning administrator and the director of community development. If any permitted off-premises advertising sign is relocated from an "off-premises advertising site" and if the zoning of the property is not M-2 or M-3, off-premises advertising shall not be considered a permitted use upon such property and the designation of the site as an "off-premises advertising site" shall be removed from the official zoning maps. 
(2)  Relocation of permitted off-premises advertising signs shall be permitted: 
(a)  Within the boundaries of the site upon which the structure was located on September 1, 1988, if zoned M-2 or M-3; 
(b)  On a contiguous lot, provided that such contiguous lot was created by subdivision from the lot on which the off-premises advertising sign was located on September 1, 1988, and retains common ownership, and is zoned M-2 or M-3; 
(3)  No off-premises advertising sign shall be relocated within a one thousand-foot radius drawn from the center point of any interchange of Interstate 64 or 664. 
(4)  Off-premises advertising sign height for signs primarily read from interstate highways shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the elevation of the highway to which the sign is principally displayed, as measured at the point of pavement of such highway nearest to the sign; and shall not exceed twenty-six (26) feet in height in all other areas. 
(5)  Off-premises sign area shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet per sign face when oriented primarily toward 1-64 and three hundred (300) square feet per sign face in all other areas. 
(6)  All replacements of existing units shall be of a single pole construction and subject to the following criteria: the site is zoned M-2 or M-3, the current size does not increase, the height meets the provisions of this ordinance and construction shall comply with all applicable Virginia building code requirements. 
(7)  No additional faces shall be permitted in excess of the number that existed on September 1, 1988. 
(8)  All off-premises advertising signs shall comply with the "City of Hampton Landscape Guidelines." 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-9. - Signs exempt from regulation. 
(1)  Window signs, provided the total area of the signs shall not exceed 33 percent of the area of the window in which they are displayed. 
(2)  Murals. 
(3)  Letters less than 19 inches in height and one (1) inch in thickness carved into or constructed of the same material as the building frontage in such a way that they are an architectural detail of the building, provided that they are not illuminated apart from the building, are not made of a reflecting material, and are the same color as the building. For any letters greater than 19 inches in height, only 50 percent of the area shall be counted towards the maximum area for wall signs. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-10. - Non-conforming signs. 
No nonconforming sign may be enlarged, extended, altered or relocated except as set forth in chapter 12 of this ordinance. 
Any damaged or destroyed nonconforming sign requiring repairs at a cost of fifty (50) percent or more of the replacement cost of the sign shall be removed or brought into conformity with this ordinance. Replacement cost shall be calculated using a substantially similar sign with the same materials as the original sign and shall only include the cost of the supporting structure, foundation, and sign face(s). 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
ARTICLE II. - SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN REGULATIONS IN CERTAIN ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 10-11. - Supplemental sign regulations. 
The supplemental sign regulations contained in article II shall supersede the general regulations contained in article I to the extent that they are specifically in conflict with article I. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-12. - O-MVC District sign regulations. 
(1)  In addition to the prohibitions set forth in article I of this chapter, the following signs shall be prohibited in the Magruder Visual Corridor Overlay (O-MVC) District: 
(a)  Signs painted on a building. 
(b)  Portable signs. 
(c)  Reader boards. 
(d)  Animated signs. 
(e)  Off-premises advertising signs. 
(2)  Limitations on permitted signs. Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet above natural grade within 100 feet of any major road right-of-way, and within 100 feet of any intersecting street right-of-way for a distance of 300 feet to either side of the Magruder Boulevard right-of-way, and may increase one (1) foot in height for each additional 20 feet of setback, provided that other related provisions of the ordinance are met. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-13. - O-CC District sign regulations. 
(1)  Sign area shall be as permitted in article I of this chapter, however the following shall also apply in the O-CC District: 
(a)  No sign shall be painted on a building, accessory structure or fence. 
(b)  Parcels are required to have at least 50 feet of frontage on a public right-of-way in order to place a freestanding sign facing that right-of-way. 
(c)  No freestanding sign shall be located closer than 40 feet to any other freestanding sign. 
(d)  Except for interstate/arterial signs, all freestanding signs shall be ground-mounted monument signs as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  In an effort to address the special signage needs of the Coliseum Central area, modifications to the requirements of (1) above, to include additional sign area, may be permitted upon the approval of the Coliseum Central Design Review Committee (CCDRC), as defined in chapter 2. Such approval shall be based upon the sign package's ability to meet the following standards: 
(a)  The appropriateness to the type of activity to which it pertains; 
(b)  Compatibility with the character of the surrounding area; 
(c)  Compatibility with the architecture of the building and its incorporation into that architecture in a manner that does not obscure elements and details that define the building design; 
(d)  Sensitivity of placement to signs on adjacent parcels; and 
(e)  Consolidation of freestanding signs. 
In no instance, however, shall the CCDRC allow the use of off-premises advertising that would not otherwise be permitted by this chapter. Should any request for additional sign area, or a change in the dimensions or location of a sign, be denied by the CCDRC, the request may be forwarded to the board of zoning appeals in the form of a variance. The CCDRC shall forward the rationale for their decision to the board of zoning appeals for consideration. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-14. - DT-1, DT-2 and DT-3 Districts sign regulations. 
(1)  Prohibited signs in the DT Districts. In addition to the prohibitions set forth in article I of this chapter, the following signs shall be prohibited within the DT Districts: 
(a)  Signs and parts thereof which move by spinning, rotating, or similar motion, and all forms of flashing or intermittent light, or any similar type devices, located on public or private property. 
(b)  Any window sign except those either specifically exempted in section 10-9 or those painted on a window surface. 
(2)  Signs in the DT Districts shall only be of the following types: 
(a)  Projecting signs. 
(b)  Wall signs. Signs may be attached flat against a storefront or building, or painted on glass surfaces. 
(c)  Freestanding signs. 
(d)  Awning/canopy signs. 
(e)  Sandwich boards. 
(3)  Lighting. 
(a)  All signs, if lighted, shall be indirectly illuminated by white-colored light, directed and/or shielded so that none of the lighted areas of the light source is visible from adjoining properties or rights-of-way, or may be internally illuminated in the case of a reverse-faced sign, in which the sign face is opaque and only the logo and/or letters are illuminated. Neon or similar gaseous discharge light shall be permitted. 
(b)  All forms of flashing or otherwise intermittent light are prohibited throughout the district. 
(4)  Materials. All exterior signs and sign supports shall be constructed of wood, non-corrosive metal, brick, fabric, neon, or similar gaseous discharge light, and shall be treated so as to be resistant to weathering, except that internally illuminated signs may contain plastic panels over the illuminated face. In all cases, lettering may be plastic. 
(5)  Optional incentives. 
(a)  It is the intent of this section to encourage outstanding sign design which reinforces the distinctive historic character of the DT Districts. 
(b)  A review board shall be established, composed of the community development director or designee, zoning administrator or designee, and three (3) representatives from the DT Districts. These three (3) representatives will act in an advisory capacity to the community development director and zoning administrator in the review of requests for incentive sign area. 
(c)  Upon application to and approval by the review board, a proposed sign may be granted additional sign area if it is adjudged to meet design criteria which exceed the minimum standards. The following incentives may be awarded: 
(i)  High-rise areas, defined as the four following areas: 1) the area bounded by Settlers Landing Road, South King Street, Rudd Lane, and Bridge Street; 2) the area bounded by Settlers Landing Road, Eaton Street extended, Wine Street extended, and the Hampton River; 3) the area bounded by Settlers Landing Road, Eaton Street, East Queen Street, and the Hampton River; and 4) the area bounded by Lincoln Street, Eaton Street, Syms Street extended, and Wine Street extended: an additional one hundred square feet of sign area per frontage; and 
(ii)  Other areas, defined as the areas not comprising the high-rise areas described above nor being part of a parcel having frontage on Queens Way between West Queens Court and Wine Street or on Kings Way between Lincoln Street and Settlers Landing Road: additional sign area of up to sixty-five (65) square feet per frontage. 
(d)  In determining the eligibility of a proposed sign for such incentives, the review board shall consider: 
(i)  The proposed sign's general design and arrangement and any distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship. 
(ii)  Height, proportion, relation to district entrances, materials, texture, color, lighting, details, scale, and styles of expression, and the extent to which the sign would be harmonious with or incongruous to the DT Districts, the architecture of the subject building, and adjacent buildings. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-15. - HRC-2 and HRC-3 Districts sign regulations. 
(1)  In addition to the prohibitions set forth in article I of this chapter, the following signs shall be prohibited in the HRC-2 and HRC-3 districts: 
(a)  Signs painted on a building. 
(b)  Off-premises advertising signs. 
(c)  Portable signs. 
(d)  Internally illuminated signs. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-16. - BB-3, BB-4 and BB-5 Districts sign regulations. 
(1)  Permitted locations and signs in the BB-3, BB-4, and BB-5 districts. 
(a)  Signs are permitted only on Mixed Use Lots or Special Lots as described in chapter 8, article 3. 
(b)  Types of signs permitted are the following: 
(i)  Wall signs. 
(ii)  Painted window signs. 
(iii)  Canopy signs. 
(iv)  Projecting signs. 
(v)  Sandwich board signs. 
(2)  Standards for signs in the BB-3, BB-4, and BB-5 districts. 
(a)  Internally illuminated signs (not including neon) are prohibited. Signs may be illuminated by backlighting or directional lighting done in a manner to minimize glare. 
(b)  Not more than 33 percent of the window surface area shall be covered by any combination of signs. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-17. - FM Districts sign regulations. 
(1)  General sign regulations for the FM Districts. Signage shall generally be as permitted in article I of this chapter, however the following shall also apply: 
(a)  Permitted sign types include only: 
(i)  Wall signs, to include painted wall signs. 
(ii)  Window signs. 
(iii)  Awning/canopy signs. 
(iv)  Projecting signs. 
(v)  Sandwich board signs. 
(b)  Prohibited sign types include but are not limited to: 
(i)  Freestanding signs. 
(ii)  Changeable copy signs. 
(iii)  Inflatable signs. 
(iv)  Changeable electronic message signs. 
(c)  Sign illumination. Internal illumination, except for neon or similar gaseous tubing signs, is prohibited. 
(d)  Sign area. Total square footage of the sign area shall not exceed a ratio of 0.75 square feet of sign area for each linear foot of the building façade. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016)  
Sec. 10-18. - PH-1, PH-2 and PH-3 Districts sign regulations. 
(1)  Signage shall generally be as permitted in article I of this chapter, however the following shall apply: 
(a)  Permitted sign types include only: 
(i)  Wall signs, to include painted wall signs. 
(ii)  Window signs. 
(iii)  Awning/canopy signs. 
(iv)  Projecting signs. 
(v)  Sandwich board signs. 
(vi)  Roof signs. 
(vii)  Freestanding signs permitted in subsections 10-5(3)(a), (f), and (g). 
(b)  Prohibited sign types include but are not limited to: 
(i)  Freestanding signs, with the exception of those permitted in subsections 10-5(3)(a), (f), and (g). 
(ii)  Changeable copy signs 
(iii)  Inflatable signs. 
(iv)  Changeable electronic message signs, with the exception of those permitted in subsections 10-5(3)(a), (f), and (g). 
(c)  Internal illumination, except for neon or similar gaseous tubing signs and LED or similar screens for signs permitted by subsections 10-5(3)(a), (f), and (g), is prohibited. 
(d)  Sign area. 
(i)  Signage painted directly on the wall of a building shall be permitted at a ratio not to exceed 1.5 square feet of sign area for each linear foot of the building façade, is permitted on any building façade, and shall not count toward the total number of facades which may hold other-wise permitted signage. 
(ii)  Roof signs shall not exceed one hundred eight (180) square feet, shall not project more than ten (10) feet above the highest point of the building, and shall count toward the maximum number of otherwise-permitted wall signs. 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016; Ord. No. Z18-14 , 12-12-2018; Ord. No. Z19-09 , 1-9-2019)  
Sec. 10-19. - One and two family residential district sign regulations. 
(1)  Signs in conjunction with a bed and breakfast 1 or a bed and breakfast 2. 
Signage shall generally be as permitted in article I of this chapter, however the following shall also apply: 
(a)  No more than two (2) signs that, together, total no more than twenty-eight (28) square feet are permitted per establishment. 
(b)  Wall signs shall not exceed five (5) square feet in sign area. 
(c)  Only one (1) sign may be freestanding. 
(d)  Freestanding signs shall be a maximum of six (6) feet in height. 
(e)  Signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
(f)  Changeable electronic message signs shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. Z18-7 , 3-14-2018)  
Secs. 10-20—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TABLES OF SIGNAGE PERMITTED 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Table of Freestanding Signage Permitted. 
The attached table entitled, "Table of Freestanding Signage Permitted" is hereby declared to be a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Click here for a PDF version of this table. 
 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016; Ord. No. Z18-7 , 3-14-2018; Ord. No. Z19-09 , 1-19-2019)  
Sec 10-32. - Table of Wall Signage Permitted. 
The attached table entitled, "Table of Wall Signage Permitted" is hereby declared to be a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Click here for a PDF version of this table. 
 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016; Ord. No. Z18-7 , 3-14-2018; Ord. No. Z19-09 , 1-19-2019)  
Sec. 10-33. - Table of Temporary Signage Permitted. 
The attached table entitled, "Table of Temporary Signage Permitted" is hereby declared to be a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Click here for a PDF version of this table. 
 
(Ord. No. Z16-14 , 7-13-2016; Ord. No. Z19-09 , 1-19-2019)  
Chapter 11 - PARKING 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes the minimum standards for vehicular parking, loading, and service areas. The provisions in this chapter apply to all types of new development, redevelopment, expansions of existing uses, and changes in use. The minimum standards required by this chapter shall apply unless alternate minimum parking standards and/or parking credits are applicable and approved by the zoning administrator. When considering the appropriateness of applying alternate minimum parking standards and/or parking credits, the zoning administrator shall consult with appropriate city departments (i.e. public works, planning, police, fire, etc.) to insure such decisions are in the best interest of the health, safety, and public welfare of the community and consistent with goals and objectives adopted in the City of Hampton comprehensive plan. These standards ensure the adequate and safe provision of parking to support various types of land uses. In addition, these standards contribute to the reduction of potential detrimental impacts to adjoining properties, enhance pedestrian access and connections, reduce stormwater impacts, and minimize excessive parking and the associated environmental impacts.  
Sec. 11-2. - Parking spaces required. 
Along with means of ingress and egress, uses permitted by the zoning ordinance shall provide on-site a minimum number of permanently maintained parking spaces as required in Tables 11-2.1 through 11-2.5; Required Minimum and Maximum Parking unless parking credits are granted pursuant to section 11-8 below, or alternate parking provisions are specified in other chapters of this ordinance which shall govern the required parking. In addition, all uses shall provide parking spaces that are accessible to the associated use according to the Uniform Statewide Building Code and meet access standards established in the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. Uses requiring a use permit may be required to vary from these standards due to the specific conditions of the development. Such variation shall be in the form of a condition recommended by the zoning administrator and adopted by city council. Minimum and maximum parking standards for uses not specifically listed in this chapter shall be determined by the zoning administrator based upon the minimum and maximum parking requirements of the closest comparable use for which a standard is specified. 
Table 11-2.1: Required Minimum and Maximum Parking 
Use Group: 	Automobile 	Bicycle 
Residential 	Min. 	Max. 	
Single-family detached 	2 spaces per housekeeping unit 	NA 	NA 
Accessory dwelling 	1 space in addition to 
required parking for the 
principal dwelling 	NA 	NA 
Two-family or duplex 	2 spaces per housekeeping unit 	NA 	NA 
Multi-family (apartment, townhouse, condominium, or other arrangement of attached units not otherwise specified) 	For one bedroom units: 1 space 	1.5 spaces 	1 space for each 50 
automobile 
spaces 
required 
	For two bedroom units: 1.5 spaces 	2.0 spaces 	
	For three or more bedroom units: 2 spaces 	2.25 spaces 	
	In addition (regardless of the mix of unit type and size), guest parking shall be provided at a ratio of 1 space per 5 dwelling units. Guest parking shall be located in an area or areas commonly accessible to all units. 	1 space per 4 
dwelling units 	
Dormitories or residence halls 	For one bedroom units: 1 space 	1.5 spaces 	1 space per 3 students 
	For two bedroom units: 1.5 spaces 	2.0 spaces 	
	For three or more bedroom units: 2 spaces 	2.25 spaces 	
	In addition (regardless of the mix of unit type and size), guest parking shall be provided at the ratio of 1 space per 5 dwelling units. Guest parking shall be located in an area or areas commonly accessible to all units. 	1 space per 4 
dwelling units 	
Rooming house, lodging house, fraternity/sorority house, tourist home or B&B 	1 space per 2 bedrooms 	1 space per bedroom 	NA 
Senior adult housing—Independent living 	1 space per 2 units plus one space per employee 	1 space per 1.5 units plus one space per employee 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Nursing home or convalescent home 	1 space per 4 beds plus 1 space per employee 	1 space per 3 beds plus 1 space per 
employee 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Adult Care Residence, Group Home, or Juvenile Residence 	1 space per every 3 beds plus 1 space per employee 	1 space per every 2 beds plus 1 space per employee 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Continuing Care Retirement Community (contains multiple elements of independent living, assisted living and convalescent care in one campus/complex) 	Minimum parking shall be calculated based upon the sum of the parking requirements (specified in this table) for each component of the complex 	Sum of the maximum requirements of the individual components of the complex 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
 
Table 11-2.2: Required Minimum and Maximum Parking 
Use Group: 	Automobile 	Bicycle 
Public/Semi-Public Use and Community Facilities 	Min. 	Max. 	
Auditoriums, gymnasiums, religious facilities, and other places of assembly not otherwise listed 	1 space per 4 seats in the largest 
assembly hall 	1 space per 3 seats in the largest 
assembly hall 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Movie theater 	1 space per 4 seats 	1 space per 3 seats 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Club or lodge 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 150 sq. feet of floor area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Elementary school or middle school 	1.5 spaces per classroom 	2.0 spaces per classroom 	Equal to 10% of the student capacity 
High school 	5 spaces per classroom 	6.5 spaces per 
classroom 	Equal to 10% of the student capacity 
College, business school, or vocational school 	6 spaces per classroom 	7.5 spaces per 
classroom 	Equal to 6% of the classroom capacity of each building 
Library or museum 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. of display area 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. of display area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Convention center 	1 space per 3 seats in the largest assembly hall plus 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of 
exhibit hall space 	1 space per 2.5 seats in the largest assembly hall plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of 
exhibit hall space 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Live performance theater or music hall 	1 space per 3 seats 	1 space per 2.5 seats 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Stadium and arenas 	1 space per 3 seats 	1 space per 2.5 seats 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Hospital 	1 space per 2 beds plus 1 space per 400 square feet of reception, administration, diagnostic, surgical, and 
outpatient space 	1 space per bed plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of reception, administration, lab, diagnostic, surgical and outpatient space 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Public facilities, community centers, neighborhood facilities, and recreational facilities 	1 space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 space per 3 seats for each place of assembly within the facility 	1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 space per 2.5 seats for each place of assembly within the facility 	12% of the required number of automobile spaces 
Public transit station or 
private bus station 	1 space per 300 square feet of floor area 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 	35% of the number of 
automobile spaces 
required or a minimum of 20, whichever is greater 
Parks: Active—i.e., ball fields, playgrounds, picnic shelters, bandstands, beach etc. 	5 spaces per acre of facility plus 1 space per every 4 persons of total maximum capacity of the facilities included in the park 	6 spaces per acre of facility plus 1 space per 3 persons of total maximum capacity of the facilities included in the park 	Minimum of 10 spaces plus 1 additional space for each 50 automobile spaces 
required 
Parks: Passive—Does not include any facilities to accommodate active organized recreation 	To be determined by the Director of parks, recreation, and leisure services based upon estimated peak usage of the facility 	125% of the minimum parking 	Minimum of 5 spaces plus 1 additional space for each 50 automobile 
spaces 
required 
Post office and private postal services 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Parking garage, commercial parking lots, public parking lots 	NA 	NA 	10% of the number of 
automobile spaces 
provided 
Marina 	1 space for every 2 boat slips 	1 space for every slip 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
 
Table 11-2.3: Required Minimum and Maximum Parking 
Use Group: 	Automobile 	Bicycle 
Commercial 	Min. 	Max. 	
Retail (except furniture and appliance sales) 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. of sales area 	1 space per 166 sq. ft. of sales area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Retail: Furniture and appliance sales 	1 space per 400 sq. ft. of sales area 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. of sales area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Shopping center, shopping mall 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. of sales area 	1 space per 166 sq. ft. of sales area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Grocery store 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. of sales area 	1 space per 166 sq. ft. of sales area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Home improvement superstore 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. of sales area 	1 space per 140 sq. ft. of sales area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Discount club or superstore 	1 space per 250 sq. ft of sales area 	1 space per 140 sq. ft. of sales area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Office (except medical or denial office or clinic) 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Medical office or clinic, dental office or clinic 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Bank: No drive-thru 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Bank: With drive-thru 	1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Personal services (i.e. dry cleaner, barber shop, beauty salon, tailor, etc.) 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of service area 	1 space per 166 sq. ft. of service area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Restaurant, eating and drinking establishments 	1 space per 75 sq. ft. of floor area exclusive of kitchen and freezer areas 	1 space per 60 sq. ft. of floor area exclusive of the kitchen and freezer area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Live entertainment with a dance floor or similar open space in association with a restaurant or micro-brewery/distillery/winery 	1 space per 15 sq. ft. of dance floor or similar open floor area in addition to the spaces required herein for the area of the restaurant or micro- brewery/distillery/winery use. 	1 space per 10 sq. ft. of dance floor or similar open floor area in addition to the maximum spaces permitted herein for the area of the restaurant or micro-brewery/distillery/winery use 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Dance hall or similar places of assembly without fixed seats 	1 space per every 3 persons based upon maximum occupancy 	1 space per every 2.5 persons based upon maximum occupancy 	1 space for each 50 automobile space required 
Commercial recreation—Within a building (unless otherwise listed). 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 166 sq. ft. of floor area 	12% of the total automobile spaces 
required 
Commercial recreation—Outdoors 	5 spaces per acre of facility plus 1 space per 4 persons of total maximum capacity of the facilities 	6 persons per acre of facility plus 1 space per 3 persons of total maximum capacity of the facilities 	Minimum of 10 spaces plus 1 additional space for each 50 automobile spaces 
provided 
Bowling alley 	1 space per employee plus 4 spaces per lane 	1 space per employee plus 5 spaces per lane 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Motel and tourist homes 	1 space per guest room 	1.25 spaces per guest room 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Hotel with total meeting space in excess of 1,000 sq. ft. 	1 space per guest room plus 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of meeting or banquet room 	1.25 spaces per guest room plus 1 space per 75 sq. ft. of meeting or banquet room 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Hotel with total meeting of 1,000 sq. ft. or less 	1 space per guest room 	1.25 spaces per guest room plus 1 space per 75 sq. ft. of meeting or banquet room 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Kennel or veterinary hospital 	1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Day care or nursery school 	1 space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Funeral home or mortuary 	1 space per employee plus one of the below ratios, whichever is greater. 
1 space per 50 sq. ft. of public viewing area 
or 
1 space per 3 seats in the chapel 	1 space per employee plus one of the below ratios, whichever is greater. 
1 space per 40 sq. ft. of public viewing area 
or 
1 space per 2.5 seats in the chapel 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Automobile repair and service 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. of service area 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of service area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Automobile and truck sales 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. of sales, office and waiting area 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of sales, office and waiting area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
House sales, mobile home sales, trailer sales, boat sales, and other outdoor equipment sales 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. of sales, office and waiting area 	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of sales, office and waiting area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces 
required 
Commercial nurseries 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor space plus 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. of lot area 	1 space per 250 sq. ft. of floor space plus 1.5 spaces per 5,000 sq. ft. of lot area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Car wash facility: Self service 	1 parking space at each end of every stall plus 1 parking space per stall located elsewhere on the site 	1 parking space at the end of every stall plus 1.5 parking spaces per stall located elsewhere on the site 	N/A 
All other car wash facilities (full service and/or automated) 	Stacking area to accommodate 3 vehicles per bay plus 2 parking spaces per bay elsewhere on site 	Stacking area to accommodate 4 vehicles per bay plus 3 parking spaces per bay elsewhere on site 	N/A 
 
Table 11-2.4: Required Minimum and Maximum Parking 
Use Group: 	Automobile 	Bicycle 
Research, Manufacturing and Industrial 	Min. 	Max. 	
Research lab 	1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Manufacturing 	1 space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Warehousing 	1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space per 1,500 sq. ft. of floor area 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Self storage facility enclosed—All storage units are contained within a building accessible from a single entry and interior hallways 	5 spaces adjacent to the office/entry plus 1 space per 50 units 	7 spaces adjacent to the office/entry plus 1 space per 30 units 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
Self storage facility not enclosed—All storage units are individually accessible from vehicular drive aisles 	5 spaces adjacent to the office plus drive aisles measuring a minimum of 28 feet between units 	7 spaces adjacent to the office plus drive aisles measuring a minimum of 28 feet between units 	N/A 
 
Table 11-2.5: Required Minimum and Maximum Parking 
Use Group: 	Automobile 	Bicycle 
Mixed Uses 	Min. 	Max. 	
Mixed uses—Any combination of 2 or more uses located upon the same site, within the same building or space 	Total spaces equal the sum of the requirements for each individual use unless credits and/or alternative parking standards are applied as permitted elsewhere in this chapter 	Total maximum number of spaces equals to the sum of the max. parking limits of the individual uses 	1 space for each 50 automobile spaces required 
 
(Ord. No. Z16-02 , 3-9-2016; Ord. No. Z19-03 , 1-9-2019)  
Sec. 11-3. - Loading spaces. 
Non-residential uses permitted by the zoning ordinance shall provide permanently maintained off-street loading spaces with adequate access. 
(1)  Each loading space shall measure no less than ten (10) feet wide by twenty-five (25) feet long and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet and a backing space of at least twenty-four (24) feet. 
(2)  Buildings of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less shall require one (1) loading space. Buildings in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall require two (2) loading spaces. 
(3)  Loading spaces shall not be located any closer than ten (10) feet to any existing or proposed rights-of-way, or closer than twenty (20) feet to any residential use or any property zoned for residential uses. 
(4)  Upon approval of the zoning administrator, required loading spaces to serve uses located in more urban densely developed districts such as (but not limited to) Downtown Hampton and Phoebus may be designated and signed as loading spaces during designated hours. Beyond these designated hours, this space may be used for parking, drive aisle, etc. Designated hours for this type of loading space shall specify times of the day that are "off peak" times for the respective use. 
(5)  The zoning administrator may waive some or all of the above requirements for loading spaces when evidence warrants special consideration. Waivers may be particularly applicable to redevelopment sites and mixed-use higher density nodes or districts identified in the adopted Hampton comprehensive plan and any adopted small area plans, redevelopment plans, or master plans where provision of off-street loading spaces may not be practical or desirable. The zoning administrator may also approve "shared use" of loading spaces in which more than one (1) use shares a common loading space.  
Sec. 11-4. - Maximum parking. 
In order to better utilize land, encourage alternative modes of transportation, and minimize the impact to the environment, maximum parking standards are established herein. A use may not exceed the maximum parking standard as required in Tables 11-2.1 through 11-2.5 unless it meets either of the following conditions described below. The following conditions apply to the parking spaces and associated drive aisles which exceed the maximum number or spaces permitted in Tables 11-2.1 through 11-2.5. 
(1)  If parking is comprised of new surface lot construction, the following low impact features are incorporated into the site design subject to approval of the director of planning and the director of public works: 
(a)  All stormwater from the parking lot shall be handled within or directly adjacent to the parking lot using a permeable paving system, underground detention, bioretention, or other similar method consistent with the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook (latest edition), and 
(b)  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the surface area of the parking lot must be shaded by tree canopy; or 
(c)  Alternative approaches which differ from (a) and (b) above but meet the same intent, may be approved upon review and approval of both the planning director and public works director. 
(2)  If parking spaces in excess of maximum number allowed by Tables 11-2.1 through 11-2.5 are accommodated in structured parking, no additional "low impact" features are required.  
Sec. 11-5. - Bicycle parking. 
To accommodate the growing diversity of transportation options, encourage alternative modes of transportation, and promote pedestrian activity, bicycle parking is required as specified in Tables 11-2.1 through 11-2.5: Required Minimum and Maximum Parking. Required bicycle parking is in addition to the required automobile parking. Bicycle parking shall be placed in highly visible areas within close proximity to primary building entrances and located such as to not impede pedestrian access and safety.  
Sec. 11-6. - Vertically stacked parking and modular automated parking systems (MAPS). 
Vertically stacked parking arrangements and modular automated parking systems shall be permitted. Vertically stacked systems which are not automated and which require vehicles and or lifts to access the stacked vehicle storage system shall provide a standard drive aisle between bays. Additional clearances may be required upon review by the appropriate building code official and the fire chief. 
Modular automated parking systems (MAPS) are not required to meet the standard parking space or drive aisle dimensions. They are required to meet all other applicable codes and ordinances.  
Sec. 11-7. - Dimensional standards. 
Minimum dimensions for all permitted types of parking stalls and backing/drive aisles shall be as specified in Table 11-7.1: Minimum Dimensional Standards: Parking Stalls and Aisles. 
Table 11-7.1: Minimum Dimensional Standards: Parking Stalls and Aisles 
Parking 
Element 	Dimensions 	Other Requirements 	Notes 
Standard Parking Space 	9'×18' (except in HRC-2 District where the minimum dimension is 8.5'×18') 		May be reduced to 9'×17' if the parking space is adjacent to green area that the vehicle may overhang—without encroaching into any pedestrian path, sidewalk, etc. 
Compact Parking Spaces 	8'×16' 	Must be clearly posted and marked 	No more than 33% of the min. required parking may be provided in compact spaces 
Parallel Parking Space 	8'×25' 		The Zoning Administrator may allow a reduction in width to a min. dimension of 7'×23' upon review of the street classification, traffic counts, and speed of traffic by the Director of Public Works. 
Standard Parking Garage Space 	8.5'×18' 		
Compact Parking Garage Space 	8'×16' 	Must be clearly posted and marked 	No more than 33% of the total spaces in a parking garage may be compact spaces. 
Motorcycle Parking Space 	4'×8' 	Must be posted and marked 	Although motorcycle parking is not required, it may be provided voluntarily using this dimensional standard. 
Aisle Width; 			Note: The fire marshal may assess the adequacy of all aisles less than 24 feet in terms of providing sufficient access for fire and emergency equipment. The fire marshal may require wider drive aisles than those specified—Not to exceed 24 feet. 
One-way aisles: 			
• 76—90 degree parking 	24' 		
• 61—75 degree parking 	18' 		
• 1—60 degree parking 	14' 		
Two-way aisles 	24' 		
  
Sec. 11-8. - Parking credits, exemptions and reductions. 
Any land use which is eligible for any of the shared parking and parking credits identified in this section may apply these credits in a cumulative fashion. When multiple credits may be applicable, the combination of credits which requires the lowest number of required parking spaces may apply. The application of all parking credits must be approved and documented in writing by the zoning administrator. All approved parking credits shall be included as a note upon site plans or other official documents submitted for permitting. 
Prior to approving any parking credits, the zoning administrator shall consult with all appropriate city departments to insure that the application of parking credits shall protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and shall promote harmonious development consistent with the goals and objectives of the adopted Hampton comprehensive plan. The zoning administrator may decline to apply parking credits when there is evidence that the existing parking conditions upon a site or within a district are such that application of all or some of the eligible parking credits will further contribute toward an existing condition in which parking is already inadequate (based upon requirements of this ordinance), unsafe (as determined by the police division, fire department, or city traffic engineer), and/or is creating negative off-site impacts to adjoining land uses. 
(1)  Shared parking. The shared parking model can be used as a basis for predicting the overall parking demand for a particular mix of land uses on a site as an alternative to the application of individual parking requirements specified in Tables 11-2.1 through 11-2.5. This model assumes that every separate use will need the full amount of parking that is called for in the parking requirements table at some point during the day (called the "peak period" for that use). Where different uses need parking at different times of the day, there is an opportunity for these uses to share parking. The total number of parking spaces needed to serve a mix of uses (the parking demand) may be significantly less than the number of spaces that would have to be built if each of the uses had to provide one hundred (100) percent of its own required parking. 
Shared parking credits may be applied to a mixed-use site as specified in Table 11-8.1: Shared Parking Credit Schedule under the following conditions: 
1.  The land contains a mix of two (2) or more land uses and is under single ownership; or 
2.  The land contains a mix of two (2) or more land uses and operates under a joint use agreement which permits shared use of parking. The shared parking agreement shall include all of the following terms, to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator and city attorney: 
(a)  Consent of all applicable property owners, 
(b)  The number and location of all parking spaces being shared with an exhibit depicting such spaces, 
(c)  A minimum 20-year term, 
(d)  A provision requiring 90-days prior written notice to the director of community development upon amendment or termination of the agreement, 
(e)  Provisions allowing for the use of the parking spaces during all times relevant to the use necessitating the parking spaces, as determined by the zoning administrator, 
(f)  An acknowledgement that, upon termination of the shared parking agreement, the grantee of the credits may be in violation of the zoning ordinance unless the required parking is provided by alternate means prior to the termination date of the shared parking agreement, and 
(g)  Any other such term reasonably required by the city based upon the unique circumstances of a particular case. 
Notwithstanding the above-described 20-year term, such shared parking agreement may include a provision allowing termination of the agreement by either party at any time, provided 90-days prior written notice is provided to the director of community development and all parties to the agreement. The shared parking agreement shall be in a form suitable for recordation in the deed books maintained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton and accompanied by a check made payable to the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton in an amount required by the Clerk to cover recording fees. 
Table 11-8.1: Shared Parking Credit Schedule 
Use 	Weekday 	Weekend 	Night 
	Daytime (8 a.m.—6 p.m.) 	Evening (6 p.m.—midnight) 	Daytime (8 a.m.—6 p.m.) 	Evening (6 p.m.—midnight) 	Midnight—8 a.m.) 
Residential Uses 	70% 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 
General Retail 	100% 	95% 	100% 	70% 	5% 
Restaurant: Family or fast food 	100% 	80% 	100% 	70% 	25% 
Restaurant: Fine dining 	75% 	100% 	60% 	100% 	50% 
Restaurant with nightclub 	45% 	100% 	60% 	100% 	100% 
Performing Arts Theater, Arena 	5% 	100% 	100% 	100% 	5% 
Stadium 	10% 	100% 	100% 	100% 	10% 
Movie Theater 	60% 	100% 	60% 	100% 	50% 
Hotel: General 	80% 	100% 	80% 	100% 	100% 
Hotel with Convention/Conference Center 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 
Office 	100% 	30% 	60% 	0% 	0% 
Medical/Dental Office 	100% 	30% 	100% 	0% 	0% 
Meeting Center/Convention Center 	100% 	100% 	100% 	50% 	10% 
Churches 	10% 	100% 	100% 	100% 	0% 
Bank 	100% 	67% 	100% 	0% 	0% 
Health Club 	100% 	100% 	100% 	95% 	80% 
All other uses not listed 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 
 
Example: Calculating the Shared Parking Credit. In this example, the hypothetical development consists of three (3) different land uses located upon the same parcel. These land uses are as follows: (1) three hundred (300) room hotel with no meeting space; (2) one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of general office space; and (3) one hundred (100) rental apartments—All three-bedroom units. 
Step 1: Calculate the minimum parking required using Tables 11-2.1 through 11-2.5 
Land Use 	Parking Ratios 	Min. Required 
300-room hotel 	1 space per room 	300 spaces 
100K sq. ft. of office space 	1 space per 300 sq. ft 	333 spaces 
100 rental apartments 	2 spaces per unit plus 1 visitor space for every 5 units 	220 spaces 
Total: 	853 spaces 
 
Step 2: Calculate the minimum parking required using the Shared Parking Credit Schedule—Table 11-8.1 for the various times of day and days of the week. 
Land Use 	Week Day 	Week End 	Night 
	Daytime 	Evening 	Daytime 	Evening 	
300-room hotel 	80% × 
300 = 
240 	100% × 
300 = 
300 	80% × 
300 = 
240 	100% × 
300 = 
300 	100% × 
300 = 
300 
100K sq. ft. office building 	100% × 
333 = 
333 	30% × 
333 = 
100 	60% × 
333 = 
200 	0% × 
333 = 
0 	0% × 
333 = 
0 
100 3-bedroom apartments 	70% × 
220 = 
154 	100% × 
220 = 
220 	100% × 
220 = 
220 	100% × 
220 = 
220 	100% × 
220 = 
220 
Totals: 	727 	620 	660 	520 	520 
 
Step 3: Find the highest number generated in Step 2; in this example the highest number is seven hundred twenty-seven (727). 
Step 4: Compare the number generated in Step 1 with the highest number generated in Step 2: in this example eight hundred fifty-three (853) versus seven hundred twenty-seven (727), or a difference of one hundred twenty-six (126) spaces. 
Step 5: If these two (2) numbers are different, there is the potential to reduce the required minimum parking for the entire project to the lower of the two (2) numbers. Ultimately that choice is the land owner/developer's to make. 
(2)  On-street parking and off-site parking. All on-street and off-site parking credits shall only apply to parking that is generally available to the public and not restricted in any way which would limit its ability to meet the parking demands of the intended land use. 
(a)  On-street parking credit. On-street parking credits may be applied to any lot. On-street parking within the public rights-of-way immediately adjacent (and on the same side of the street) to the subject site may be counted towards the minimum required parking. 
(b)  Off-site parking credit. Where parking is available off-site and within five hundred (500) feet of any publically accessible pedestrian entry point to a building, it may be counted towards the minimum required parking under the following conditions: 
(i)  The off-site parking is owned or controlled by a public entity and the requested parking credit is approved, in writing, by the appropriate authority. The public entity shall maintain an inventory of parking space credits provided and the spaces within the lot in which they exist. Credits shall not be granted beyond the number of spaces available with the exception for instances when the uses involved qualify for parking credits under section 11-8(1), as amended; or 
(ii)  The off-site parking is owned or controlled by a private entity with a legally binding shared parking agreement. The shared parking agreement shall include all of the following terms, to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator and city attorney: 
(a)  Consent of all applicable property owners, 
(b)  The number and location of all parking spaces being shared with an exhibit depicting such spaces, 
(c)  A minimum 20-year term, 
(d)  A provision requiring 90-days prior written notice to the director of community development upon amendment or termination of the agreement, 
(e)  Provisions allowing for the use of the parking spaces during all times relevant to the use necessitating the parking spaces, as determined by the zoning administrator, 
(f)  An acknowledgement that, upon termination of the shared parking agreement, the grantee of the credits may be in violation of the zoning ordinance unless the required parking is provided by alternate means prior to the termination date of the shared parking agreement, and 
(g)  Any other such term reasonably required by the city based upon the unique circumstances of a particular case. 
Notwithstanding the above-described 20-year term, such shared parking agreement may include a provision allowing termination of the agreement by either party at any time, provided 90-days prior written notice is provided to the director of community development and all parties to the agreement. The shared parking agreement shall be in a form suitable for recordation in the deed books maintained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton and accompanied by a check made payable to the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton in an amount required by the Clerk to cover recording fees. 
(iii)  Convenient and safe pedestrian access ways shall be provided from the off-site parking to the primary entrance(s) of the subject use. Off-site parking shall not be approved without the existence of such improvements. Required pedestrian access ways shall be designated on a submitted site plan and shall be approved by the director of of community development or designee. 
(3)  Transit parking credits. In areas served by affordable and convenient transit service, parking demand can be affected. The degree to which transit service impacts parking demand is influenced by a number of factors including the type and density of surrounding development, the existing supply and cost of parking, and the quality of transit service generally accessible to the traveling public. 
In order to provide appropriately tailored transit credits that are customized to the unique set of forces influencing parking demand in any given geographic area of the city, "Transit Overlay Zones" may be established for defined geographic areas of the city. In general, "Transit Overlay Zones" may enact land use, transportation, and parking policies which encourage the provision of multiple modes of transportation and will typically include higher density, compact, mixed-use development districts referred to as Transit Oriented Development (TOD). 
Within any adopted "Transit Overlay Zone," transit parking credits may be established that are appropriate for that geographic area. 
(4)  Mixed-use district—Ground floor retail/commercial credit. In mixed-use districts (as designated in the adopted Hampton comprehensive plan, small area plans, neighborhood plans, and master plans), the first three thousand (3,000) square feet of pedestrian oriented ground floor commercial retail space shall be exempt from the calculation to determine the minimum required parking. This credit shall be calculated based upon specific information (building size, uses, ownership, etc.) provided to the City of Hampton at the time of site plan review or building permit review. 
(5)  Other parking credits. The zoning administrator may also grant parking credits based upon request by an applicant. The applicant requesting such consideration shall supply documentation regarding parking data (anticipated parking demand, anticipated peak parking demand times of day, week, and month) relevant to the specific site and proposed uses as well as parking data relevant to the surrounding area. Other relevant data may also be requested of the applicant and/or local, state, and federal agencies. All such information shall be reviewed by the director of public works and the planning director and a recommendation forwarded to the zoning administrator prior to making a final decision to grant parking credits not specified elsewhere in this chapter. The zoning administrator shall consider granting other parking credits only when the applicant's submitted request and supporting data meets one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
(a)  Adherence to the applicable parking standards is not necessary and will result in excess parking spaces because the mixture of existing or proposed uses will generate a high proportion of multiple destination vehicle trips; or 
(b)  Adherence to the applicable parking standards is not necessary and will result in excess parking spaces because there will be a high level of pedestrian, carpool, and/or public transit traffic serving the use; or 
(c)  Adherence to the applicable parking standards within a Historic District designated by the federal government, Commonwealth of Virginia, or within a locally adopted preservation district will be detrimental to the historic character of the district and thus deviation from the adopted standards furthers the public interest in preserving and maintaining these historic community assets. 
(6)  Parking exemptions and reductions. To recognize the unique character of established urban neighborhoods and the provision of alternative parking options nearby, the following zoning districts shall have parking requirements exempted or reduced as described below: 
(a)  O-IH District. Residential development on substandard lots, as set forth in chapter 9 article 5 of the Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted a reduction from the parking requirements of section 11-2 herein to one (1) space per housekeeping unit when the lot frontage is less than fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  DT-1, DT-2, and DT-3 Districts. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as required in section 11-2 herein, except that buildings erected so as to provide office and/or living space on more than three (3) floors shall furnish garage or vehicle parking space only to the extent that such office and/or living space exceeds three (3) floors. 
(c)  BB-1, BB-2, and BB-3 Districts. Such permitted accessory dwelling units shall only be required one (1) space in addition to the primary dwelling unit requirement. 
(d)  PH-1 and PH-2 Districts. 
(i)  All non-residential uses, except religious facilities, colleges/universities, schools, auditoriums and theaters shall be exempt for the first 5,000 (five thousand) square feet measured for the purposes of determining the parking requirement of section 11-2 herein. 
(ii)  Multifamily residential uses shall be exempt from the guest parking requirement of section 11-2 herein. 
(Ord. No. Z15-22 , 10-14-15; Ord. No. Z19-03 , 1-9-2019; Ord. No. Z19-10 , 1-9-2019; Ord. No. Z19-12 , 4-10-2019)  
Chapter 12 - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
Sec. 12-1. - General. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any vested right; except that land, buildings and structures and the uses thereof which do not conform to the zoning prescribed for the district in which they are situated may be continued only so long as: (i) the then existing or a more restrictive use continues; (ii) such use is not discontinued for more than two (2) years; and (iii) the buildings or structures are maintained in their then structural condition. For purposes of calculating the term of discontinuance of a nonconforming use or structure pursuant to this section, two (2) years means twenty-four (24) consecutive months.  
Sec. 12-2. - Alteration, enlargement, erection of structures in conjunction with a nonconforming use. 
Except as set forth in chapter 9, article 1 of the zoning ordinance, it shall be lawful to alter, add to, or erect structures in conjunction with a nonconforming use provided the front, side, and rear yard setbacks are not thereby violated and the other provisions of this ordinance are met and such structure is structurally altered as provided in the Uniform Statewide Building Code.  
Sec. 12-3. - Damage or destruction of nonconforming structures. 
The owner of any residential or commercial building damaged or destroyed by a natural disaster or other act of God may repair, rebuild, or replace such building to eliminate or reduce the nonconforming features to the extent possible, without the need of a variance as provided in chapter 13 of this ordinance, if such building is damaged greater than fifty (50) percent and cannot be repaired, rebuilt or replaced except to restore it to its original nonconforming condition, the owner shall have the right to do so. The owner shall comply with the floor area, lot, yard, setbacks, or height requirements of this ordinance as nearly as possible. The owner shall apply for a building permit and any work done to repair, rebuild or replace such building shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and any work done to repair, rebuild or replace such building shall be in compliance the floodplain regulations adopted in article 4 of chapter 9 of this ordinance as a condition of participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. Unless such building is repaired, rebuilt or replaced within two (2) years of the date of the natural disaster or other act of God, such building shall only be repaired, rebuilt or replaced in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. However, if the nonconforming building is in an area under a federal disaster declaration and the building has been damaged or destroyed as a direct result of conditions that gave rise to the declaration, then the owner shall have an additional two (2) years to repair, rebuild or replace such building. For the purposes of this section, "act of God" shall include any natural disaster or phenomena including a hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave, earthquake or fire caused by lightning or wildfire. For the purposes of this section, owners of property damaged by an accidental fire have the same rights to rebuild such property as if it were damaged by an act of God. Nothing herein shall be construed to enable the property owner to commit an arson under section 18.2-77 or 18.2-80 of the Code of Virginia and obtain vested rights under this chapter.  
Sec. 12-4. - Replacement of on-site sewage systems. 
Notwithstanding any provision of the city zoning ordinance or the city code to the contrary, an owner of real property shall be permitted to replace an existing on-site sewage system for any existing building in the same general location on the property even if a new on-site sewage system would not otherwise be permitted in that location, unless access to a public sanitary sewer is available to the property. If access to a sanitary sewer system is available, then the connection to such system shall be required. Any new on-site system shall be installed in compliance with applicable regulations of the department of health in effect at the time of installation.  
Sec. 12-5. - Nonconforming manufactured home. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the land owner or home owner from removing a valid nonconforming manufactured home from a mobile or manufactured home park and replacing that home with another comparable manufactured home that meets the current HUD manufactured housing code. In such mobile or manufactured home park, a single-section home may replace a single-section home and a multi-section home may replace a multi-section home. The owner of a valid nonconforming mobile or manufactured home not located in a mobile or manufactured home park may replace that home with a newer manufactured home, either single- or multi-section, that meets the current HUD manufactured housing code. Any such replacement home shall retain the valid nonconforming status of the prior home.  
Chapter 13 - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. Z15-12, adopted July 8, 2015 , repealed the former chapter 13, §§ 13-1—13-7, 13-11—13-17, and enacted a new chapter 13 as set out herein. The former chapter 13 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ordinance No. Z15-06, adopted March 25, 2015. 
 
ARTICLE I. - COMPOSITION, POWERS, AND DUTIES 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Creation, appointment, term, etc. 
(1)  The board of zoning appeals ("board") for the City of Hampton is currently existing under authority of prior law and Virginia Code § 15.2-2308 and is hereby continued in existence. 
(2)  Membership. The board shall consist of five (5) residents of the City of Hampton appointed by the circuit court. 
(3)  Alternates. The circuit court shall appoint at least one (1) but not more than three (3) alternates to the board. The qualifications, terms and compensation of alternate members shall be the same as those of regular members. A regular member, when he knows he will be absent from or will have to abstain from any application at a meeting, shall notify the chairman twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting of such fact. The chairman shall select an alternate to serve in the absent or abstaining member's place and the records of the board shall so note. Such alternate member may vote on any application in which a regular member abstains. 
(4)  Qualifications. Members of the board shall hold no other public office in the city except that one (1) may be a member of the planning commission. 
(5)  Terms. The terms of office of board members shall be for five (5) years, except that original appointments shall be made for such terms that the term of one member shall expire each year. 
(6)  Vacancies. The secretary of the board shall notify the circuit court at least thirty (30) days in advance of the expiration of any term of office, and shall also notify the court promptly if any vacancy occurs. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may be reappointed to succeed themselves. A member whose term expires shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed and qualifies. 
(7)  Removal. Any board member or alternate may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, or for other just cause, by the circuit court, after a hearing held after at least fifteen (15) days' notice. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-2. - Officers. 
The board shall elect from its own membership a chairman and vice-chairman who shall serve annual terms as such, and may succeed themselves. The board shall appoint a secretary who shall not be a member of the board or an alternate member. It shall be the secretary's duty to keep the minutes and other records of the actions and deliberations of the board and to perform such other ministerial duties as the board shall direct. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-3. - Quorum and voting. 
For the conduct of any hearing and taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the board. The concurring vote of a least three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the ordinance or to effect any variance from the ordinance. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-4. - Procedures and records. 
The board may make, alter, and rescind rules and forms for its procedures, consistent with ordinances of the city and general laws of the Commonwealth. 
The board shall keep a full public record of its proceedings, including the recorded vote of each member upon each question, and shall submit a report of its activities to the council at least once each year. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-5. - Compensation. 
Members of the board shall receive such compensation as may be established by the city council. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-6. - Meetings. 
(1)  The board by resolution may fix a schedule of regular meetings, and may also fix the day or days to which any meeting shall be continued if the chairman, or vice-chairman if the chairman is unable to act, finds and declares that weather or other conditions are such that it is hazardous for members to attend the meeting pursuant to Virginia Code § 15.2-2309(8). Such finding shall be communicated to the members and the press as promptly as possible. All hearings and other matters previously advertised for such meeting in accordance with § 15.2-2312 shall be conducted at the continued meeting and no further advertisement is required. 
(2)  The chairman with the concurrence of two (2) other members may call for special meetings. The time, date and location of any special meeting shall be communicated to the members and the press as promptly as possible. 
(3)  The chairman, or in his absence the vice-chairman, may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. 
(4)  All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-7. - Ex parte communications, case materials, and proceedings. 
The following applies to all cases brought before the board except for applications for special exceptions: 
(1)  The non-legal staff of the city may have ex parte communications with a member of the board prior to the hearing but may not discuss the facts or law relative to a particular case. 
(2)  The applicant, landowner or his agent or attorney may have ex parte communications with a member of the board prior to the hearing but may not discuss the facts or law relative to a particular case. 
(3)  If any ex parte discussion of facts or law in fact occurs, the party engaging in such communication shall inform the other party as soon as practicable and advise the other party of the substance of such communication. For purposes of this section, regardless of whether all parties participate, ex parte communications shall not include (i) discussions as part of a public meeting or (ii) discussions prior to a public meeting to which staff of the governing body, the applicant, landowner or his agent or attorney are all invited. 
(4)  Any materials relating to a particular case, including a staff recommendation or report furnished to a member of the board, shall be made available without cost to such applicant, appellant or other person aggrieved under § 15.2-2314, as soon as practicable thereafter, but in no event more than three (3) business days of providing such materials to a member of the board. If the applicant, appellant or other person aggrieved under § 15.2-2314 requests additional documents or materials be provided by the locality other than those materials provided to the board, such request shall be made pursuant to § 2.2-3704. Any such materials furnished to a member of the board shall also be made available for public inspection pursuant to subsection F of § 2.2-3707. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the board from having ex parte communications with any attorney or staff of any attorney where such communication is protected by the attorney-client privilege or other similar privilege or protection of confidentiality. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-8. - Powers and duties. 
The board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator or other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of the zoning ordinance as set forth in Article II. 
(2)  To review and decide applications for variances as set forth in Article II. 
(3)  To hear and decide applications for interpretation of the district map where there is any uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary as set forth in Article II. 
(4)  To hear and decide applications for such special exceptions as may be authorized in the ordinance and to revoke special exceptions previously granted by the board as set forth in Article II. 
(5)  No provision of this chapter shall be construed as granting the board the power to rezone property or to base board decisions on the merits of the purpose and intent of local ordinances duly adopted by the city. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Secs. 13-9—13-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VARIANCES, SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS, AND APPEALS OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR AND ORDERS OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 13-11. - Applications for variances. 
(1)  Procedural requirements. 
(a)  Applications for variances may be made by any property owner, tenant, government official, department, board, or bureau. Such application shall be made to the zoning administrator in accordance with rules adopted by the board. The application and accompanying maps, plans, or other information shall be transmitted promptly to the secretary of the board, who shall place the matter on the docket to be acted upon by the board. The zoning administrator shall also transmit a copy of the application to the planning commission which may send a recommendation to the board or appear as a party at the hearing. 
(b)  No variance shall be considered except after notice and a hearing as required by Virginia Code § 15.2-2204. However, when giving any required notice to the owners, their agents or the occupants of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the board may give such notice by first-class mail rather than by registered or certified mail. 
(c)  No variance shall be considered until any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the City of Hampton on the subject property have been paid, with the exception of applications sponsored by the City of Hampton. 
(d)  The board shall offer an equal amount of time in a hearing on the case to the applicant and the staff of the local governing body. 
(2)  Standard of review. 
(a)  The burden of proof shall be on the applicant for a variance to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his application meets the standard for a variance as defined in Virginia Code § 15.2-2201 and the criteria set out in this section. 
(b)  A variance shall be granted if the evidence shows that the strict application of the terms of the ordinance would unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property or that the granting of the variance would alleviate a hardship due to a physical condition relating to the property or improvements thereon at the time of the effective date of the ordinance, and: 
(i)  The property interest for which the variance is being requested was acquired in good faith and any hardship was not created by the applicant for the variance; 
(ii)  The granting of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and nearby properties in the proximity of that geographical area; 
(iii)  The condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the ordinance; 
(iv)  The granting of the variance does not result in a use that is not otherwise permitted on such property or a change in the zoning classification of the property; and 
(v)  The relief or remedy sought by the variance application is not available through a special exception process or the process for modification of a zoning ordinance pursuant to subdivision A4 of § 15.2-2286 at the time of the filing of the variance application. 
(c)  In granting a variance, the board may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed structure or use as it may deem necessary in the public interest and may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, general or special, the property upon which a property owner has been granted a variance shall be treated as conforming for all purposes under state law and local ordinance; however, the structure permitted by the variance may not be expanded unless the expansion is within an area of the site or part of the structure for which no variance is required under the ordinance. Where the expansion is proposed within an area of the site or part of the structure for which a variance is required, the approval of an additional variance shall be required. 
(3)  The board shall not reconsider substantially the same application for a period of one (1) year, except by motion of the board. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-12. - Applications for special exceptions and revocation of special exceptions. 
(1)  Procedural requirements. 
(a)  Applications for special exceptions may be made by any property owner, tenant, government official, department, board, or bureau. Such application shall be made to the zoning administrator in accordance with rules adopted by the board. The application and accompanying maps, plans, or other information shall be transmitted promptly to the secretary of the board, who shall place the matter on the docket to be acted upon by the board. The zoning administrator shall also transmit a copy of the application to the planning commission which may send a recommendation to the board or appear as a party at the hearing. 
(b)  No special exception may be granted except after notice and hearing as provided by § 15.2-2204. However, when giving any required notice to the owners, their agents or the occupants of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the board may give such notice by first-class mail rather than by registered or certified mail. 
(c)  No special exception shall be considered until any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the City of Hampton on the subject property have been paid, with the exception of applications sponsored by the City of Hampton. 
(d)  The board shall offer an equal amount of time in a hearing on the case to the applicant and the staff of the local governing body. 
(2)  Standard of review. 
(a)  In its review of special exception applications, the board shall consider the standards set forth in section 14-6 of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  The board may impose such conditions relating to the use for which a permit is granted as it may deem necessary in the public interest, including limiting the duration of a permit, and may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(3)  The board shall not reconsider substantially the same application for a period of one (1) year, except by motion of the board. 
(4)  The board may revoke a special exception previously granted by the board if the board determines that there has not been compliance with the terms or conditions of the permit. No special exception may be revoked except after notice and hearing as provided by § 15.2-2204. However, when giving any required notice to the owners, their agents or the occupants of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the board may give such notice by first-class mail rather than by registered or certified mail. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-13. - Interpretations of a zoning district map where there is uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary. 
(1)  After notice to the owners of the property affected by the question, and after public hearing with notice as required by § 15.2-2204, the board may interpret the map in such way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the ordinance for the particular section or district in question. However, when giving any required notice to the owners, their agents or the occupants of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the board may give such notice by first-class mail rather than by registered or certified mail. The board shall not have the power to change substantially the locations of district boundaries as established by ordinance. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-14. - Appeals to the board from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer. 
(1)  Procedural requirements. 
(a)  An appeal to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of the zoning ordinance or any modification of zoning requirements pursuant to section 15.2-2286 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  No appeal shall be considered except after notice and hearing as provided by § 15.2-2204. However, when giving any required notice to the owners, their agents or the occupants of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the board may give such notice by first-class mail rather than by registered or certified mail. A party's actual notice of, or active participation in, the public hearing required herein shall waive the right of that party to challenge the validity of the proceeding due to the failure of the party to receive the written notice required herein. 
(c)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application or appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within ninety (90) days. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify an order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from. In any appeal taken pursuant to this section, if the board's attempt to reach a decision results in a tie vote, the matter may be carried over until the next scheduled meeting at the request of the person filing the appeal. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official actions which shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be public records. 
(d)  The board shall offer an equal amount of time in a hearing on the case to the applicant, appellant, or other person aggrieved under Virginia Code § 15.2-2314 and the staff of the local governing body. 
(e)  Any written notice of a zoning violation or written order of the zoning administrator shall include a statement informing the recipient that he may have a right to appeal the notice of a zoning violation or a written order within thirty (30) days in accordance with this section, and that the decision shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within thirty (30) days. The appeal period shall not commence until the statement is given. A written notice of a zoning violation or written order of the zoning administrator that includes such statement sent by registered or certified mail to, or posted at, the last known address of the property owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall be deemed sufficient notice to the property owner and shall satisfy the notice requirements of this section. The appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(f)  A decision by the board on an appeal taken pursuant to this section shall be binding upon the owner of the property which is the subject of such appeal only if the owner of such property has been provided notice of the zoning violation or written order of the zoning administrator in accordance with this section. The owner's actual notice of such notice of zoning violation or written order or active participation in the appeal hearing shall waive the owner's right to challenge the validity of the board's decision due to failure of the owner to receive the notice of zoning violation or written order. 
(g)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the zoning administrator, and for good cause shown. 
(h)  In no event shall a written order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator or other administrative officer be subject to change, modification or reversal by any zoning administrator or other administrative officer after sixty (60) days have elapsed from the date of the written order, requirement, decision or determination where the person aggrieved has materially changed his position in good faith reliance on the action of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer unless it is proven that such written order, requirement, decision or determination was obtained through malfeasance of the zoning administrator or other administrative officer or through fraud. The sixty-day limitation period shall not apply in any case where, with the concurrence of the city attorney, modification is required to correct clerical errors. 
(2)  Standard of review on appeal to the board. 
(a)  The decision on appeal shall be based on the board's judgment of whether the administrative officer was correct. The determination of the administrative officer shall be presumed to be correct. 
(b)  At a hearing on an appeal, the administrative officer shall explain the basis for his determination after which the appellant has the burden of proof to rebut such presumption of correctness by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(c)  The board shall consider the purpose and intent of any applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations in making its decision. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-15. - Proceedings to prevent construction of a building in violation of zoning ordinance. 
Where a building permit has been issued and the construction of the building for which such permit was issued is subsequently sought to be prevented, restrained, corrected, or abated as a violation of the zoning ordinance, by suit filed within fifteen (15) days after the start of construction by a person who had no actual notice of the issuance of the permit, the court may hear and determine the issues raised in the litigation, even though no appeal was taken from the decision of the administrative officer to the board of zoning appeals. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-16. - Relation of zoning ordinance to other laws. 
Whenever the regulations made under the zoning ordinance require a greater width or size of yards, courts, or other open spaces; require a lower height of building or less number of stories; require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied; or impose other higher standards than area required in any other statute or local ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the zoning ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or local ordinance or regulations require a greater width or size of yards, courts or other open spaces; require a lower height of building or less number of stories; require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied; or impose other higher standards than are required by this ordinance, the provisions of such statute or local ordinance or regulation shall govern. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Sec. 13-17. - Fees. 
Every application that comes before the board, whether an appeal of the zoning administrator's decision, a variance or a special exception, shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable fee from the following schedule. The sum shall be payable to the City of Hampton, incidental to reviewing, publishing, and reporting the application: 
(1)  One hundred dollars ($100.00) for any application that is associated with a current or proposed one-family residential use of property; and 
(2)  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for any application that is associated with a current or proposed use of property that is not one-family residential. 
( Ord. No. Z15-12, 7-8-2015 )  
Secs. 13-18—13-20. - Reserved.  
Chapter 14 - REVIEWS BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL  
ARTICLE I. - USE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Purpose and intent. 
As permitted by section 15.2-2286 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the purpose of the use permit process is to develop and enforce regulations for a specific use on a specific parcel of land, such that the use is not detrimental to surrounding properties, even though that use is not permitted by right in the zoning district in which the parcel is located. These uses may be allowed under the suitable regulations, safeguards, controls, and limitations (collectively "conditions") of a use permit. It is the duty of the city council under the provisions of this chapter to evaluate the impact and the compatibility of each such use, and to stipulate such conditions, in addition to those specifically contained in the applicable zoning district, if any, as will assure the use is compatible with the neighborhood in which it is located. Nothing in this ordinance shall guarantee, through implicit or explicit language, the granting of any use permit. Use permits shall be limited to those specified in the individual zoning districts.  
Sec. 14-2. - Pre-application conference. 
Prior to the formal submission of an application, the community development department, if requested, will meet with the applicant and will review the criteria and standards governing the use permit process. In no way shall a pre-application conference be construed to equate to the approval of any subsequent application.  
Sec. 14-3. - Application requirements. 
(1)  Application for a use permit shall be made by the property owner, or by persons other than the property owner with the written consent of the property owner, in writing to the director of the department of community development or his designee. A complete application shall include the following: 
(a)  A fully completed "Use Permit Application," as provided in subsection (3) below; and 
(b)  A non-refundable application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) except that Qualified Arts and Cultural Businesses located in a designated Arts and Cultural District shall be eligible for a 100% reduction in the use permit application fee under the terms and conditions set forth in the Hampton City Code. 
(2)  All application materials shall be submitted in writing and will become part of the record of the hearing on the use permit application. 
(3)  A complete Use Permit Application shall include, unless waived by the director of the department of community development or his designee, the following information: 
(a)  A legal description of the property for which the use permit is requested, including the actual dimensions and shape of the property, as well as the current zoning classification; 
(b)  The names and addresses of the owners of the subject property and their agents, if any, and the written consent of the property owner if the applicant is not the property owner; 
(c)  The most recent surveyed plat of the property involved in the use permit; 
(d)  A site plan of the subject property prepared by a duly licensed professional engineer, land surveyor, architect, or landscape architect authorized to do business in the state of Virginia showing property boundaries, existing and proposed buildings and uses, yards, open spaces, pedestrian walkways, landscaping, screening and buffering, fences, signs, access to the site, and on-site parking and vehicular circulation, easements, water bodies, floodplains, wetlands and other natural features, existing and proposed streets, and utilities and drainage facilities within one-quarter-mile of the subject property The site plan shall also include the name of the property owner, as well as the name of the person who prepared the plan, together with the north point, scale (one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet) and number of sheets of the plan. Required plans shall be submitted in such numbers as determined by written policy of the department of community development; 
(e)  Elevation drawings and general floor plans of all buildings; 
(f)  Information regarding the impact and/or demand the proposed use will place on the city's public services and facilities, including but not limited to traffic, public safety services, water, sewer and utility services, education, and other community facilities and services; 
(g)  Proof that all city and state ad valorem taxes due upon the property have been paid in full; and 
(h)  A statement specifically addressing all of the standards for review set out in the Use Permit Application. 
(Ord. No. Z15-24 , 12-9-2015)  
Sec. 14-4. - Procedure for application review. 
Upon submission and acceptance of a complete application for a use permit, the following review procedures shall apply: 
(1)  Action by the director of the community development department. 
(a)  The director of the community development department or his designee shall transmit the use permit application to appropriate city departments and other agencies affected by the proposal, retrieve comments, and develop any conditions suitable to mitigate the impact of the proposed use, as set forth in section 14-5 of this chapter. 
(b)  The director of the community development department or his designee shall have forty-five (45) days to respond to the applicant by forwarding any department or agency comments and identifying any deficiencies in the application. 
(c)  The director of the department of community development or his designee shall not schedule the application for a public hearing before the planning commission until either he receives information addressing the deficiencies in the application and any required additional information or a written statement by the applicant stating that the stated deficiencies will not be addressed and/or no further information will be submitted. 
(d)  Subject to meeting all advertising and notification deadlines and upon receipt of information addressing deficiencies or a written statement by the applicant stating that the deficiencies will not be addressed and/or no further information will be submitted as described in subsection (c) above, the director or his designee shall forward the application to the planning commission. The forwarded application shall include any comments from city departments or other agencies, the manner in which the proposed use permit application complies or does not comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter, and any recommendations the community development department may have regarding approval, disapproval or conditions to be attached to the proposed use. 
(2)  Action by the planning commission. 
(a)  Upon receiving the use permit application with all related material, the planning commission shall give notice of and hold a public hearing in accordance with section 15.2-2204 of the Virginia Code, as amended. A party's actual notice of or active participation in, the public hearing shall waive the right of that party to challenge the validity of the proceeding due to the failure of the party to receive the written notice required herein. 
(b)  After the public hearing, the planning commission may: 
(i)  Recommend approval of the use permit with the conditions stated in the applicable zoning district, if any, and any additional conditions developed by the community development department; 
(ii)  Recommend disapproval; or 
(iii)  Recommend approval with the conditions stated in the applicable zoning district, if any, and different conditions than those developed by the community development department as deemed appropriate to protect the public interest in accordance with section 14-5 of this chapter and the standards set forth in section 14-6 of this chapter. 
(c)  Unless the use permit application is deferred or withdrawn pursuant to sections 14-7 or 14-8 of this chapter, within forty-five (45) days after the public hearing the planning commission shall forward its recommendation to the city council. 
(3)  Action by the city council. 
(a)  Upon receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the application in accordance with section 15.2-2204 of the Virginia Code, as amended. A party's actual notice of, or active participation in, the public hearing shall waive the right of that party to challenge the validity of the proceeding due to the failure of the party to receive the written notice required herein. 
(b)  After the public hearing, the city council may: 
(i)  Approve the use permit with the conditions recommended by the planning commission; 
(ii)  Disapprove the use permit; 
(iii)  Approve the use permit with conditions stated in the applicable zoning district, if any, and any additional conditions as deemed appropriate to protect the public interest in accordance with section 14-5 of this chapter and the standards set forth in section 14-6 of this chapter; or 
(iv)  Refer the application back to the planning commission for further consideration or advice. 
(c)  Unless the application is sponsored by the City of Hampton, the city council shall not approve a use permit until any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the City of Hampton on the subject property have been paid. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Sec. 14-5. - Conditions. 
(1)  Conditions stipulated by the city council may include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Those conditions specifically contained in the applicable zoning district, if any. 
(b)  Those related to fencing; planting or other landscaping; additional setbacks from property lines; location and arrangement of lighting; setting of reasonable hours of operation upon the use of the property; and the operation, establishment, location, and construction of the use. 
(c)  Other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of the zoning ordinance as may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements in the vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities and services, or are necessary to protect the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in this chapter. 
(2)  The city council may impose a condition for a time limitation when granting a use permit if, in the estimation of the director of the department of community development, the planning commission, or the city council, the proposed use is of such nature that a mandatory review is necessary to affirm that the use permit is in compliance with all conditions imposed and provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 14-6. - Standards for use permit application review. 
Without limiting the discretion of either the planning commission or city council, the planning commission and city council may consider whether the proposed use and operation thereof, together with the conditions attached, meets the following standards: 
(1)  That the proposed use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare, including but not limited to consideration that: 
(a)  Adequate public facilities, improvements and services have been or will be provided; and 
(b)  Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress designed to minimize vehicle traffic congestion on public streets and provide for safe pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  That the proposed use will conform to: 
(a)  The city's comprehensive plan and official policies adopted in relation thereto, including this chapter; 
(b)  The goals and objectives of the Hampton Zoning Ordinance; and 
(c)  The applicable regulations of the zoning district classification in which the use is located. 
(3)  That the proposed use is compatible with and not injurious to the enjoyment, use, and orderly development and improvement of the properties in the immediate vicinity of the subject property. Specific factors to be considered by the planning commission and city council may include the following, in relation to the immediate vicinity of the subject property: 
(a)  Adequate safety, including fire hazards and use of effective measures for fire control, the location and type of any fuel and fuel storage the location and nature of any proposed security features and provisions, and other similar factors; 
(b)  The impact of nuisances, including noise, glare or light odors, fumes, dust, vibrations or other similar factors emanating from the site; 
(c)  The preservation or destruction, loss or damage of any topographic or physical, natural, scenic, archaeological, or historic feature in the immediate vicinity or neighborhood; 
(d)  The location, lighting, and type of signs in relation to the proposed use and the sign requirements of the zoning ordinance; 
(e)  The days and hours of operation associated with the proposed use, including the number of full and part-time employees; 
(f)  The location and use of any anticipated accessory uses and structures and any existing nonconforming uses and structures associated with the proposed use; 
(g)  The location, nature, and extent of existing or proposed landscaping, screening and buffering on the site, including parking and loading spaces and areas; and 
(h)  The location of any parking and loading spaces and areas.  
Sec. 14-7. - Deferral of a use permit application. 
(1)  Deferral of consideration of any use permit application filed pursuant to this chapter may be requested by the applicant in writing at any time, provided that: 
(a)  If the request for deferral is made prior to the publication of the notice of public hearing for either the planning commission or city council, whichever is applicable at the time, such shall be granted administratively, for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(b)  If the request for deferral is made after the publication of the notice of public hearing, such deferral shall only be granted with the consent of either the planning commission or city council, whichever body advertised the hearing. 
(c)  If an application is deferred at the request of the applicant after it has been advertised for public hearing, an additional fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid by the applicant for re-advertising the application. 
(2)  The planning commission or city council may defer consideration of any use permit application filed pursuant to this chapter upon a finding that there is a public benefit to be gained by deferring the application. Applications deferred by the planning commission or the city council will not be subject to the additional re-advertisement fee.  
Sec. 14-8. - Withdrawal of a use permit application. 
A use permit application may be withdrawn from consideration at any time, in writing by the applicant, provided that if the request for the withdrawal is made after publication of the notice of public hearing either before the planning commission or city council, withdrawal shall be granted only with the consent of either the planning commission or city council, whichever body advertised the hearing.  
Sec. 14-9. - Re-filing of a use permit application upon denial. 
No application for a use permit shall be accepted within one (1) year of denial by the city council of a use permit application concerning substantially the same use on substantially the same land.  
Sec. 14-10. - Appeal. 
All persons aggrieved by a decision of the city council granting or failing to grant a use permit must appeal within thirty (30) days of the decision to the Hampton circuit court as set forth in section 15.2-2285 of the Virginia Code, as amended. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to create any new right to contest the action of the city council.  
Sec. 14-11. - Violation and revocation of a use permit. 
The city council may revoke a use permit, after notice and a public hearing as set forth in section 15.2-2204 of the Virginia Code, as amended, for any violation of a term or condition thereof or repeated or continuing violations of the city zoning ordinance or city code, failure to comply with approved plans, and/or when false, fraudulent, or misleading information is supplied by the applicant. The consideration of a possible revocation shall follow the procedure set forth in this chapter for approving the use permit, provided that fifteen (15) days' written notice is given to the owner of the subject property prior to the public hearing.  
Sec. 14-12. - Expiration of a use permit. 
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a use permit shall automatically expire and become null and void under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  If, in the case of new construction, the building has not been erected, with doors, windows, roof covering and exterior finish materials in place within two (2) years of the issuance of the use permit; 
(2)  No building permit to construct the authorized improvements has been issued within twelve (12) months of the date of approval by the city council, or if no building permit is required, if the use is not established within twelve (12) months of the date of approval by the city council; or 
(3)  Once the property may be occupied, if the property is not used for the permitted purpose for a continuous two-year period unless otherwise specified in the zoning ordinance. In making this determination the city may consider such matters as the issuance of a building permit, a business license, utility connections and such related factors.  
Sec. 14-13. - Amendment to an approved use permit. 
Any amendment or change of substance to an approved use permit shall be subject to the same procedures and standards as for a new application. Minor modifications to approved terms and conditions of a use permit may be authorized by the director of the department of community development or his designee when such modifications do not: expand or significantly alter the location or boundaries of the use; conflict with specific requirements of this chapter; decrease the width or depth of any yard, setback or buffer area; significantly alter points of access to the property or the internal arrangement of site plan elements; or have an appreciable effect on surrounding properties.  
Sec. 14-14. - Existing uses. 
Any use legally established prior to October 9, 1996 shall be considered a nonconforming use.  
Sec. 14-15. - Application to the property. 
The use permit and all its conditions shall apply to the property for which it is issued so long as such property is used for the permitted purpose, regardless of changes in the ownership of the property, provided the use permit is not expired or revoked, or the use is terminated through a subsequent rezoning. Approval of a use permit shall not be considered a rezoning of the subject property. Once the use permit is approved by the city council, the conditions attached to the use permit shall constitute additional zoning regulations and requirements for the site, which to the extent of any conflict shall supersede the zoning district regulation. All other regulations of the zoning district in which the use is located shall apply and remain in force.  
Secs. 14-16—14-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REZONING, CONDITIONAL ZONING, AND ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 14-21. - Initiation of amendments. 
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice requires, the city council may, by ordinance, amend, supplement, or change the regulations, district boundaries, or classifications of property. Any such amendment may be initiated by resolution of the city council or motion of the planning commission, or by petition submitted to the planning director by the property owner or the authorized agent therefor of the property which is the subject of the proposed zoning map amendment or rezoning. Applications may be submitted by persons other than the property owner provided that written consent of such action, signed by the property owner(s), is included with the application. The terms "application" and "petition," and "applicant" and "petitioner" are used interchangeably throughout this chapter. The term "planning director" means the director or his designee.  
Sec. 14-22. - Application submission schedule and content. 
(1)  Applications shall include the following materials: 
(a)  A fully completed rezoning application as provided by the planning director; 
(b)  The most recent surveyed plat of the property proposed for rezoning; 
(c)  A non-refundable application fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) per acre or portion thereof, except that Qualified Arts and Cultural Businesses located in a designated Arts and Cultural District shall be eligible for a 100% reduction in the rezoning application fee under the terms and conditions set forth in the Hampton City Code; and 
(d)  A check made payable to the clerk of the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton in an amount required by the clerk to cover recording fees for the proffer, if applicable. 
(2)  Once the application has been submitted, the planning director or his representative shall review the application with the applicant. Subject to the provisions of section 14-24(7) as applicable to conditional zoning applications, if the application is complete, the planning director shall schedule the application for public hearing with the planning commission. If the application is not subject to section 14-24 and the application is not complete, no later than thirty (30) days of receipt of the application not subject to section 14-24, the planning director shall return the application to the applicant with a statement of the reasons for the deficiency. Upon certification by the director that the application is complete and payment of required fees, the application shall be deemed received and shall be transmitted to the planning commission. 
(3)  In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, if the application is for a conditional zoning and conditions are to be proffered, the applicant is responsible for supplying a voluntary proffer in accordance with the provisions outlined in section 14-24 herein. If no conditions are to be proffered, a written statement to that effect must be submitted and the application will be considered as a change of zoning classification. Submission of either the proffer or statement is required for the application to be advertised for public hearing. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 ; Ord. No. Z15-24 , 12-9-2015)  
Sec. 14-23. - Matters to be considered in evaluating applications. 
Consideration of proposed amendments to zoning district boundaries, to classifications of property or conditional zonings may include, but need not be limited to, the adopted comprehensive plan and capital improvements plan, the timing of the proposed development, the relation of the proposed and existing development of utilities and public facilities; and the net public costs of the development. Unless the application is sponsored by the City of Hampton, the city council shall not approve an amendment to zoning district boundaries or classifications of property until any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the City of Hampton on the subject property have been paid.  
Sec. 14-24. - Conditional zoning. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide a procedure by which conditional zoning may be used in accordance with the enabling legislation provided in the Code of Virginia. It is the policy of the City of Hampton to encourage voluntary proffering of conditions by the applicant in cases where the use of traditional zoning methods is inadequate to achieve certain desired goals and where the proffered conditions will offset identified problems to the extent that the proposed rezoning is thus acceptable; but to discourage its use where the proffered conditions do not sufficiently offset or are unrelated to identified problems or where traditional zoning methods are adequate to achieve certain desired goals. It is further the purpose of this section to allow for complete and timely review and evaluation of the proffered conditions by city staff, the public, the planning commission and the city council. 
(2)  Criteria for proffers. Proffers shall only be accepted as conditions attached to the conditional rezoning if they meet the following criteria: 
(a)  the rezoning itself must give rise for the need for the condition; 
(b)  such conditions shall have a reasonable relation to the rezoning; 
(c)  all such conditions shall be in conformity with the comprehensive plan; 
(d)  such conditions shall be capable of being readily and effectively enforced by the City of Hampton at the time of development of the property; and 
(e)  such conditions shall be deemed necessary and sufficient to offset identified problems caused by the rezoning in a manner not readily available by traditional zoning methods. 
(3)  Proffers including dedication of real property or cash proffers. In the event proffered conditions include the dedication of real property of substantial value or the payment of cash such dedication and the collection of payment thereof shall by in accordance with the provisions of section 15.2-2298 of the Code of Virginia. 
(4)  Legal form of proffer. All proffers shall be in writing, prepared by the owner of the property or an attorney licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth of Virginia, and shall be in a form suitable for recordation in the deed books maintained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton. The proffer shall be accompanied by a check made payable to the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the City of Hampton in an amount required by the clerk to cover recording fees. No proffer shall be accepted by the city council which has not received the approval of the city attorney as to legal form and sufficiency. 
(5)  Title certificate. Each conditional zoning petition shall be accompanied by a certificate of title, prepared and signed by an attorney licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The certificate of title shall describe the property that is the subject of the petition and shall identify all parties having a recorded interest in the property, including legal and equitable owners, and shall state the source of title or interest for each party. The certificate of title shall state the date through which the attorney examined the title to the property, which date shall not be more than six (6) months prior to the date of filing the petition. The city attorney shall reject any certificate of title which, in his opinion, is incomplete or is otherwise insufficient. 
(6)  Parties to sign the proffer. The written proffer shall name as grantors all owners of the property and shall be signed by all such parties. In the event the applicant for the conditional zoning is a contract purchaser, such purchaser shall also be made a party to the proffer and shall sign same. The foregoing provisions shall not be construed as limiting the authority of the city attorney to require any additional person, firm, association or corporation be made a party and sign the proffer, when in his opinion, the inclusion of such person, firm, association or corporation is necessary to protect the city's interest. Nor shall the foregoing be construed as limiting the authority of the city attorney to require that the proffer be approved by a court of competent jurisdiction in the case of church property. 
(7)  Procedure for proffering. 
(a)  The written proffers, together with the certificate of title described in subsection (5), and a check made payable to the clerk of the circuit court of the City of Hampton in an amount required by the clerk to cover recording fees shall be submitted to the planning director as part of the application for conditional zoning. In complying with the notice requirements of section 14-25 and 14-27 of this ordinance, the planning commission and the city council shall state whether conditions have been proffered, and such proffers shall be made available for public review by the planning director as part of the public documents in the case. 
(b)  No later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the proffers, the planning director shall submit to the applicant a written statement identifying deficiencies in the proffered conditions, if any, or identifying any additional information needed. Upon receipt of the planning director's statement, the applicant may make any changes he deems appropriate to the written proffer, provided that they are submitted in writing and shall provide any additional information required by the planning director. 
(c)  Subject to meeting all advertising and notification deadlines, the planning director shall not schedule the application for conditional zoning for a public hearing before the planning commission until the planning director receives information addressing the deficiencies in the proffers and such required additional information or a written statement by the applicant stating that the stated deficiencies will not be addressed and/or no further information will be submitted. 
(d)  The applicant may make additional changes to the written proffer after the planning director schedules the complete application for a public hearing before the planning commission, provided that such changes are in writing and are submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the planning commission public hearing. Provided, however, that where the written proffer provides for cash contribution, dedication of real property or payment for or construction of substantial public improvements, the planning director may require that the amended proffer be submitted at least forty-five (45) days prior to the public hearing when, in his opinion, such additional time will be necessary to allow adequate staff review of the sufficiency of such amended proffers. Upon receipt of the amended proffers, the planning director shall make them part of the public record. The planning commission shall not consider any proffer not made available for public review for at least thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled public hearing. 
(e)  After holding a public hearing on the proposed conditional zoning, the planning commission, in its action on the proposal, may recommend acceptance of all, acceptance of some and rejection of some, or rejection of all of the proffers. The planning commission may also, with the concurrence of the applicant, defer action to a later meeting for the purpose of considering revised proffers, but only so that such revisions are submitted and reviewed on the same time schedule as for the original proffers established in this section. 
(f)  Upon completion of planning commission action, the matter shall be forwarded to the city council in the manner of all rezonings. The city council, in acting on the proposal may accept all, accept some and reject some, or reject all of the proffers. The city council may also accept any modified proffered condition once the public hearing has begun if the amended proffer does not materially affect the overall proposal. Otherwise a modified proffer may be accepted only with the concurrence of all parties to the proffer, and only after a new public hearing is held before city council to consider the modified proffer with the modified proffer being submitted in writing to the planning director at least ten (10) days prior to said public hearing. 
(g)  The planning commission and the city council may reject any proffer for failure to submit it in a form acceptable to the city attorney. No proffer may be modified or added except in accordance with these provisions. After the effective date of this subsection, the city council shall attach no condition to or accept any proffer with a conditional rezoning except in accordance with this section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to supersede any provisions of sections 14-25 through 14-29 of this ordinance. 
(8)  Recordation of proffer and amendment of zoning map. If the city council approves the conditional zoning petition and accepts the written proffer, the city attorney shall, within ten (10) days of the city council's action, examine the appropriate records so as to determine whether any change in the interest of the property has occurred since the date of the certificate of title described in subsection (5). In the event that the city attorney determines that no such change in interest has occurred, he shall within said ten-day period, present the proffer to the clerk of the circuit court for recordation. If the city attorney determines that a change in interest has occurred, he shall notify the petitioner in writing that the proffer will not be recorded and that city council's action in approving the conditional zoning will be rescinded and void unless an appeal is filed for a hearing before the city council within sixty (60) days of the date of the city attorney's letter. The city attorney shall mail the notice described herein to the petitioner at the address given by the petitioner on the conditional rezoning petition. In the event that the petitioner files an appeal within the sixty (60) days of the date of the city attorney's letter, he shall be given an opportunity for a hearing before the city council. At the conclusion of such hearing, the city council may in its legislative discretion, permit the petitioner a certain amount of time in which to correct the objection raised by the city attorney or may rescind its earlier action in approving the rezoning. If either the petitioner fails to file his appeal within the said sixty-day period or upon hearing the appeal the city council acts to rescind its earlier action, the approval of the rezoning petition shall be void. In no event shall the zoning map be changed to reflect city council's approval of the rezoning petition until the planning director receives written notice from the city attorney that the proffer has been properly recorded. 
(9)  Effect of recorded proffers. 
(a)  Once proffered and accepted as part of an amendment to the zoning ordinance, such conditions shall continue in full force and effect until a subsequent amendment changes the zoning on the property covered by such conditions; provided, however, that such conditions shall continue if the subsequent amendment is part of the comprehensive implementation of a new or substantially revised zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Once proffered and accepted as part of an amendment to the zoning ordinance including either the dedication of real property of substantial value, construction of substantial public improvements or substantial cash payment toward the construction, and the need for such dedication, construction or payment is not solely generated by the rezoning itself, no amendment to the zoning map for the property subject to such conditions, nor the conditions themselves, nor any amendments to the text of the zoning ordinance with respect to the zoning district applicable thereto may be initiated by the city which eliminate, or materially restrict, reduce, or modify uses, lot coverage, or the density of use permitted in the zoning district applicable to such property unless there has been mistake, fraud, or a change in the circumstances substantially affecting the public health, safety or welfare. This requires the property owner to pursue, in good faith, the completion of the development of the property. 
(c)  Once proffered and accepted as part of an amendment to the zoning ordinance, the subject property shall be appropriately annotated on the zoning map referencing the conditions as adopted. A conditional zoning index, which shall contain a record of conditions attached to each such special annotation on the zoning map, shall be maintained by the zoning administrator and updated annually as required by state law. Such conditions shall be in addition to the specific regulations set forth in this zoning ordinance for the zoning district in question. Further, the zoning administrator is hereby vested with all authority necessary to enforce such conditions in the same manner as all other zoning regulations, as set forth in section 1-6 of this ordinance. 
(d)  Upon approval, any site plan, subdivision plat, or development plan thereafter submitted for the development of the subject property shall be in substantial conformity with all proffers, plans, profiles, elevations, or other submissions, and no development shall be approved by any city official in the absence of such substantial conformity. For the purpose of this section, "substantial conformity" shall mean that degree of conformity which leaves a reasonable margin for adjustment due to final engineering data, but conforms with the general nature of the development, the specific uses, and the general layout depicted by the proffered submissions of the petitioner. 
(10)  Amendment to accepted proffers. 
(a)  Any landowner subject to conditions proffered pursuant to a conditional zoning under this chapter may apply for amendments or variations of such proffered conditions. Application for any such amendment or variation shall be subject to the same procedure as set forth in section 14-24, including payment of fees and recording costs. However, written notice of such application shall be provided in the manner prescribed by subsection H of section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia to any landowner subject to such existing proffered conditions. The department of community development planning division staff shall prepare a staff report with recommendations on the proposed amendment or variation. 
(b)  There shall be no such amendment or variation of any accepted proffered condition until after a public hearing is advertised pursuant to the provisions of section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  Once approved by city council pursuant to this section, the amended or varied proffered conditions shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court for the City of Hampton at the landowner's cost and shall continue to be an amendment to the zoning ordinance and may be enforced by the zoning administrator pursuant to the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  The approval of such an amendment or variation by city council shall not itself cause the use of any other property subject to the original proffer agreement to be determined a nonconforming use. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no claim of any right derived from any condition proffered pursuant to a conditional zoning under this chapter shall impair the right of any landowner subject to such a proffered condition to secure amendments to or variations of such proffered conditions. 
(11)  Petitions not meeting minimum requirements. Any petition for which the parcel involved or structure on the parcel does not meet minimum area or dimensional restrictions shall be processed nevertheless, but shall not be approved by city council unless it finds that either special circumstances pertinent to the site or special conditions attached to the petition pursuant to this section satisfactorily offset the negative effects inherent in the area or dimensional deficiency. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Sec. 14-25. - Planning commission action; notice of hearing. 
Before making any recommendation on a proposed amendment or conditional zoning petition, the planning commission shall give notice of a public hearing thereon, as set forth in section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, as amended; provided, however, that written notice as prescribed therein shall be given at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. A party's actual notice of, or active participation in the public hearing required herein shall waive the right of that party to challenge the validity of the proceeding due to the failure of the party to receive written notice required herein.  
Sec. 14-26. - Planning commission hearing; action following hearing. 
(1)  Withdrawal or deferral of consideration of any petition filed pursuant to this chapter may be requested by the applicant in writing at any time subject to the following: 
(a)  Unless a petition is withdrawn or deferred by the applicant/petitioner by letter or other formal notice prior to the publication of the notice of public hearing, the hearing shall be held at the time and placed announced; provided that if the hearing is postponed, new public notice shall be issued. 
(b)  If the request for deferral or withdrawal is made after publication of the notice of public hearing, such shall be granted with the consent of the planning commission; provided, however if the deferral is at the request of the applicant or due to the applicant's failure to properly follow applicable procedures, then the re-advertisement shall be at the applicant's expense as set forth in section 14-30. With the exception of conditional zoning petitions, a deferral under this subsection shall be granted for a period not to exceed the second regularly scheduled planning commission meeting after the date of the deferral. 
(2)  Following each hearing, the planning commission shall by motion adopt its recommendation, which may include any changes to the original proposal, and shall transmit such recommendation to city council. The planning commission shall make its report and recommendation to the city council in the form of resolutions duly authenticated. Such resolutions shall be forwarded to the clerk of council not later than forty-five (45) days following adoption by the planning commission. 
(3)  Failure of the planning commission to report to the city council within one hundred (100) days after the first meeting of the planning commission on a proposed amendment or reenactment of the zoning ordinance shall be deemed a recommendation of approval unless the amendment or reenactment has been withdrawn by the applicant prior to the expiration of the time period. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Sec. 14-27. - Action by city council; notice of hearing. 
Before approving or adopting any amendment or conditional zoning petition, city council shall give notice of a public hearing thereon, as required by law. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit concurrent advertising of notice of public hearing as set for in section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, as amended; provided, however, that such concurrent advertising shall only be employed in the case of a city sponsored conditional zoning application, emergency legislation or compliance with amendments enacted by the general assembly of the Commonwealth of Virginia, or upon request of the applicant and upon the showing of good and sufficient cause, the planning director makes a determination that failure to grant the request would result in hardship to the applicant which hardship is not self-inflicted.  
Sec. 14-28. - Withdrawal of petition before city council. 
Where city council finds that there is public benefit to be gained by modifying a petition for amendment or conditional zoning under consideration, and that significant public inconvenience would not result from consideration within one (1) year of the modified petition, it may allow withdrawal of a petition for amendment or conditional rezoning during public hearing. However, if the petition is denied by city council, substantially the same petition shall not be filed within one (1) year of denial. For purposes of this section, a petition for a zoning amendment or conditional zoning shall be considered to be substantially the same petition when the request is for a district classification that is within the same chapter as the classification that was previously denied. These provisions shall not be held to impair the right of the planning commission or city council to propose an amendment to the zoning ordinance at any time.  
Sec. 14-29. - City council hearing; action following hearing. 
(1)  The public hearing shall be held at the time and placed advertised. Following the hearing, city council may make appropriate changes or corrections in the proposed amendments; provided that no additional land may be zoned to a different classification than was contained in the public notice and no land may be rezoned to a less restrictive district classification without new notice and public hearing. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the city council from referring any petition back to the planning commission for further study and recommendation whenever it deems any change made in the petition to be substantial. In connection with such actions, the planning commission shall hold public hearings with notice suiting the circumstances of the case. 
(2)  An affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the city council shall be required to amend the ordinance. A reconsideration of a vote resulting in approval or denial may be initiated pursuant to section 2-48 of the city code. 
(3)  A reconsideration of conditions attached to approval of any amendment may be initiated by the filing of an application with the planning director in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 14-21. Upon receipt of such application, the planning director, depending on the magnitude of the proposed reconsideration, may send the application to the planning commission in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter or directly to the city council. Upon receipt of such application by the city council, it may refer the matter to the planning commission or may act upon it. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to supersede the provisions of subsection 14-24(9) with regard to conditional zoning. 
( Ord. No. Z15-15, 8-12-2015 )  
Sec. 14-30. - Fees. 
(1)  The sum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) per acre or portion thereof payable to the City of Hampton shall accompany every application for change of zoning district boundaries filed with the planning director. Such fee shall be applied to the cost of collecting, reviewing, and reporting the facts and expenses related to the advertising and notification procedures required by law; such fee is non-refundable. 
(2)  If an application is deferred by the applicant or due to applicant's failure to properly follow applicable procedures after it has been advertised for public hearing, an additional fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid by the applicant for re-advertising the application. 
(3)  If an application involves a conditional rezoning, a check made payable to the clerk of the circuit court in the amount required by the clerk shall be submitted by the applicant with his application to cover the costs of recording the approved proffer agreement. 


