CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF LYNCHBURG, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
THE CHARTER 
AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
Published in 1981 by Order of the City Council 
Republished in 2014 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS OF THE 
CITY OF LYNCHBURG, VIRGINIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
Michael A. Gillette 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ceasor T. Johnson 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Joan F. Foster 
Jeff S. Helgeson 
J. Randolph Nelson 
Edgar J.T. Perrow, Jr. 
Treney L. Tweedy 
Council Members 
____________ 
L. Kimball Payne, III 
City Manager 
____________ 
Walter C. Erwin, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Valeria P. Chambers 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1981 Code, as supplemented through June 27, 2014, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The republication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sennitt, Vice President, and Kelly B. Cribbs, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Valeria Chambers for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lynchburg, Virginia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lynchburg, Virginia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lynchburg, Virginia. 2014. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. O-14-083  7- 8-14 Include 1 O-14-092  8-12-14 Include 1 O-14-097  8-12-14 Include 1 O-14-127 11-11-14 Include 1 O-15-017  3-10-15 Include 1 O-15-024  4-14-15 Include 1 O-13-034  3-12-13 Include 2 O-15-064  7-14-15 Include 2 O-14-069  6-10-14 Include 2 O-14-070  6-10-14 Include 2 O-15-072  9- 8-15 Include 2 O-15-078  9-22-15 Include 2 O-16-018  2-23-16 Include 2 O-16-031  4-12-16 Include 2 O-16-035  4-12-16 Include 2 O-16-049  5-10-16 Include 2 O-16-067  5-10-16 Include 2 O-16-084  6-28-16 Include 3 O-16-085  6-28-16 Include 3 O-16-106  9-13-16 Include 3 O-16-134 12-13-16 Include 3 O-17-013  2-14-17 Include 3 O-17-021  3-14-17 Include 3 O-17-028  4-11-17 Include 3 O-17-038  5- 9-17 Include 3 O-17-052  5- 9-17 Include 3 O-17-060  7-27-17 Include 3 O-17-070  8- 8-17 Include 4 O-17-091 10-10-17 Include 4 O-17-095 10-10-17 Include 4 O-17-098 11-14-17 Include 4 O-17-103 11-28-17 Include 4 O-18-004  1- 9-18 Include 4 O-18-005  1- 9-18 Include 4 O-18-013  2-27-18 Include 4 O-18-017  3-27-18 Include 4 O-18-023  4-10-18 Include 4 O-18-048  6-12-18 Include 4 O-18-049  6-12-18 Include 4 O-18-072  9-11-18 Include 5 O-18-093 10-23-18 Include 5 O-18-095 11-13-18 Include 5 O-19-018  3-12-19 Include 5 O-19-019  3-12-19 Include 5 O-19-020  3-26-19 Include 5 O-19-029  5-14-19 Include 5 O-19-033  6-11-19 Include 5  
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Charter of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, is derived from Chapter 343 of the Acts of Assembly of 1928, approved March 21, 1928, and is printed herein for the convenience of the user of this Code. The Charter is set out herein as originally enacted and amended, but catchlines for the various sections have been added by the editor for ease of use. All amendments to the Charter have been included in their proper places and are indicated by history notes following the amended sections. 

CHAPTER 1. - CORPORATE LIMITS AND CORPORATE STATUS 

Sec. 1. - Boundaries; corporate status.[2] 
    The territory contained within the following limits shall be deemed and taken as the City of Lynchburg: The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the present limits of the City of Lynchburg as hereinbefore described or as the same may be hereafter altered and established by law, shall continue to be one body politic in fact and in name under the style and denomination of the City of Lynchburg, and as such shall have and may exercise all (the) powers which are now or hereafter may be conferred upon or delegated to cities under the Constitution and the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, as fully and completely as though said powers were specifically enumerated herein, and no enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall be held to be exclusive, and shall have, exercise and enjoy all the rights, immunities, powers and privileges and be subject to all the duties and obligations now appertaining to and incumbent on said city as a municipal corporation, and the said City of Lynchburg, as such, shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with and may have a corporate seal which it may alter, renew or amend at its pleasure. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The metes and bounds description as originally set forth in this section was omitted because the boundaries there described were changed and enlarged by the decree of the circuit court of Campbell County, Virginia, dated March 20, 1940, and recorded in the Lynchburg clerk's office in Deed Book 271, at page 473 et seq.; again by a decree of the circuit court of Campbell County, Virginia, dated October 11, 1957, and recorded in the Lynchburg clerk's office in Deed Book 317, at page 151 et seq.; and again by a decree entered in the circuit court of Campbell County, Virginia, dated May 21, 1974, and recorded in the clerk's office in Deed Book 507, page 327 et seq. 

CHAPTER 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2. - Exemption from county taxes and county jury service. 
    The City of Lynchburg and its inhabitants shall be exempt from all assessments for levies in the way of taxes imposed by the authorities of Bedford, Campbell or Amherst Counties for any purpose whatever, except upon property in the said counties owned by the inhabitants of said city, nor shall said inhabitants be liable to serve upon juries in said counties. 
Sec. 3. - Persons holding under previous Charter offices provided for in this Charter. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, the persons holding any of the offices provided for in this Charter, which offices have existed under the Charter heretofore in force, shall continue to hold the same under their previous election or appointment until the term of such office as herein provided shall expire, dating the commencement of such term from the time fixed in said former Charter. 
CHAPTER 3. - GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration generally, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 4. - Vested in council, city manager and other departments, boards and officers. 
    The government and administration of the city shall be vested in one body, to be called the council of the City of Lynchburg, and in one administrative officer, to be styled city manager, and in such other departments, boards and other officers as are hereinafter provided for, or as are permitted or required by law appointed by the council. 
Sec. 5. - Council-Composition; election of members; terms and vacancies. 
(a)  Subject to paragraphs (b) through (f) of this section, on and after September first, nineteen hundred and twenty-eight, the council shall consist of seven members, who shall be elected at large from qualified voters of the city and they shall serve for a term of four years from the first day of September next following the date of their election and until their successors shall have been elected and qualify; provided, however, that at the first election held hereunder in nineteen hundred and twenty-eight, five councilmen shall be elected, three of the councilmen elected at said first election hereunder, shall succeed the three present councilmen, whose terms expire on August thirty-first, nineteen hundred and twenty-eight, and shall serve for a period of four years, and two of the councilmen elected at the first election hereunder shall serve for a period of two years; the councilmen to serve for the two-year period shall be determined by lot between the five councilmen elected at the first election hereunder at the first meeting of the council held in September, nineteen hundred and twenty-eight; and at the next election, four councilmen shall be elected to succeed the two present councilmen, whose terms expire on the thirty-first day of August, nineteen hundred and thirty, and the two councilmen elected at the first election hereunder to serve for two years, and at said election and each election thereafter, the councilmen elected to succeed those whose terms expire shall be elected for a period of four years. 
(b)  On and after July one, nineteen hundred seventy-six, the council shall consist of seven members of whom four shall be elected from wards and three of whom shall be elected at large as hereinafter provided. The terms of councilmen elected in nineteen hundred seventy-six and thereafter shall begin July one, succeeding their election. 
(c)  On March one, nineteen hundred seventy-six, the council in office shall divide the city into four wards with reasonably equal populations. Upon the completion thereof, notice shall be given by publication once a week for four successive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. 
(d)  At the election to be held in May, nineteen hundred seventy-six, successors to four councilmen whose terms expire June thirty next shall be elected for a term of four years. The four councilmen shall be elected from and be registered voters in the wards established under paragraph (c) above with one councilman to be elected from each ward. At the same election to be held in May, nineteen hundred seventy-six, three successors to the councilmen whose terms expire in such year shall be chosen by election at large in the city to serve for terms of two years. 
(e)  After May, nineteen hundred seventy-six, successors to the councilmen elected under paragraph (d) hereof shall be elected for terms of four years by ward or at large, as the case may be, depending upon whether the perspective office was filled by election at large or by ward. 
(f)  The council shall be a continuing body and no measure pending before such body shall abate or be discontinued by reason of the expiration of the term of office or removal of the members of said body or any of them. Vacancies occurring in the membership of the council shall be filled by the council within thirty days for a term to expire when the qualified voters of the city at large or the ward in which the vacancy occurred, as the case may be, have elected a successor at the next ensuing general election for councilmen and the person so chosen has duly qualified. If the vacancy occurs in a ward, the successor so chosen shall be a registered voter of that ward. All vacancies filled by the council shall be by majority vote of the remaining members. 
(Acts 1976, ch. 3, p. 4) 
Cross reference- Council, § 2-16 et seq. 
Sec. 6. - Same-Election and terms of officers; president of council ex officio mayor; powers of mayor. 
    The council shall elect one of its members to preside over its meetings, who shall be entitled president, and who shall be ex officio mayor of the city, and shall also elect another member to be vice-president of the council to act in the place of the president in his absence or incapacity. The president and vice-president shall be elected for a term of two years, and any vacancy in the offices shall be filled by the election by the council for the unexpired term. The mayor shall have the same powers and duties as other members of the council with a vote, but no veto, and shall be the official head of the city. With the exception of those officers required by the Constitution of the state to be elected by popular vote, the members of the council shall be the only elective city officials. 
Sec. 7. - Same-Salaries. 
    Present members of council shall be paid their current salary until the first of July, nineteen hundred seventy-six, thereafter the salary of each member of council shall be twenty-four hundred dollars per annum, except that member, who shall be elected mayor, whose salary shall be thirty-six hundred dollars per annum, and except that member who shall be elected vice-mayor, whose salary shall be three thousand dollars per annum, payable out of the treasury of the city of Lynchburg in monthly installments; provided, however, that the council may, from time to time, by five-sevenths vote of all members elected to council, change the salaries of each member of the council, and the members who shall be elected mayor and vice-mayor respectively, to such sums per annum as it may see fit, but not to exceed the sum of twenty-four hundred dollars per annum each member of the council and thirty-six hundred dollars per annum for the mayor and three thousand dollars per annum for the vice-mayor. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209; Acts 1968, ch. 22, p. 49; Acts 1976, ch. 298, p. 331) 
Sec. 8. - Same-Time of meetings; business to be transacted at special meetings; postponement for lack of quorum at regular meetings. 
    The council shall meet at such times as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution; provided, however, that it shall hold at least two regular meetings each month. No business shall be transacted at a special meeting except that for which it shall have been called, unless all members of the council attend such special meeting or give their written consent thereto. For lack of quorum, any regular meeting may be postponed to such time as the council may determine. 
Sec. 9. - Same-Calling special meetings; special meetings without notice. 
    The president or any other two members of the council or the city manager may call special meetings of the council at any time upon at least twelve hours' written notice to each member served personally or left at his usual place of business or residence, but special meetings may be held at any time without notice, provided all members of the council attend said meeting or waive notice thereof. 
Sec. 10. - Same-Quorum; consideration or rescission of vote at special meeting; passage of ordinances or resolutions appropriating or borrowing money or imposing taxes. 
    A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No vote shall be considered or rescinded at any special meeting unless at such special meeting there be present as large a number of members as were present when such vote was taken. No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding the sum of one thousand dollars, imposing taxes or authorizing the borrowing of money, shall be passed by the council on the same day on which it is introduced, nor shall any such ordinance or resolution be valid unless at least three days intervene between its introduction and date of passage. No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding the sum of one hundred dollars, imposing taxes or authorizing the borrowing of money shall be passed except by recorded affirmative vote of a majority of all members elected to the council. 
Sec. 11. - Same-Election and appointment of officers by council except where otherwise provided. 
    The officers of the city whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for herein or under the general statutes of the state, shall be elected or appointed by the council except such administrative officers and employees as are appointed by the city manager under the powers granted him by this Act. 
Sec. 12. - Same-Resolutions or ordinances increasing indebtedness of city or appropriating money; effect of motion to reconsider. 
    Upon the announcement by the president of the adoption of resolutions or ordinances having for their object the increase of the indebtedness of the city, or the expenditure of its revenues, except for the payment of its salaried officers and employees, any two councilmen may give notice of a motion to reconsider, which motion shall delay the question until said reconsideration can be acted on at the (next) regular meeting of the council. 
Sec. 13. - City manager-Administrative head of city; manner of and qualifications for selection; compensation; term; absence or disability. 
    The city manager shall be the administrative head of the municipal government. He shall be chosen by the council without regard to his political belief and solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. The choice shall not be limited to the inhabitants of the city or state unless otherwise required by the Constitution of the state. The city manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the council by ordinance or resolution. He shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall serve at the will of the council. During the absence or disability of the city manager, the council shall designate some properly qualified person to perform his duties. 
Cross reference- City manager, § 2-96 et seq. 
Sec. 14. - Same-Powers and duties generally. 
    The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the efficient administration of all affairs of the city. He shall have power, and it shall be his duty: 
    First. To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. 
    Second. Except as otherwise provided in this Act, to appoint all heads or directors of departments, and all subordinate officers and employees of the city, with power to discipline and remove any officer or employee so appointed. Such appointments and removals shall be reported to the council at its next regular meeting. 
    Third. To exercise supervision and control over all departments and divisions created herein or that may be hereafter created by the council. 
    Fourth. To attend all regular meetings of the council with the right to take part in the discussion but having no vote. He shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings. 
    Fifth. To recommend to the council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
    Sixth. To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed; upon knowledge of any violation thereof, to call the same to the attention of the council and of the city attorney. 
    Seventh. To make and execute all contracts on behalf of the city except as may be otherwise provided by this Act or by ordinance passed in pursuance thereof. 
    Eighth. To act as budget commissioner and as such to prepare and submit to the council the annual budget, after receiving estimates made by the heads or directors of the departments or of any boards or commissions not within the departments. 
    Ninth. To keep the council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city. Tenth. To perform all such other duties as may be prescribed by law or be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the council. 
Sec. 14-a. - Same-Preparation and submission to council of annual budget. 
    At such time as council may direct, but not later than forty-five days before the end of each fiscal year, the city manager shall prepare and submit to the council for informative and fiscal planning purposes only, an annual budget for the ensuing year, based upon detailed estimates furnished by the several departments and other divisions of the city government according to a classification as nearly uniform as possible. The budget shall contain such other information as may be prescribed by council. 
(Act 1960, ch. 479, § 1, p. 740) 
Sec. 15. - Councilmen not to hold other city office during term or twelve months thereafter. 
    No person elected to the council, whether be qualify or not, shall during the term for which he was elected or twelve months after the expiration of that time be elected by the council or appointed by the city manager to any position of trust or office of trust or profit of the city. 
Sec. 16. - Election and terms of office of city clerk, auditor, attorney and collector. 
    The council shall elect a city clerk, a city auditor (the duties of both officers, city clerk and city auditor, may be imposed upon one individual), a city attorney and a city collector, each of whom shall serve for such term as may be provided by the council, and until his successor has been elected and qualified. 
CHAPTER 4. - ELECTIONS, OATHS OF OFFICE AND BONDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, generally, § 2-79; elections, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Elections, Code of Virginia, Tit. 24.1. 

Sec. 17. - Time of holding popular elections. 
    The election of all the municipal officers who are chosen by the vote of the people shall be held at the intervals and on the days prescribed for such elections by the laws of the state. 
State Law reference- See Code of Virginia, § 24.1 et seq. 
Sec. 18. - Manner of filling vacancies in elective offices. 
    In case of a vacancy arising in any elective municipal office hereinafter mentioned, except as otherwise provided, it shall be the duty of the council to certify the same to the judge of the corporation court, who shall issue his writ for an election to fill such vacancy in the manner prescribed by the general election laws of the state. 
State Law reference- See Code of Virginia, § 24.1 et seq. 
Sec. 19. - Special elections for objects not provided for by general election laws. 
    Whenever any special election shall be ordered by the city council for any object not provided for in the general election laws of the state, they shall communicate their order for the same to the judge of the corporation court, and the same proceedings shall be had by it as are provided by law for special elections to fill vacancies in any elective municipal office. 
INITIATIVE 
Sec. 19.1. - Procedure. 
    Subject to the exceptions set out hereinafter in Section 19.8, any proposed ordinance or ordinances, including ordinances for the repeal or amendment of an existing ordinance, may be submitted to the council by petition signed by voters equal in number to ten percent of the number of voters duly registered on January 1 of the year of the petition. 
    The execution of the petition by a registered voter shall be acknowledged by him, or it may be proved by the oath of a witness who shall swear on information and belief that he knows the registered voter and that the petition was signed by the registered voter in the presence of the witness. The petition may be in the form of separate sheets, each sheet containing at the top thereof the petition as set forth above, and when bound together and offered for filing, shall be deemed to constitute one petition. Such petition shall contain the proposed ordinance in full, and shall have appended thereto or written thereon the names and addresses of at least five voters who shall be officially regarded as filing the petition, and who shall constitute a committee of petitioners for the purposes hereinafter stated. An affidavit signed by the committee of petitioners shall be attached to the petition stating the date the petition was first circulated. 
    All papers comprising the petition shall be assembled and filed with the clerk of the council, as one instrument, within 120 days from the date stated in the affidavit that the petition was first circulated. Within fifteen days of the date the petition is filed, the clerk shall have the general registrar of the city certify that the petition has the number of signatures of registered voters required to meet the above mentioned percentage. After the general registrar has certified that the number of signatures of registered voters meets the required percentage, the clerk shall submit the petition to the council at its next regular meeting, and provisions shall be made for public hearing upon the proposed ordinance. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.2. - Petition for election. 
    The council shall at once proceed to consider such petition and shall take final action thereon within sixty days from the date of the submission thereof. If the council rejects the proposed ordinance, or passes it in a form different from that set forth in the petition, or fails to act finally upon it within the time stated, the committee of petitioners may require that it be submitted in its original form, or that it be submitted with any proposed change, addition, or amendment, to a vote of the voters by the following procedure: The committee shall present to the clerk of the circuit court of the city a petition for such election, addressed to the court and signed by voters equal in number to fifteen percent of the number of voters duly registered on January 1 of the year of the petition. The petition shall contain the proposed ordinance in full in the form in which it is to be submitted to the voters. The petition and all copies thereof shall be filed with the clerk as one instrument. Within fifteen days after the filing thereof, the clerk shall examine the same and ascertain and certify thereon whether the persons whose names are signed thereto are voters of the city, equal to the number required. However, the clerk of the circuit court shall have the general registrar certify which names on a petition are registered voters before certifying any petition himself. The general registrar and the clerk of the circuit court shall make their certifications within fifteen days of the date of filing. If it be found that the required number of voters have signed the petition, then the petition, with the certificate of the clerk thereon, shall be presented by the committee to the circuit court of the city, and thereupon the court shall forthwith enter an order calling and fixing a date for holding an election for the purpose of submitting the proposed ordinance to the voters of the city. Any such election shall be in accordance with Section 24.1-165 of the Code of Virginia. At least ten days before any such election, the clerk of the circuit court shall cause such proposed ordinance to be published once in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.3. - Ballots and effect of voting. 
    The ballots at such election shall conform to Section 24.1-165 of the Code of Virginia. With respect to each ordinance whose adoption, amendment, or repeal is sought, the following question shall be submitted: "Shall the ordinance entitled (title of ordinance) be (either adopted, amended or repealed, as appropriate)?" 
    If a majority of the voters voting on such proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, the proposed ordinance shall, upon the ascertainment and certification of the results of such election as in other special elections, become an ordinance of the city. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.4. - Ordinances adopted by the voters; how amended or repealed. 
    No ordinance adopted by a vote of the voters, as herein provided, shall be repealed or amended, except by a vote of the voters; but the circuit court of the city, on request of the council, by resolution, may order that a proposed ordinance repealing or amending any ordinance so adopted be submitted to the voters of any election, or any special municipal election called for some other purpose, if in accordance with the provisions of Section 24.1-165 of the Code of Virginia, provided that the clerk of the circuit court shall cause notice of the submission of such proposed ordinance repealing or amending such ordinance to be published once in one or more newspapers of the city not less than ten days prior to the election. If an amendment is proposed, the notice shall contain the proposed amendment in full, and the ballot shall be in the same form and the vote shall have the same effect as in the case of an ordinance submitted to election by popular petition. The ballots and effect of voting shall be as provided in Section 19.3 of this chapter. 
(Acts 1983, ch. 398) 
REFERENDUM 
Sec. 19.5. - Petition for referendum. 
    Subject to the exceptions set out hereinafter in Section 19.8, if at any time within a thirty-day period following the adoption of an ordinance, a petition, signed by voters equal in number to fifteen percent of the number of voters duly registered on January 1 of the year of the petition, be filed with the clerk of the council, requesting that any such ordinance be repealed or amended as stated in the petition, such ordinance shall not become operative until the steps indicated herein shall have been taken or the time allowed for taking such steps shall have elapsed without action. Such petition shall state therein the names and addresses of at least five registered voters, who shall be officially regarded as filing the petition, and who shall constitute a committee of petitioners for the purposes hereinafter stated. Referendum petitions shall contain the text of the ordinance or ordinances, the amendment or repeal of which is sought, and shall contain the proposed amendment, if an amendment is demanded. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.6. - Procedures. 
    The clerk of the council shall present the petition to the council at its next regular meeting, and thereupon the council shall consider the ordinance. If, within sixty days after the filing of such petition, the ordinance is not repealed or amended as requested in such petition, the clerk of the council, if so requested by a writing signed by a majority of the committee and presented to the clerk of the council within twenty days after the expiration of sixty days, shall present to the clerk of the circuit court of the city, the petition and all copies thereof as one instrument, together with a copy of the ordinance, the repeal or amendment of which is sought. The clerk of the circuit court of the city shall examine the petition and ascertain and certify thereon whether the persons whose names are signed thereto are registered voters of the city, equal in number to fifteen percent of the number of voters duly registered as of January 1 of the year of the petition; provided, however, the clerk of the circuit court shall have the general registrar certify which names on the petition are registered voters before certifying any petition himself. The general registrar and the clerk of the circuit court shall make their certifications within fifteen days of the date of filing. If such signatures do amount to such percentage, the committee shall present the petition to the circuit court of the city, and thereupon the court shall forthwith enter an order calling and fixing a date for holding an election for the purpose of submitting the ordinance to the voters of the city. Thereupon the ordinance shall ipso facto be further suspended from going into effect until the election shall have been held and shall then be deemed repealed or amended upon the approval by a majority of those voting thereon. Any such election shall be held in accordance with Section 24.1-165 of the Code of Virginia. At least ten days before any such election, the clerk of the court shall cause the ordinance to be published once in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city. 
    The ballots used when voting upon such ordinance shall conform in all respects to the ballots required for an initiative election under Section 19.3 hereof, and the method of voting in any such election shall be as prescribed in that section. 
    If in any such election the ordinance so referred or submitted be approved by a majority of the voters voting thereon, the ordinance shall, upon the ascertainment and certification of the results of such election as in other special elections, go into effect as an ordinance of the city. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.7. - Conflict of ordinances. 
    If two or more ordinances adopted or approved at the same election conflict in respect to any of their provisions, such ordinances shall go into effect in respect to such of their provisions as are not in conflict, and the one receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail insofar as their provisions conflict. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398.) 
Sec. 19.8. - Measures not subject to initiative or referendum. 
    Ordinances passed providing for any work, improvement or repair certified by the city manager to be immediately necessary to protect public safety, public property, health or morals from imminent danger or protect the city from imminent loss or liability, shall not be subject to such referendum. The certificate of the city manager in any such case shall be conclusive. No ordinance concerning revenue levies, expenditures, zoning, or any administrative act shall be subject to initiative or referendum. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
RECALL 
Sec. 19.9. - Procedure. 
    Any member of the council may be recalled and removed from office by the voters by the following procedure: A petition for the recall of the member or members designated, signed by voters equal in number to at least ten percent of the number of voters duly registered on January 1 of the year of the petition eligible to vote for the member or members sought to be recalled, and containing a statement of factual reasons of not more than 200 words of the grounds of the recall, shall be filed with the clerk of the council. Within fifteen days of the date such petition was filed, the clerk shall have the general registrar of the city certify that the petition has the number of signatures of voters required to meet the above mentioned percentage. If the petition contains the required number of signatures, the clerk shall forthwith notify the member or members sought to be removed, and such member or members may, within ten days after such notice, file with the clerk a defensive statement of not more than 200 words. The clerk shall, immediately upon the expiration of ten days, cause sufficient printed or typewritten copies of such petition, without the signatures, to be made, and to each of them he shall attach a printed or typewritten copy of such defensive statement or statements, if any such shall have been furnished him within the time provided. He shall preserve the original petition and any defensive statements in his office. He shall cause a copy of such petition, with a copy of any defensive statements, to be placed in the office of the general registrar of the city who shall provide facilities for signing the petition and for the proper custody thereof. The clerk shall immediately cause notice to be published in some newspaper of general circulation in the city of the place where the copies may be found and of the time in which the same may be signed. 
    The petition shall remain on file in the place designated for a period of thirty days, during which time it may be signed by voters of the city, including those who signed the original petition. 
    At the expiration of the period of thirty days, the clerk shall assemble all of the copies, and shall file the same as one instrument with the clerk of the circuit court of the city who shall examine the same and ascertain and certify thereon whether the persons whose names are signed thereto are voters of the city, equal in number to fifteen percent of the number of voters duly registered on January 1 of the year of the petition; however, the clerk of the circuit court shall have the general registrar certify which names on the petition are voters before certifying any petition himself. The general registrar and the clerk of the circuit court shall make their certifications within fifteen days of the date of filing. If such signatures do amount to such percentage, the clerk of the circuit court of the city shall at once serve notice of that fact upon the member or members designated in the petition. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.10. - Recall election. 
    If the member or members, or any of them, designated in such petition file with the clerk of the council, within five days after the last mentioned notice from the clerk of the circuit court of the city, his or their written resignation or resignations, the clerk of the council shall at once notify the clerk of the circuit court of the city of that fact, and such resignation or resignations shall be irrevocable and shall be filed and preserved in the offices of the clerk of the council; and the council shall proceed to fill the vacancy or vacancies, subject to the provisions of Section 5 of this Charter. In the absence of notice from the clerk of the council that such resignation or resignations have been filed, as aforesaid, the clerk of the circuit court of the city shall, upon the expiration of the period of five days, forthwith present to the court the copies with his certificate as to the percentage of voters whose names are signed thereto, and a certificate as to the date of the service of the notice given by him to the member or members designated in the petition, as above provided. And, thereupon, the court shall forthwith enter an order calling and fixing a date for holding a recall election for the removal of the member or members named in the petition who have not resigned as aforesaid. Any such election shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Section 24.1-165 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.11. - Ballots and effect of voting. 
    The ballots of such recall election shall provide, with respect to each person whose removal is sought, the following question: "Shall (name a person) be removed from the office of councilman by recall?" 
    In all other respects the election shall be held in accordance with general law. 
    In any election, if the majority of the votes cast on the question of the removal of any member are affirmative, such member shall be deemed removed from office upon the ascertainment and certification of the results of such election as in other special elections, and the vacancy or vacancies caused by such recall shall be filled by the remainder of the council, according to the provisions of Section 5 of this charter. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.12. - Effect of resignations pending proceedings for the recall of the whole council. 
    No proceedings for the recall of all of the members of the council at the same election shall be defeated in whole or in part by the resignation of any of them or all of them; but in any such case upon the resignation of any of them, the remaining members of council or if a majority of the members of council resign, then the circuit court, as provided for in Section 15.1-808 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, shall have the power, and it shall be their duty or the court's duty, as the case may be, forthwith to fill such vacancy or vacancies temporarily until successors are elected, and the proceedings for the recall and the election of successors shall continue and have the same effect as though there had been no resignation. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.13. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
    No petition to recall any member shall be filed within one year after he assumes the duties of his office. The method of removal herein provided shall not be deemed or held to be exclusive, but it is in addition to such other methods as are now or may hereafter be provided by general law. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 
Sec. 19.14. - Elections. 
    All municipal elections shall be conducted and the results canvassed and certified by the regular election officials provided by the general election laws of the Commonwealth; and except as otherwise provided by this charter, all such elections shall be governed by the general election laws. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.15. - Petitions. 
    All petitions referred to in this charter shall be signed in ink or indelible pencil by the voter in person and not by agent or attorney. Each person signing any such petition shall print opposite his signature his full name and his place of residence by street and number. The signatures to any such petition need not all be appended to one paper, but to each such paper (except in the case of copies of recall petitions, which may not be circulated) there shall be attached an affidavit by the circulator thereto stating that each signature appended thereto is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. All copies of any such petition shall be treated as originals. No such petition shall be deemed invalid by reason of the fact that it is signed by one or more persons who are not voters, but the names of such persons shall not be counted. As used in this charter the term "voter," "qualified voter," and "registered voter" are synonymous. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.16. - Presumptions. 
    All signatures to any petition referred to in this charter shall be accepted and treated as prima facie genuine. For the purpose of certifying the number of voters whose names are signed to any such petition, the clerk of the circuit court of the city shall presume that any person whose name appears thereon is a voter if such person be a voter within the meaning of section 19.17 hereof. All such petitions substantially complying with the requirements of this charter, and certified by the clerk of the circuit court to bear the required number of signatures of voters, shall be accepted and treated as prima facie sufficient. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.17. - Qualifications of persons signing certain petitions. 
    Any person shall be deemed to be a voter for the purpose of signing any petition referred to in this charter if the name of such person is on the registration books maintained by the general registrar of the city on the date such petition is filed with the appropriate official. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.18. - Duty of city attorney. 
    Before any ordinance or amendment proposed by popular petition shall be submitted to the council, it shall first be approved as to form by the city attorney, whose duty it shall be to draft such proposed ordinance or amendment in proper legal language, and to render such other service to persons desiring to propose such ordinances or amendments as shall be necessary to make the same proper for consideration by the council. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.19. - Offenses. 
    No person shall: 
(a)  Falsely impersonate another in the signing of any petition for initiative, referendum or recall, or forge any name thereto, or deface, destroy, or remove from any of the places designated in this charter any copy of a petition for recall with intent to interfere with or defeat such recall; 
(b)  Sign any petition for initiative, referendum or recall with knowledge that he is not qualified voter of the city; or purposely write his name or residence falsely in the signing of any such petition; or sign or intentionally permit to be signed any petition for recall at any other place than hereinbefore designated for the signing of such petitions; or employ or pay another or accept employment on the basis of the number of signatures subscribed thereto, or for circulating any petition permitted by this charter to be circulated. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
    The foregoing provisions shall not be deemed or held to be exclusive of, but in addition to, all laws of the Commonwealth prescribing penalties for the same offenses, or for other offenses relating to the same matter. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 19.20. - Compensation of clerk of the circuit court. 
    For his services in connection with any proceedings under the foregoing sections relating to the initiative, referendum and recall, the clerk of the circuit court of the city shall be paid by the city such reasonable fees as are now or may hereafter be provided by law for similar services in other cases. 
(Acts 1982, ch. 398) 
Sec. 20. - Oaths of office. 
    The members of the city council and all other officers of the city, whether elected by the people or appointed by the council, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, shall be sworn in, in accordance with the laws of the state. Such oaths may be administered by the clerk of council, the judge or clerk of the circuit court or by any person competent to administer an oath under the laws of the state; and a certificate of such oaths having been taken shall be filed by each officer with the clerk of the council, who shall enter the same upon the journal of the council. If any person appointed or elected to any office in said city, shall neglect to take such oath as required by law, his office shall be deemed vacant, and there shall be another appointment or election for the same. 
(HB1615, 3-25-99) 
Sec. 21. - Terms and termination of office of elected officials. 
    All persons elected by the people to fill any municipal office, shall enter upon the duties thereof at the time prescribed by the general laws of the state, and shall respectively continue in office until their successors have qualified. 
Sec. 22. - Bonds of officers and employees-Generally. 
    The council shall designate such officers and employees of the city as shall give to the city bonds, with securities to be approved by the council, conditioned so as to secure the faithful discharge of their official duties, and the several penalties of said bonds shall be the sums of the council, by ordinance, shall prescribe; provided, that the securities of the treasurer, collector, commissioner of revenue and high constable, respectively, shall be equally liable for the acts of his deputy or deputies as for those of their principals. 
    The bonds provided for under this section are only to secure the faithful discharge of duties to the city, and in no wise are to supersede the official bonds of the Commonwealth required of any of said officials by law. All official bonds given by municipal officers and employees shall be filed with the clerk of the corporation court. 
Cross reference- Official bonds, § 2-81. 
State Law reference- Oaths, affirmations and bonds, Code of Virginia, Tit. 49. 
Sec. 23. - Same-Remedy of city upon default. 
    In case of default on the part of any bonded municipal officer, the city shall have the same remedies upon his bond against him and his sureties as are provided for the state in enforcing the penalty of any official bond given to it. 
CHAPTER 5. - COURTS GENERALLY AND BAIL COMMISSIONERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
This chapter should be read in light of Code of Va., Tit. 16.1. Also, pursuant to revisions in the Code of Virginia, the court of the city is known as the General District Court, not as the municipal court. 
Cross reference- Courts and jail, § 2-363 et seq. 

Sec. 24. - Territorial jurisdiction of corporation and circuit courts. 
    The jurisdiction of the corporation and the circuit courts of the city shall extend to the corporate limits thereof and to a space of one mile without and around said limits, except that the same shall not extend into the County of Amherst beyond the corporate limits; and any judgment, order or decree of the said corporation court or of the said circuit court for the City of Lynchburg heretofore made in any case, in which the said court would have had jurisdiction had this Act been in operation, shall have the same effect as if this Act had been at that time in force. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Sec. 25. - Election, term, salary and courtroom and office for municipal court judge. 
    The city council, in the month of September, nineteen hundred and forty-three and each four years thereafter, shall elect an officer, who at the time of his election shall be an attorney-at-law, licensed to practice in this state for at least five years, who shall be called the judge of the municipal court of said city, whose term of office shall begin on the first day of January succeeding his election, and shall continue for four years thereafter; his salary shall be fixed by the council and paid out of the city treasury in monthly installments and shall not be diminished during his term of office. The present judge of the municipal court shall be the judge of the municipal court until the expiration of the term for which he was elected and until his successor shall be elected and qualified. The council may elect to the position of judge of the municipal court the same person who holds the position of judge of the municipal civil court. The city council shall provide a suitable courtroom and office for the judge of the municipal court and shall furnish all necessary furniture, books and stationery. Such furniture, books and stationery shall be under the control of the judge of the municipal court, but shall remain the property of the city. 
(Acts 1930, ch. 11, p. 12; Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Sec. 26. - Jurisdiction of judge of municipal court. 
    His territorial jurisdiction or venue shall extend throughout the corporate limits of the city and for one mile beyond those limits, except that the same shall not extend into the County of Amherst beyond the corporate lines of the city. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Editor's note- Except for the sentence set out herein, this section, as amended in 1942, has been superseded by Code of Virginia, Tit. 16.1. 
Sec. 26-a. - Juvenile and domestic relations court and judge. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the council shall appoint or elect a person who at the time of his election shall be an attorney at law, who shall have been licensed to practice law in this state for at least five years, who shall be known as the judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court of the city, whose term of office shall begin the first day of the month following his election and shall continue for six years thereafter; his salary shall be fixed by the city council and paid out of the city treasury in monthly, bi-weekly or weekly installments, and shall not be diminished during his term of office. 
    The assistant judge of the municipal court, or, if he be unavailable, the substitute assistant judge of the municipal court, shall be authorized to act in all matters in the place, room and stead of the said judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court in case of absence from the city or inability to act on the part of the judge of the said juvenile and domestic relations court or during the annual vacation of said judge; and the compensation for so acting shall be fixed by the council and paid out of the city treasury. The assistant judge of the municipal court, or the substitute assistant judge of the municipal court, independently of whether either be acting for the judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court or not, shall, subject to the general supervision and control of the judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court, have at all times the same authority and power with respect to the admitting to bail and the issuing of warrants, summons, process, capias, and other proper papers as to matters within the jurisdiction of the juvenile and domestic relations court as such officers now possess with respect to bail and the issuance of such papers as to matters within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. The judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court shall hold court at such times as the council may by ordinance or resolution provide, and the city council shall further have the authority to provide by ordinance or resolution for the trail of juvenile cases coming before said court separate and apart from domestic relations cases. 
    Any vacancy in the office of such judge shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointments or election to such office. 
    The judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court shall have the same powers, jurisdiction, duties, rights, privileges, and the same method of qualification as are now conferred and provided for by general state laws upon such courts in this state and the judges thereof. 
    The present judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court shall continue in office until the expiration of the term for which he was appointed or elected, and upon the expiration of his term and of each successive term thereafter a successor shall be appointed or elected for the term and in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Acts 1947, Ex. Sess., ch. 5, p. 15; Acts 1958, ch. 156, p. 203) 
State Law reference- Juvenile and domestic relations courts, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-226 et seq. 
Sec. 27. - [Reserved.] 
    Superseded by Code of Virginia, section 16.1-132. 
Sec. 28. - Enforcement of fines and penalties by municipal court. 
    The said court, and the judge thereof, shall have power to enforce the payment of any fine or penalty imposed by the said court for any violation of a city ordinance or resolution, or of any state law, by imprisonment in the city jails or by committing any person convicted by said court to the city farm. 
Sec. 29. - Days of holding municipal court. 
    Said judge shall hold court each day (except Saturdays and Sundays, and such holidays as may be specified by council, and such days as he may set apart for the trial of juvenile and domestic relations cases when he is sitting as judge of such court), to take cognizance of such cases as may be brought before him under the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209; Acts 1968, ch. 22, p. 49) 
Sec. 30. - Assistant judge and substitute assistant municipal court judges. 
    When the judge of the municipal court is elected, the city council shall also elect an assistant judge of the municipal court whose term of office shall coincide with that of the judge of the municipal court, and who shall be an attorney-at-law licensed to practice in this state, and who, in case of the absence from the city or inability to act on the part of the judge of the municipal court, shall act in all matters in the place, room and stead of the said judge of the municipal court, and who when so acting shall possess the same powers and discharge the same duties as said judge; and his salary for so acting shall be fixed by the council and paid out of the city treasury. 
    And in addition, the said assistant judge of the municipal court, independently of whether he be acting for the judge of the municipal court or not, shall at all times have the same power to issue warrants and to admit to bail as is hereinafter provided for bail commissioners, and at all times have the same powers as the judge of the municipal court in matters relating to lunacy, inebriacy, drug addicts, feeblemindedness and epilepsy, and in matters relating to the issuing of summons, mittimus, process, capias and other proper papers; and for his services in issuing warrants, admitting to bail or in connection with matters of lunacy, inebriacy, drug addicts, feeblemindedness or epilepsy, he shall receive the same fees and from the same sources as allowed under the general laws of the state to other officers for performing similar services. The present assistant judge of the municipal court shall be the assistant judge of the municipal court and fill that office until the expiration of the term for which he was elected and until his successor shall be elected and qualified. The city council may elect one or more attorneys-at-law licensed to practice in this state as substitute assistant judges of the municipal court to act in case of the absence from the City or in ability to act on the part of the assistant judge of the municipal court who when so acting shall have all the powers and duties of the assistant judge of the municipal court. And the council may fix their terms of office and provide for and fix their compensation. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209; Acts 1970, ch. 9, p. 8) 
Sec. 31. - Vacancies in office of municipal court judge. 
    Any vacancy in the office of the judge of the municipal court or the assistant judge of the municipal court or of the substitute assistant judge thereof may be filled by election by the city council; and the person or persons thus elected shall serve for the unexpired term of their predecessor and until their successors shall be elected and qualified. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Sec. 32. - Clerk and deputy clerk of municipal court. 
    The said judge of the municipal court shall appoint a clerk of said court who shall hold office at the pleasure of said judge and shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the city council. Said clerk shall also act as clerk of the domestic relations and juvenile court and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned him. The said judge of the municipal court may also appoint a deputy clerk, who shall hold office at the pleasure of said judge, and who if appointed, shall have the same powers and duties as the clerk of said court and shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the council. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167. p. 209) 
Note-Pursuant to revisions in the Code of Virginia, the court of the city is now known as the General District Court, not as the municipal court. 
Sec. 33. - Bail commissioners. 
    The City Council shall have authority to appoint from such of the qualified voters of the city not more than five persons, who shall, when appointed, be called bail commissioners, whose respective terms of office shall begin on the first day of January succeeding their respective appointments and shall continue for four years thereafter. 
    All said bail commissioners, if appointed, shall each, at all times, have the same authority and power as the judge of the municipal court to issue search warrants and warrants of arrest for violation of the criminal laws of the state and penal ordinances of the city, and each of said bail commissioners shall at all times have power and jurisdiction within the said city to admit to bail persons charged with crime in all cases where the courts of record or the judges thereof are authorized to admit to bail; but none of said bail commissioners shall issue any such warrants nor admit any persons to bail after any court of record having jurisdiction in the matter, or the judge thereof, or the judge of the municipal court of the city, has acted upon the application for such warrant or bail nor while the application for such warrant or bail is pending before such court or judge. 
    The council shall have authority by ordinance to provide such rules and regulations governing the work and duties of the said bail commissioners as it may deem proper and shall fix the fees and compensation of such bail commissioners as it may deem proper. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209; Acts 1970, ch. 9, p. 10) 
Sec. 34. - Municipal civil court-Election, qualifications, salary, etc., of judge. 
    The city council, in the month of September, nineteen hundred and forty-three, and each fourth year thereafter, shall elect an officer, who at the time of his election shall be an attorney-at-law licensed to practice law in this state for at least five years, who shall be called the judge of the municipal civil court of said city, whose term of office shall begin on the first day of January succeeding his election, and shall continue for four years thereafter and until his successor shall be elected and qualified; his salary shall be fixed by the city council and paid out of the city treasury, by monthly installments, and shall not be diminished during his term of office. The present judge of the municipal civil court shall be the judge of said municipal civil court until the expiration of the term for which he was elected, and until his successor is elected and qualified. The council may elect to the position of judge of the municipal civil court the same person who holds the position of judge of the municipal court. Said judge of the municipal civil court shall give bond in the penalty of twenty-five hundred dollars with such security as may be approved by the council, payable to the City of Lynchburg with a condition for the faithful discharge of the duties of his office. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Sec. 35. - Same--Assistant judge. 
    When the judge of the municipal civil court is elected, the council shall also elect an assistant judge of the municipal civil court who shall be an attorney-at-law licensed to practice in this state whose term of office shall coincide with that of the judge of the municipal civil court. In the event of the inability of the judge of the municipal civil court to perform the duties of his office by reason of sickness, absence, vacation, or otherwise, such assistant judge of the municipal civil court shall perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability and shall receive for his services such compensation as may be fixed by the city council. While acting as such judge of the municipal civil court, either the judge of the municipal civil court or the assistant judge of the municipal civil court may issue warrants, executions upon, grant new trials, hear motions and perform other acts in reference to the judgments and proceedings of the other in the same manner as if they were his own. The present assistant judge of the municipal civil court shall be assistant judge of the municipal civil court until the expiration of the term for which he was elected and until his successor shall be elected and qualified. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Sec. 36. - Same-Vacancies in office and absence or inability of judge or assistant to act. 
    Any vacancy in the office of the judge of the municipal civil court or assistant judge of the municipal civil court may be filled by election by the city council. The person or persons thus elected shall serve for the unexpired term and until their successor shall be elected and qualified. In case of absence from the city, or inability to act, on the part of either the judge of the municipal civil court or the assistant judge of the municipal civil court, the city council may designate some person to act in the place of said judges, who, when acting, shall possess the same powers and discharge the same duties as such judges. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Sec. 36-a. - [Reserved.] 
    Superseded by Code of Virginia. 
Sec. 36-b. - [Reserved.] 
    Superseded by Code of Virginia. 
Sec. 36-c. - Same-High constable. 
    The high constable of the City of Lynchburg shall act as bailiff of said municipal civil court and shall have charge of the courtroom thereof. He shall also call the docket of said court and while exercising his duties as bailiff shall have all the powers, rights and duties of a police officer of the City of Lynchburg. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Sec. 36-d. - Same-Days and place court to be held. 
    The municipal civil court shall be presided over by the judge thereof and shall be held in such places as shall be designated by the city council and shall be held at least three days each week to take cognizance of such cases as may be brought before it. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Sec. 36-e. - [Reserved.] 
    Superseded by Code of Virginia, sections 16.1-77 and 16.1-78. 
Sec. 36-f. - [Reserved.] 
    Superseded by Code of Virginia, sections 16.1-79 through 16.1-122. 
Sec. 36-g. - [Reserved.] 
    Superseded by Code of Virginia, sections 16.1-106 through 16.1-113. 
Sec. 36-h. - [Reserved.] 
    Superseded by Code of Virginia, section 16.1-92. 
Sec. 36-i. - [Reserved.] 
    Superseded by Code of Virginia, section 16.1-98. 
Sec. 36-j. - [Reserved.] 
    Superseded by Code of Virginia, sections 16.1-76 and 16.1-80. 
Sec. 36-k. - Same-Papers in proceedings to be preserved; papers as evidence. 
    All papers connected with any of the proceedings in the trial of cases before such judge of the municipal civil court, and distress warrants, except such as may be removed on appeal or removal, shall be properly indexed, filed and preserved in the office of the judge of the municipal civil court, by said judge. Copies of any papers so filed in the office of the judge of the municipal civil court, certified by the judge or clerk thereof, shall be competent evidence in any court of the State of Virginia, or the United States. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
State Law reference- Destruction of papers in civil cases, Code of Va., § 16.1-117. 
Sec. 36-l. - [Reserved.] 
    Superseded by Code of Virginia. 
Sec. 36-m. - [Reserved.] 
    Superseded by Code of Virginia, sections 14.1-125 through 14.1-128. 
CHAPTER 6. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY: FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Fire division, § 19-16 et. seq.; police, Ch. 31. 

Sec. 37. - City council-Adoption of rules; appointments of officers and clerks; discipline of members; journal; open and secret meetings; compelling attendance of witnesses. 
    The council shall have authority to adopt such rules and appoint such officers and clerks as it may deem proper for the regulation of its proceedings, and for the convenient transaction of business may compel the attendance of absent members, may punish its members for disorderly behavior, and by a vote of two-thirds of its members may expel a member for malfeasance or misfeasance in office. It shall cause a journal of its proceedings and its meetings to be kept and its meetings shall be open except when recorded vote of two-thirds of the members present, the council shall decide that the public welfare requires secrecy. The council in any investigation held by it may order the attendance of any person as a witness and the production by any person of any proper books and papers. Any person refusing or failing to attend or testify or produce such books and papers, may be summoned by the council before the judge of the municipal court or other officer having the powers of the justice of the peace of the city, and upon failure to give a satisfactory excuse, may be fined by him not exceeding the sum of one hundred dollars, or imprisoned not exceeding thirty days, such person to have the right of appeal, as in cases of misdemeanor, to the corporation court of said city. Such witness may be sworn by the officer presiding at such investigation and shall be liable for prosecution for perjury for any false testimony given at such investigation. 
Sec. 38. - Same-Powers enumerated. 
    The council shall have all the general powers vested in it by the Constitution and laws of the state, and it shall have power to enact ordinances provided for the exercise within its jurisdiction of all police powers which the state itself may exercise under the Constitution, except such as may be specially denied cities by Act of the General Assembly; and shall further have power: 
    First. Control, etc., of city affairs; group, etc., insurance. To control and manage the fiscal and municipal affairs of the city, and all property, real and personal, belonging to the city, and make such ordinances, orders and bylaws, relating to the same as it may deem proper and necessary; and to provide for group, life, health and accident insurance on the lives and persons of the weekly payroll or salaried employees of the city on such terms as it may deem proper, and to make appropriation out of the city treasury to cover such portion of the cost of such insurance as it may deem wise and proper. 
    Second. Purchase, sale, etc., of property. To purchase, hold, sell and convey all real and personal property necessary for its uses and purposes. 
    Third. Markets; sale of food; hucksters and junk dealers. To establish markets in the city and regulate the same, and to enforce such regulations in regard to the keeping and sale of fresh meat, vegetables, eggs and other green groceries, and the trade of hucksters and junk dealers, as may be deemed advisable. 
    Fourth. Houses of correction; care of poor. To erect in or near the city limits suitable workhouses, houses of correction or reformation, and houses for the reception and maintenance of the poor and destitute. It shall possess and exercise exclusive authority over all persons within the limits of the city receiving the benefits of the poor law; appoint officers and other persons connected with any institution or house which it may establish, and regulate pauperism within the limits of the city, and the council, through a board of overseers of the poor, or such other agencies as it may appoint for the direction and management of the poor of the city, shall exercise the powers and perform the duties vested by law in overseers of the poor. 
    Fifth. Erection, etc., of public buildings, etc.; recreation facilities. To erect and keep in order all necessary public buildings; to establish and regulate public squares, airports, playgrounds and parks in or near the city, and to acquire by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, the land it may deem necessary for such uses, and to construct in such public squares, playgrounds or parks, as it may maintain, or upon any city property, stadiums, swimming pools and recreation or amusement buildings, structures or enclosures of every character, refreshment stands, restaurants, etcetera; and to charge for admissions, and use of same, and to rent out or lease the privileges of construction or using such swimming pools, recreation or amusement building, structures or enclosures of every character, refreshment stands, or restaurants, etcetera. 
    Sixth. Establishment, etc., of gasworks and waterworks. To establish, maintain and enlarge waterworks or gasworks within or without said city; to contract with the owners of land, water and riparian rights, for the use or purchase thereof, or to have the same condemned for the location or enlargement of said works, or the pipes and fixtures thereof, and to acquire by purchase or condemnation such quantity of the watershed land adjacent to the intake or source of supply as in the judgment of the said council may be necessary to insure a sufficient supply of water of said city, and to protect the same from pollution; to acquire by purchase or condemnation from lower riparian owners the right to divert streams into the present or any future reservoir; to prevent the throwing of filth or offensive matter in the James River within six miles of the city limits, and to protect said water supply, works, pipes, reservoirs and fixtures, whether within or without the city, against injury and pollution, by appropriate ordinances and penalties, to be enforced as are other ordinances of said city. 
    Seventh. Supply, etc., of electricity. To establish or acquire by purchase and to maintain and operate within or without the corporate limits suitable works for the generation of electricity for illumination or other purposes, and to supply the same to consumers in or near the city at such price and on such terms as it may prescribe, and to that end may contract with owners of land and water power for the use thereof, or may have the same condemned. 
    Eighth. Other public utilities, etc. To establish, or acquire by purchase, such other public utilities, abattoirs and other enterprises, either within or without the city, as may in its judgment be in the public interest, and to that end may contract with owners of land, with or without buildings, for the use or the purchase thereof, or may have the same condemned. 
    Ninth. Authority over streets, etc., generally. To take care, supervision and control of streets, squares and commons, and to close, vacate, abandon, extend, widen, narrow, lay out, pave, graduate, improve and otherwise alter the streets in said city; have the streets properly lighted and kept in good order; make or construct sewers or public ducts through the same wherever else they may deem expedient; build bridges in or culverts under said streets or alleys, prevent or remove obstructions or encroachments over, under or in the same; plant shade trees along the same, and prevent the cumbering of streets, alleys, walks, public squares, lanes or bridges in any manner whatever. 
    Tenth. Authority over railroads. To permit railroads to be built and to determine and designate the route and grade thereof; to permit poles for electrical, telephone, or telegraph purposes to be erected; gas and steam pipes and conduits for wires to be laid in the streets, and to prescribe an annual license charge for the privileges granted hereunder; and to levy an annual inspection charge upon all such poles, pipes and conduits; to regulate the speed of engines and cars upon the railroads within the city, and to wholly exclude the same where the welfare of the city may demand it. 
    Eleventh. Weights and measures-Generally. To provide for the weighing of hay, fodder, oats and shucks or other long forage, ice, coal and livestock, and the measuring of wood and lumber. 
    Twelfth. Same-Sealing. To require every merchant or trader in property of any description which is sold by measure or weight, to have his weights and measures sealed by the city sealer, or other officer designated to perform such duties. 
    Thirteenth. Public Schools. To provide for aid in the support or maintenance of public free schools; to appoint the school board for the city, and to designate the age of pupils to be admitted into the public schools and the grade of such schools. 
    Fourteenth. Aid to various organizations. To grant aid to military companies and to contribute to the support of a band maintained within the city, to associations for the advancement of agriculture or the mechanic arts, to scientific, literary, educational or benevolent organizations or institutions and to public libraries, provided such action is not prohibited by the Constitution of the state, and that all such societies, organizations or institutions be located in or near the city; and provided further, that no appropriation for any such purposes shall be made, nor shall aid be otherwise granted through exemption from charge for use of water or light facilities or otherwise, either with or without charge beyond the city limits, unless two-thirds of all the members elected to the council vote therefor. 
    Fifteenth. Health and sanitation generally. To secure the inhabitants from contagious, infectious or other dangerous diseases; to establish a quarantine ground; to provide and maintain hospitals; to compel the removal of patients to same; to appoint and organize a board of health or a department of public welfare; to define its duties, and grant to it the necessary authority effectually to discharge them. 
    Sixteenth. Registration of births and deaths. To provide for the registration of births in the city, and to that end may require physicians, midwives, or parents to report the same to the board of health or department of public welfare under such regulations as it may deem proper. 
    Seventeenth. Burial places. To provide, in or near the city, lands to be used as burial places for the dead, to improve and care for the same and the approaches thereto, and to charge for and regulate the use of ground therein; to prohibit the burial of dead within the city and to regulate public cemeteries, and to require the return of bills of mortality by the keepers of all cemeteries in or near the city. 
    Eighteenth. Abatement of nuisances; regulation of keeping of animals and fowl; regulation of transportation of articles through streets; regulation of dry closets. To compel the abatement and removal of all nuisances within the city, or upon property owned by the city beyond its limits, at the expense of the person or persons causing the same, or of the owner or occupant of the ground or premises whereon the same may be; to require all lands, lots and other premises within the city to be kept clean, sanitary and free from weeds or to make them so at the expense of the owners or occupants thereof; to regulate or prevent slaughterhouses or other noisome or offensive business within the said city; the keeping of animals, poultry or other fowl therein, or the exercise of any dangerous or unwholesome business, trade or employment therein; to regulate the transportation of all articles through the streets of the city; to compel the abatement of smoke and dust; to prevent unnecessary noise therein; to regulate the location of stables and the manner in which (they) shall be kept and constructed; to provide means for and to regulate the cleaning of all dry closets and to assess against the owner or occupant of the premises on which the same is located a reasonable charge therefor, which shall be collectible as any other city taxes, and generally to define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent all things detrimental to the health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
    Nineteenth. Party walls and fences. To authorize and regulate the erection of party walls and fences, and to prescribe how the cost thereof shall be borne by coterminous owners. 
    Twentieth. Fire prevention; discharge of firearms. To direct the location of all buildings for storing explosives or combustible substances; to regulate the sale and use of gunpowder, nitroglycerine, fireworks, kerosene oil or other like material; to regulate the exhibition of fireworks, the discharge of firearms and the making of bonfires in the streets and yards. 
    Twenty-first. Prevention of fowl and animals running at large. To prevent fowl and animals being kept in or running at large in the city, and to subject the same to such taxes, regulations and confiscations as it may think proper. 
    Twenty-second. Regulation of traffic; flying kites in streets; prevention of punishment to animals. To prevent the riding or driving of horses or other animals at improper speed; to regulate the use of automobiles and other automotive vehicles upon the streets in accordance with law; to prevent the flying of kites, throwing of stones, or engaging in any sort of employment in the public streets which is dangerous or annoying to passers-by, and to prohibit and punish the abuse of animals. 
    Twenty-third. Drunkards, vagrants, etc. To restrain and punish drunkards, vagrants and mendicants. 
    Twenty-fourth. Prevention of vice and immorality; preserve the peace; prevention of gambling. To prevent vice and immorality; to preserve public peace and good order; to prevent and quell riots, disturbances and disorderly assemblages; to suppress houses of ill fame and gambling houses and gambling devices of all kinds; to prevent the carrying on of lotteries of all kinds and the conducting of raffles; to prevent lewd, indecent and disorderly conduct or exhibitions in the city, and to expel therefrom persons guilty of such conduct who have resided therein less than one year. 
    Twenty-fifth. Prevention of certain persons coming into city. To prevent the coming into the city of persons having no ostensible means of support, or of persons who may be dangerous to the peace and safety of the city, and for this purpose may require any railroad company bringing such passengers into the city to enter into bond, with approved security, that such persons shall not become chargeable to the city for one year, or may compel such company to take them back from whence they came, or compel such persons to leave the city if they have been in the city more than six months before the order is given. 
    Twenty-sixth. Regulation of certain businesses and occupations. To regulate and control auction sales, livery stables, garages, gasoline filling stations, slaughterhouses, theatrical performances or other public shows or exhibitions, the hiring or use for pay of carriages, carts, wagons and drags, automobiles and other automotive vehicles, and the business of hawkers, peddlers, persons selling goods by sample, persons keeping billiard tables, tenpin alleys and pistol galleries for profit, and all other similar businesses and occupations and employments, and as to such trades, occupations and employments and any other of a like nature, may grant or refuse license as it may deem proper. 
    Twenty-seventh. Right to work prisoners. To compel persons sentenced to confinement in the jail of the city for petty larceny or other misdemeanor or other violations of the city ordinances to work on the public streets, parks or other public works of the city or on the city farm, or be sent to the poorhouse, there to perform such labor as the overseers of the poor or officer having charge of such department may direct; and on the requisition of the judge of the municipal court it shall be the duty of the sergeant of the city to deliver such persons to the duly authorized agent of the city for such purposes from day to day as he may be required. 
    Twenty-eighth. Division of government into departments; creation, etc., of offices. To divide the administrative work of the city into such departments as the council, in its judgment, may deem proper and to appoint a city engineer, city surveyor, city electrician, a collector of city taxes, a city attorney and an auditor, and such other officers and employees as it may deem proper and necessary, and to prescribe their respective powers and duties, terms of office and compensation; and all such officers may have such assistants and clerks as the council may approve. Any office which the council has the power to fill by appointment or election it may abolish or declare vacant at any time whether the term of office of the incumbent has expired or not; and it may likewise at any time consolidate any such office with any other of the offices that the council has the power to fill by election or appointment, or it may consolidate any such office with any office to which the incumbent is elected by the voters of the city, provided that the fire and police departments shall not be abolished. When a vacancy occurs in any office to which the incumbent is elected by the council, the council is empowered to fill the vacancy, and when such vacancy occurs otherwise than by the regular expiration of the term of the incumbent the election shall be only for the unexpired term. 
    Twenty-ninth. Ward boundaries and number. To change the boundaries of wards and increase the number thereof. 
    Thirtieth. Street names. To give names to or alter the names of streets. 
    Thirty-first. Unsafe buildings. To make such regulations and orders as will protect its citizens from unsafe houses or walls, and to that end it shall have the power to cause to be condemned and taken down any such building or wall, but no such condemnation shall be made or such house or wall taken down until the owner thereof, or in case of an infant or insane person, his guardian or committee, be duly summoned before the board of officers of the city, or the committee of the council thereof charged by the ordinances with such duty, and allowed reasonable opportunity to show cause against such action. 
    Thirty-second. Building Code and set-back lines. To provide for the regular and safe construction of houses in the city for (the) future, and to provide a complete Building Code for the city and to provide set-back lines on the streets beyond which no building may be constructed. 
    Thirty-third. Further provisions as to buildings; zoning and planning. To designate and prescribe from time to time the parts of the city within which no buildings of wood shall be erected, and to regulate the construction of buildings in the city so as to protect it against danger from fire; and to enact an ordinance dividing the city into zones under the provisions of the state law; and to provide for a planning commission and defined its powers. 
    Thirty-fourth. To prescribe penalties for the violation of any city ordinance, rule or regulation, but not exceeding any penalty established by the Commonwealth for a similar offense. 
    Thirty-fifth. Authority to pass ordinances, etc. To pass all bylaws, rules and ordinances not repugnant to the Constitution and laws of the state which it may deem necessary for the good order and government of the city, the management of its property, the conduct of its affairs, the peace, comfort, convenience, order, morals, health and protection of its citizens, or their property, and do such other things and pass such other laws as may be necessary or proper to carry into full effect any power, authority, capacity, or jurisdiction, which is or shall be granted to or vested in said city, or in the council, court or officers thereof, or which may be necessarily incident to a municipal corporation. 
    Thirty-sixth. Publication of ordinances generally. To provide for the due publication in the newspapers or otherwise of its ordinances and resolutions. 
    Thirty-seventh. Building or improving roads, etc., leading into city. To contribute funds or other aid to the building or improvements of permanent public roads leading to the city, or of bridges on such roads, or to the purchase of bridges on such roads by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the members elect of the council, provided that no such appropriation shall be made toward the building, purchase, or improvement of any road or bridge at a point more than forty miles beyond the corporate limits of the city measured along the route of such road. 
    Thirty-eighth. Ordinances to be published; exceptions. No ordinance or section of ordinance hereafter passed or amended by the council for the violation of which any penalty is expressly imposed in the ordinance or section of ordinance, as passed, shall take effect until the same shall have been published for five days consecutively in one of the daily newspapers of the said city to be designated by the city council; provided, however, that this requirement as to publication shall not apply to an ordinance merely granting to a person some individual right or privilege, nor to any ordinance reordained or amended in or by a compilation or codification of said ordinances, nor to the amendment of any ordinance, or section thereof, where no specific penalty for the violation thereof is provided in the ordinance or section of ordinance as amended or re-enacted, where the penalty for the violation of such ordinance or section of ordinance so amended or re-enacted is only the penalty imposed by the general ordinances of the city for the violation of the city, or is only the penalty imposed for violation of any of the provisions of an ordinance, where only one or more of the sections of said ordinance are so amended or re-enacted; and provided, further, that in cases where the council adopts ordinances or sections of ordinances which are substantially the same as state statutes or sections thereof, dealing with the same subject, it shall not be necessary to publish said ordinance or sections thereof, but it shall be sufficient to publish a notice that certain statutes of the state or sections thereof, have by ordinance been adopted by the city council, said notice to cite the act of the Assembly or sections in the Virginia Code which have been so paralleled and adopted by the council, and said notice shall further give a brief description of the subject matter of the ordinance or section thereof so adopted. 
    The record or entry made by the clerk of said city, or a copy of such record or entry duly certified by him, shall be prima facie evidence of the fact and time of such publication; and all laws, regulations and ordinances of the city council may be read in evidence in all courts of justice and all proceedings before any officer, body or board in which it shall be necessary to refer thereto, either from a copy thereof certified by the clerk of said council or from the volume of ordinances printed by authority of the city council. 
(Acts 1930, ch. 10, p. 10; Acts 1934, ch. 278, p. 429; Acts 1938, ch. 183, p. 271; HB1615, 3-25-99) 
Sec. 38-a. - Codification of ordinances; further exceptions requiring publication of certain ordinances. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any provision of section 38, or of any other sections of the Charter of the City of Lynchburg, as amended, it shall be unnecessary, whenever the council of such city shall codify, recodify, revise or amend any existing ordinance or ordinances or enact any new ordinance or ordinances of said city, and cause the same, or any part thereof, to be printed at one time or from time to time in book or pamphlet form, to publish in a newspaper or otherwise any new, revised or amended ordinance or ordinances, or any other ordinance or ordinances, or any codification or recodification of any ordinance or ordinances contained in any book or pamphlet, and all new, revised or amended ordinances, codifications or recodifications contained in any such book or pamphlet shall take effect at such time, but not less than thirty days after the same have been printed in such book or pamphlet form, as may be prescribed by the council by ordinance. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any provision of paragraph (1) of this section or of section thirty-eight, or of any other section of the Charter of the City of Lynchburg, as amended, it shall be unnecessary to either publish in a newspaper or otherwise, or to print in a book or pamphlet form any ordinance or ordinances of said city which prohibit or regulate traffic or parking on any designated street or streets, or other designated area or areas, or which prohibit or regulate the dumping of trash or other matter, or which prohibit or regulate any other specified activity or activities in or near any designated streets, areas, buildings or other locations; provided, however, such signs are present, within or near such streets, areas, buildings or other locations, as to apprise an ordinarily observant person of such prohibitions or regulations, and such ordinance or ordinances shall take effect at such time, but not before the signs called for in said ordinance or ordinances have been erected, as may be prescribed by the council by ordinance. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 235, p. 345; Acts 1950, ch. 253, p. 438) 
Editor's note- Code of ordinances, § 1-1. 
Sec. 38-b. - Authority of city to exercise right of eminent domain. 
(1)  In order to carry out more effectually the powers conferred by this charter, the City of Lynchburg is hereby expressly authorized to acquire by condemnation proceedings instituted in the corporation court of the City of Lynchburg, or in the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg, if the subject lies or is situated within the city, and if not within the city, in the circuit court of the county in which subject lies, land or any interest therein, any right, easement, or estate of any person or corporation therein, whenever in the opinion of its council a public necessity exists therefor, which shall be expressed in the ordinance or resolution directing such acquisition, whenever the City of Lynchburg cannot agree on terms of purchase or settlement with those entitled to such subject because of the incapacity of such owner, or some one of the owners, or because of the inability to agree upon the compensation to be paid, or other terms of settlement or purchase, or because the owner, or some one of the owners, of the subject proposed to be acquired is a non-resident of this State, or cannot with reasonable diligence be found in this State, or is unknown. If the subject is situated partly within the city and partly within the county, the circuit court of such county shall have concurrent jurisdiction in such condemnation proceedings with the courts of the city hereinbefore enumerated. The judge or the court exercising such concurrent jurisdiction shall appoint five disinterested freeholders, any or all of whom may reside either in such county or in the city, any three of whom may act, as provided by law. 
(2)  In addition to the procedure prescribed by general law for the exercise of the power of eminent domain, the council of the city may, by such ordinance or resolution, direct the acquisition of such property and provide therein in a lump sum the total estimated necessary funds to compensate the owners thereof for the property or properties to be acquired or damaged. Upon the adoption of such ordinance or resolution the city may file a petition in the clerk's office of any of the courts hereinbefore enumerated, which shall be signed by the mayor, vice-mayor or city manager and shall set forth the interest or estate to be taken in the property and the uses and purposes for which the property or the interest or estate therein is wanted, or when no property is to be taken but is likely to be damaged, the necessity for the work of improvement which will cause or is likely to cause damage to the property or estate of any person. There shall also be filed with the petition a plat of a survey of the property with a profile showing cuts and fills, trestles and bridges, if any, and a description of the property which, or an interest or estate in which, is sought to be taken or likely to be damaged and a memorandum showing the names and residences of the owners of the property, if known, and showing also the quantity of property which, or an interest or estate in which, is sought to be taken or will be or is likely to be damaged. There shall be filed also with said petition a notice directed to the owners of the property, if known, copies of which shall be served on such owners or on tenants of the freehold of such property, if known. If such owner or tenant of the freehold be unknown or a nonresident of the state and cannot with reasonable diligence be found in this state, or if the residence of such owner or tenant be unknown, he may be proceeded against by order of publication, which order, however, need not be published more than once a week for two successive weeks and shall be posted at a main entrance to the courthouse. The publication shall in all other aspects conform to section 8-71, 8-72 and 8-76 and 25-46.10 of the Code of Virginia. Upon the filing of said petition and the deposit of the funds provided by the council for the purpose, in a bank to the credit of the court in such proceedings and the filing of a certificate of deposit therefor, the interest or estate of the owner of such property shall terminate and the title to such property or interest or estate of the owner shall be absolutely vested in the city in fee simple and such owner shall have such interest or estate in the funds so deposited as he had in the property taken or damaged and all liens by deed of trust, judgment or otherwise upon said property or estate shall be transferred to such funds and the city shall have the right to enter upon and take possession of such property for its uses and purposes and to construct its works of improvement. The clerk of the court in which such proceeding is instituted, unless such court shall also be the court in which deeds are admitted to record, shall make and certify a copy of the petition, and any exhibits filed therewith, notice and orders and deliver or transmit the same to the clerk of the court in which deeds are admitted to record. The clerk of the court in which deeds are admitted to record shall record the same in his deed book and index them in the name of the person or persons who had the property before and in the name of the city, for which he shall receive the same fees prescribed for recording a deed, which shall be paid by the city. If the city and the owner of property so taken or damaged agree upon compensation therefor upon filing such agreement in writing in the clerk's office of such court, the court or judge thereof in vacation shall make such distribution of such funds as it may seem right, having due regard to the interest of all persons therein, whether such interest be vested, contingent or otherwise, and to enable the court or judge to make a proper distribution of such money it may in its discretion direct inquiries to be taken by a special commissioner in order to ascertain what persons are entitled to such funds and in what proportions and may direct what notice shall be given of the making of such inquiries by such special commissioner. If the city and the owner cannot agree upon the compensation for the property taken or damaged, if any, upon the filing of a memorandum in the clerk's office of said court to that effect, signed by either the city or the owner, the court shall appoint commissioners provided for in section 25-46.20 of the Code of Virginia, or as provided for in this section, and shall in this order appointing such commissioners designate the day and hour for them to meet, and all proceedings thereafter shall be had as provided for in Sections 25-46.20 through 25-46.34 of the Code of Virginia, or as provided in Section 15-1..236 thereof, insofar as they are then applicable and are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and the court shall order the deposit in bank to the credit of the court such additional funds as appear to be necessary to cover the award of the commissioners or shall order the return to the city of such funds deposited that are not necessary to compensate such owners for property taken or damaged. The commissioners so appointed shall not consider improvements placed upon the property by the city subsequent to its taking nor the value thereof nor the enhancement of the value of said property by the erection of said improvements in making their award. 
(3)  In all cases under the provisions of this Act, the enhancement, if any, in value of the remaining property of the owner by reason of the construction or improvement contemplated or made by the city, shall be offset against the damage, if any, resulting to such remaining property of such owner by reason of such construction or improvement, provided such enhancement in value shall not be offset against the value of the property taken; and provided further, that if such enhancement in value shall exceed the damage, there shall be no recovery over against the owner for such excess. 
(4)  Whenever any money shall have heretofore remained or shall hereafter remain for five years in the custody or under the control of any of the courts hereinbefore enumerated in any condemnation proceedings instituted therein by the city under this section or the general law, without any claim having been asserted thereto, such court shall, where the amount is one hundred dollars or more, cause a publication to be made once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, setting forth the amount of such money, the source from which it was derived and the proceedings in which it is held, and requiring all persons having any claim to said money to appear before said court within such time after the completion of the publication as the court may prescribe and establish their claim. If the sum be less than one hundred dollars, the court shall direct the same to be paid into the treasury of the city, and a proper voucher for the payment taken and filed among the records of the proceeding. If no person shall appear and show title in himself, the court shall order the money, after deducting therefrom the costs of such publication if such publication is made, and any other proper charges, to be paid into the treasury of the city and a proper voucher for the payment to be taken and filed among the records of the proceeding. The city comptroller shall, in a book provided for the purpose, keep an account of all money thus paid into the city treasury, showing the amount thereof, when, by whom, and under what order it was paid, and the name of the court, and, as far as practicable, a description of the suit or proceeding in which the order was made, and as far as known, the names of the parties entitled to said funds. Money thus paid into the treasury of the city shall be paid thereout to any person titled thereto, who has not asserted a claim therefor in the proceeding in which it was held, on the order of the court having jurisdiction of such proceeding, upon satisfactory proof that he is entitled to such money. If such claim be established, the net amount thereof, after deducting costs and other proper charges, shall be paid to the claimant out of the treasury of the city on the warrant of the city comptroller. No claim to such money shall be asserted after ten years from the time when such court obtained control thereof; provided, however, if the person having such claim was an infant, insane, or imprisoned at the time the claim might have been presented or asserted, claim to such money may be asserted within five years after the removal of such disability. 
(Acts 1947, Ex. Sess., ch. 5, p. 15; Acts 1968, ch. 22, p. 49) 
Sec. 38-c. - Authority of city to acquire school property within and without city limits. 
    The city shall have authority to acquire by purchase, eminent domain, grant, or otherwise, property within the city or without the city for a distance of one mile from the corporate limits thereof for school purposes; provided, however, that no property for such purpose outside the city shall be acquired that is held for, or devoted to, county school purposes or other public use; and the school board of the city shall have the same control over school property outside the city, the title to which is vested in the city, as it exercises upon like property within the corporate limits. Procedure in any condemnation proceedings brought under authority of this section shall be as prescribed in section thirty-eight-b of this Charter. 
(Acts 1948, ch. 130, p. 300) 
Sec. 38-d. - Redevelopment and housing authority. 
    Notwithstanding any of the provisions of the Housing Authorities Law (§ 36-1, et seq., of the Code of Virginia, as amended), the members of the council of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, during their respective terms of office as councilmen, are authorized and empowered to act as the commissioners of the Lynchburg Redevelopment and Housing Authority, whenever the said council shall adopt a resolution declaring: 
(a)  The need for an Authority to function in the City of Lynchburg; and 
(b)  The determination that the members of the council of the City of Lynchburg, shall act as the commissioners of the said Authority. 
    Should the council determine to act as the commissioners of the Lynchburg Redevelopment and Housing Authority as above provided, it shall designate which of the commissioners shall be the chairman of the Authority, and four commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the said Authority for the purpose of conducting its business and exercising its powers and for all purposes, and action may be taken by the Authority upon the vote of a majority of the Commissioners present, unless in any case the bylaws of the Authority shall require a larger number. The determination of the council made hereunder and any determination that may be made by the Authority as constituted hereunder shall be effective without the prerequisite of an election being held to determine the question as provided by the Housing Authorities Law. 
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the council and the Authority from otherwise proceeding under and in accordance with the Housing Authorities Law. 
(Acts 1950, ch. 253, p. 438; Acts 1956, ch. 244, p. 263) 
Sec. 38-e. - Authority of council to regulate excavations and lateral supports of land. 
    In addition to such powers as the council may have under the provisions of section thirty-eight, or any other section or sections of the Charter of the City of Lynchburg, as amended, or of any provisions of the general law, it shall have authority to limit the depth of any future excavations within the city and to regulate the rights and duties of adjoining property owners as to the lateral support of land and improvements thereon. 
(Acts 1950, ch. 253, p. 439.) 
Sec. 38-f. - Residence of officers and employees. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the council shall have the power to provide by ordinance the length of prior residence in the city, if any, which shall be required as a qualification for employment of regular, permanent officers and employees of the city, or any of them; and whether such officers and employees, or any of them, shall be required to reside within the city during their tenure in such office or employment. 
(Acts 1968, ch. 22, p. 52) 
Sec. 38-g. - Powers relating to public transportation. 
    In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter, the city shall have the power to acquire, operate, lease or otherwise provide for the operation of a public transportation system, including, by way of illustration but not limitation, the operation of passenger buses, both within and outside the City of Lynchburg, including providing for transportation of pupils attending public schools operated by the School Board of the City of Lynchburg; provided, however, that the operation of any such system outside the City of Lynchburg shall be only with the consent of the governing body of the political subdivision in which such operation is to occur. 
(Acts 1974, ch. 22, p. 38) 
Sec. 38-h. - Power relating to public museum. 
    The city shall have the authority to provide for and operate public museums and to acquire by purchase or gift, sites, landmarks, structures and all appropriate items for preservation and exhibition. The council shall have the power to appoint such boards, commissions and agencies as it deems appropriate to administer and regulate the operation of such museums. 
(Acts 1974, ch. 22, p. 38) 
Sec. 38-i. - Police jurisdiction of city-owned lands, buildings and structures located outside its corporate limits. 
    The powers set forth in § 15.1-887 of the Code of Virginia, as in force on January one, nineteen hundred seventy-four, are hereby conferred on and vested in the City of Lynchburg; provided, however, as to such facilities located outside the municipal corporation, that these powers shall be limited to jurisdiction over water supplies and facilities; and, airports and lands, structures, equipment and facilities appurtenant thereto, as provided in §§ 15.1-875 and 15.1-885. 
(Acts 1974, ch. 22, p. 38) 
Sec. 39. - Police and fire departments; department of public safety. 
    There shall be a police department and a fire department, which may be incorporated into one department known as the "department of public safety," with the director therefor to be appointed by the city manager. 
    First. 
(a)  Police department. The city manager shall, through the director of the department of public safety, if such department be established, appoint a chief of police whose duties and bond shall be such as the council may ordain. The city manager shall further, on nomination of the chief of police, through the director of the department of public safety, if such office be established, appoint such number of policemen as may be authorized by the council. 
(b)  The chief of police and policemen appointed as hereinbefore provided, shall constitute the police force of the city and shall hold their respective positions during good behavior or until they are removed by the city manager. 
(c)  The police force shall be under the control of the city manager for the purpose of enforcing peace and executing the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. It shall perform such other duties as the council may prescribe. For the purpose of enabling it to execute its duties, every member thereof is hereby made a conservator of the peace and endowed with the powers of a constable in criminal cases, and with such other powers under the laws of the state as may be necessary to the discharge of the duties of his office. 
(d)  The director of the department of public safety, if such department be established, or the chief of police, if there be no such department, may, with the approval of the city manager, in time of public emergency or at such times as there are an insufficient number of regular policemen to preserve the peace, safety and good order of the community, appoint and equip a sufficient number of special policemen to preserve the peace, safety and good order of the community. The director of the department of public safety, if such department be established, or the chief of police, if there be no such department, shall also appoint such employees of the city as may be designated by the city manager to be special policemen who, while in the performance of their official duties, shall have the powers and duties of policemen. The director of the department of public safety, if such department be established, or the chief of police, if there be no such department, may, with the approval of the city manager, upon the application of any individual, firm or corporation showing the necessity thereof, appoint one or more special policemen to be paid by the applicant who shall have the powers and duties of policemen while in or on the premises of such applicant or in the actual performance of the duties for which employed. The appointment of any special policeman shall be revocable at any time by the director of the department of public safety, if such department be established, or by the chief of police, if there be no such department. 
(e)  The pay of the said police and the said special police employed by the city shall be prescribed by the council, but the uniforms, rules and regulations of said police force and of all special police shall be prescribed by the city manager or by the director of public safety with the approval of the city manager. 
    Second. 
(a)  Fire department. The city manager shall, through the director of the department of public safety, if such department be established, appoint a chief engineer of the fire department, whose pay, duties and bond shall be such as the council may ordain. The city manager shall further, upon the nomination of the chief engineer, appoint such number of firemen as may be authorized by the council. Vacancies in the force of firemen shall be filled in like manner. The chief engineer and firemen shall retain their positions during good behavior or until they are removed by the city manager. 
(b)  The pay for the said members of the fire department shall be prescribed by the council, but the uniforms, rules and regulations of the said members of the fire department shall be prescribed by the city manager, or by the director of public safety with the approval of the city manager. 
(Acts 1946, ch. 381, p. 721; Acts 1952, ch. 163, p. 176) 
Cross reference- Department of public safety, § 2-189 et. seq. 
CHAPTER 7. - JUDGE AND CLERK OF CIRCUIT COURT, COMMONWEALTH'S ATTORNEY, CITY TREASURER AND OTHER OFFICERS 

Sec. 40. - Judge and clerk of corporation court, commonwealth's attorney, city treasurer, city sergeant and commissioner of revenue. 
(a)  There shall be for said city a judge of the circuit court, a commonwealth's attorney, a clerk of the circuit court, a treasurer, a sheriff, and a commissioner of the revenue, each of which shall be elected in the manner and at the time, and to hold office for the term prescribed by law; they shall respectively perform such duties, have such powers, and be liable to such penalties as may be prescribed by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city, made in pursuance thereof; and for all services performed for said city by the treasurer or by the commissioner of revenue, or performed under any ordinance or resolution of the council, such officers shall receive such compensation as may from time to time be fixed by the council, which compensation may be either in the shape of salary or commissions as the council may determine. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the sheriff shall, upon the adoption of an ordinance by the city council, in addition to the other duties and responsibilities imposed upon him by general law, be responsible for the operation of the city jail, lockup facilities, receiving unit and court holding facilities. 
Editor's note- In connection with this section, see Code of Virginia, § 14.1-33 et seq. and § 14.1-50 et seq. Pursuant to revisions in the Code of Virginia, the court of the city is known as the General District Court, not as the municipal court. 
Sec. 41. - Justices of the peace. 
    There shall be elected by the qualified voters of each ward of the city one justice of the peace, who shall hold office for a term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified, unless sooner removed from office. The said justices shall be conservators of the peace within the corporate limits of the city, and for one mile beyond the corporate limits thereof, except that the same shall not extend into the County of Amherst beyond the corporate lines, and within such limits shall possess the jurisdiction and exercise the powers conferred on justices of the peace under the laws of this Commonwealth, except that nothing herein contained shall be construed as vesting in such justices any portion of the jurisdiction given by law to the judge of the municipal court in enforcing the ordinances of the city or the criminal laws of the state, and in case the council shall establish the municipal civil court, as heretofore provided in this Act, with exclusive civil jurisdiction to try civil cases, said justices of the peace shall not have authority to try civil cases, through such criminal and civil jurisdiction, or any part thereof, may be vested in them, or in any one or more of them, by resolution or ordinances of the council. 
Sec. [42]. - High constable-Election, term, powers, and duties; compensation. 
    There shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city one high constable, who shall hold his office for the term of four years and until his successor be elected and qualified, unless sooner removed. Said high constable shall keep his office in some convenient place in the city, and shall have the same powers and duties and be subject to the same penalties as are prescribed by law for the constables, and shall further perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the ordinances of the city, for which duties his compensation shall be fixed by the council. He may be appointed as clerk of the municipal civil court. 
State Law reference- Salary, Code of Virginia, § 14.1-136 et seq. 
Sec. 42-a. - Same-Power of council to abolish office. 
    The council may abolish the office of high constable, whether or not the term of said high constable has expired, and may transfer the duties of high constable upon the sergeant of the city; provided, however, that no action shall be taken toward the abolition of said office until the expiration of the present term of the high constable. 
(Acts 1947, Ex. Sess., ch. 5, p. 15) 
Sec. 43. - Deputies to certain officers. 
    The collector, commissioner of revenue and high constable may each appoint one or more deputies, provided such appointments meet with approval of the council; but the sureties of said officers, respectively, shall be equally liable for the acts of said deputies as for those of their principals. 
CHAPTER 8. - BONDS, TAXES, SINKING FUNDS, ETC.[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Finance and taxation generally, Ch. 18; tax code, Ch. 36. 

Sec. 44. - Indebtedness of the city generally. 
    The council may, in the name and for the use of the city, contract debts and cause to be issued therefor notes or bonds; but no debt of the city shall be payable more than thirty-four years from the date thereof; provided that the council shall not have power to contract debts for the city or issue evidences therefor, whether notes or bonds for sums which, when added to the net debt of the city then existing after the deduction of sinking funds and all bonds issued for or allocated to the water department, shall cause the total amount of the indebtedness of the city to be greater than sixteen per centum of the value of the real and personal estate, which shall include all capital on which a license is paid, in the city as assessed for taxation, either by the state or the city; provided, however, that in determining the limitation of the power of the city to incur indebtedness there shall not be included the classes of indebtedness mentioned in subsections (a) and (b) of section one hundred and twenty-seven of the Constitution of the state; and, provided, further, that the council shall not contract debts or issue any evidence thereof for the purpose of subscribing to the capital stock of any internal improvement company or private corporation nor shall it cause the bonds of any such company to be endorsed by the city, and the council shall provide for the retirement of said bonds either by sinking funds as hereinafter provided, or it may cause said bonds to be issued as serial bonds to be retired periodically as provided by the ordinance authorizing the same from the current revenues of the city, in which case no sinking fund shall be provided. 
Sec. 45. - City debts created for longer than four months. 
    No debt shall be created by the council for a longer period than four months, unless the ordinance creating the same shall have been introduced at some meeting of the council at least thirty days before the same is passed; but an amendment to such ordinance need not lie over for an additional thirty days. 
Sec. 46. - Property taxes. 
    For the execution of its powers and duties, the council may tax all real and personal property in the city not exempt by law from taxation, or segregated to the state for exclusive taxation, all corporations located in the city or having their principal office therein and not exempt by law from taxation, all moneys owned by or credits due to any person living in the city, all capital of persons having a place of business in the city and doing business therein and employed in said business, though the said business may extend beyond the city; provided, that so much of said capital as is invested in real estate, or employed in the manufacture of articles outside the city limits, shall not be taxed as capital; all stocks in incorporated joint stock companies doing business in the city and by whomsoever owned and not exempt by law from taxation; income, interest on money, dividends of banks, or other corporations; provided, that no capital, interest, income or dividends shall be taxed, when a license or other tax is imposed upon the business in which said capital is employed, or upon the principal, money, credits or stocks from which the interest, income or dividend is derived; nor shall a tax be imposed at the same time upon stock of a corporation and upon the dividends thereon; and provided, further, that such property has not been segregated to the state for exclusive taxation. Assessments upon stocks and bonds shall be according to the market value thereof. The council may, by curative ordinance, ratify and confirm irregular assessments and levies of taxes heretofore or hereafter made, and the acts of all ministerial officers in connection therewith, and any such ordinance heretofore passed is hereby ratified and confirmed. 
Sec. 47. - Capitation taxes. 
    The council may impose a tax of one dollar per annum upon each resident of the city who has attained the age of twenty-one years. For the purposes of this section every person domiciled in the City of Lynchburg on the first day of January in any year, and every other person who has had his place of abode in this city for the longer portion of the twelve months next preceding the first day of January in any year shall be deemed a resident of this city. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 220) 
Sec. 48. - Taxes on trades, businesses and professions.[8] 
    The council may impose a tax on merchants, commission merchants, auctioneers, manufacturers, traders, lawyers, physicians, dentists, brokers, keepers of ordinaries, hotel keepers, boardinghouse keepers, keepers of drinking or eating houses, keepers of livery stables, photographic artists of all kinds, agents of all kinds (including the agents of insurance companies, whose principal office is not located in the city), sellers of wines and other liquors, vendors of quack medicine, public theatrical or other performances or shows, keepers of billiard tables, tenpin alleys, pistol galleries, hawkers, peddlers, sample merchants, railroad companies, canal companies, telegraphic companies, telephone companies, gas companies, electric companies, traction companies of all sorts, street railway companies, exress companies, insurance companies, and any other person, firm, corporation or employment, whether of like kind with any of the foregoing or not, which it may deem proper, whether such person, firm, corporation or employment be herein specifically enumerated or not, and whether any tax be imposed thereon by the state or not. As to all such persons, firms, corporations or employments, the council may lay a direct tax or may require a license tax therefor under such regulations as it may prescribe and levy a tax thereon; and where it is not prohibited by the laws of this state, or of the United States, may levy both a direct tax and a license tax thereon; but the taxes herein authorized shall be subject to the provisions and conditions set forth in section 46 of this chapter. But this section shall not render it legal to conduct within the city any business, calling or vocation which but for this section would be illegal. 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Annotation- In Richmond Linen Supply Co. v. City of Lynchburg, 160 Va. 644, 169 S.E. 554, the court held that an ordinance passed under this section which taxed laundries soliciting laundry in the city for processing outside the city at a higher rate than laundries which processed all their work within the city was constitutional and was not an unreasonable classification nor a taking of property without due process. 
Cross reference- License taxes, § 36-16 et seq. 

Sec. 48-a. - Admission taxes and utility taxes on consumer. 
    In addition to the other powers conferred by law, the council shall have the power to impose, levy and collect, in such manner as it shall deem expedient, and admission tax on admission to any public amusement, entertainment, performance, exhibition, sport or athletic event in said city, and may provide that such tax shall be added to and collected with the price of admission or other charge for such amusement, entertainment, performance, exhibition, sport or athletic event. Furthermore, council shall have the power to impose, levy and collect, in such manner as it may deem expedient, a consumer or subscriber tax upon the amount paid for the use of water, electricity, gas, telephone, and any other public utility within the city, or upon the amount paid for any one or more of such public utility services, and council may provide that such tax shall be added to and collected with bills rendered consumers for such services. 
(Acts 1947, Ex. Sess., ch. 5, p. 15) 
Cross reference- Utility taxes, § 36-187. 
Sec. 48-b. - Taxes on various other subjects and transactions. 
    In addition to the other powers conferred by law, the council is hereby empowered to raise annually by taxes and assessments such sums of money as the council shall deem necessary for the purposes of the city, in such manner, on such subjects and transactions, and from such sources as council deems expedient, in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the state and the United States. 
(Acts 1947, Ex. Sess., ch. 5, p. 15) 
Sec. 49. - Penalty for failure to pay license taxes. 
    The council may subject any person, who without having obtained a license therefor, shall do any act or follow any employment or business in the city, for which a license may be required by ordinance, to such fine or penalty as it is authorized to impose for any violation of its laws. 
Sec. 50. Sinking fund-Establishment; purpose generally; permissible investments. 
    There shall be set aside annually from the revenues of the city, a sinking fund equal to not less than one per centum on the aggregate outstanding debt of the city, which by its terms is not payable within one year, and on the debt of the city contracted for a new water system for said city, or for improving the present system, there may be set aside an additional fund equal to the two per centum of said debt contracted for a water system for said city; provided that no sinking fund need be set aside for the retirement of serial bonds maturing periodically. Said sinking fund shall be applied to the debt or debts for the discharge of which it was created, and until so applied, shall be invested, with its accumulations of interest, in direct obligations of the United States Government, or in other bonds and/or securities, the payment of which are guaranteed both as to principal and interest by the Government of the United States, or in bonds of the State of Virginia, or of the City of Lynchburg, or of any city in the State of Virginia having a population of ten thousand inhabitants or over, according to the latest United States census. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 220) 
Cross reference- Sinking fund, § 18-106 et seq. 
Sec. 51. - Same-Use of in time of war or insurrection. 
    The council shall not appropriate any part of the sinking fund or its accruing interest otherwise than as mentioned in the preceding section, except in time of war, insurrection or invasion, and then only be a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to such council. 
Sec. 52. - Powers of officers charged with duty of collecting funds due city; procedure for collecting. 
    The treasurer, collector of city taxes and assessments, the collector of delinquent taxes, the collector of water rents and water assessments, sidewalk, sewer and dry closet assessments, and any other collector of funds due to the city which it may appoint, shall have power of distress, garnishment, renting or action, or any other power now possessed, or that may hereafter be given, to any person charged with the collection of state taxes, for the purpose of collecting any taxes or assessments as above set forth due to the city. The collector of any such city taxes or assessments as above provided, shall not be required to first levy or distrain on the property, goods or chattels of the person so assessed, or to find or search for such property, goods or chattels, but without first applying to any person indebted to, or having in his hands estate of the party assessed with taxes, may garnishee the estate of any person owing taxes or assessments to the City of Lynchburg, by serving himself or by his deputy or by any other officer authorized to serve process, written notice upon any person indebted to, or having in his hands estate of, the party assessed with such taxes, levies or assessments, which notice shall state the amount of taxes, levies or assessments, plus penalties, interest and costs, due to the city, shall be signed and issued by the city collector or his deputy, and shall direct the person on whom such notice is served, if the sum due for such taxes, levies, or assessments does not exceed one thousand dollars, to appear before the judge of the municipal civil court, at the courtroom thereof, at such time as may seem reasonable, not exceeding sixty days from the date of service of such notice; and if the sum due exceeds one thousand dollars, such notice shall direct the person on whom such notice is served to appear before the corporation court of the City of Lynchburg, at the courthouse thereof, at such time as may seem reasonable, not exceeding ninety days from the date of the service of such notice; and from the time of the service of any such notice the taxes, levies or assessments, together with any penalties, interest, and costs, shall constitute a lien on any indebtedness due from such person, or on the estate in his hands, from such time of service up to the return day. Every notice of such garnishment shall be made in triplicate, one copy to be served on the garnishee, one to be served on or mailed to the person charged with such taxes, at his address appearing on the land book or other tax or assessment rolls of the city, and the third copy to be filed with the court with the return of the officer serving or mailing the same thereon. The city collector, or his deputy, shall be entitled to a fee of fifty cents for each service made by him hereunder. Court costs, other than service fees, shall not be assessed unless a trial of said notice or garnishment is held, in which latter event court costs shall be assessed as in other cases of garnishment. Any execution on judgment entered on said notice or garnishment shall be directed to the city collector or to any other officer whom he may designate. Except as herein provided, all proceedings on said notice or garnishment shall be the same as now or hereafter provided by general law for courts of record of general jurisdiction with respect to attachments and garnishments. No deed of trust or mortgage upon goods and chattels shall prevent the same from being distrained or sold for taxes assessed against the grantor in such deed while such goods and chattels remain in the possession of the grantor, nor shall any such deed prevent the goods and chattels conveyed from being distrained and sold for the taxes assessed thereon, no matter in whose possession they may be found. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Sec. 53. - Control of city money. 
    All moneys received or collected for the use of the city shall be paid over, held and disbursed as the council may order or prescribe. 
Sec. 54. - Transfers of real estate to be furnished commissioner of the revenue. 
    It shall be the duty of the clerk of the corporation court of said city annually, between the first and fifteenth days of January, to furnish the commissioner of revenue for said city a certified list of all transfers of real estate which may have been made in his office during the preceding twelve months. 
Sec. 55. - Payment of taxes by tenant. 
    A tenant from whom payment of taxes on his landlord's property shall be obtained by distress or otherwise shall have credit for the same against such person on account of his rent, unless by contract the tenant is to pay such taxes. 
Sec. 56. - Penalty for nonpayment of taxes; special power of treasurer or collector concerning persons moving from city before payment of taxes. 
    The council may impose a penalty of five per centum for the nonpayment of city taxes and levies, and may cause such penalty to be added to the amount of taxes or levies for any tax year at such time, on and after the first of July in each year, as it may by ordinance or resolution from time to time determine; and after such penalty has been added, the treasurer, city collector of taxes, collector of delinquent taxes, and all other officers of the city authorized to collect taxes or levies for the City of Lynchburg shall have the same rights, powers and methods of collection as are provided in section fifty-two of this Charter. If it comes to the knowledge of the treasurer or collector of city taxes that any person, firm or corporation owing taxes or levies to the city is moving or contemplating moving therefrom prior to the time said penalty may be added by the council, the treasurer or city collector shall have the right to collect the taxes by the method provided in section fifty-two at any time after such bills for taxes have come into his hands. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Sec. 57. - Real estate taxes-annual list of delinquent taxes to be filed by collector. 
    On or before the fifteenth day of August in each year, the collector shall file with the clerk of the corporation court a list of all real estate in the City of Lynchburg delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes thereon for the preceding year, which list shall be recorded by the clerk in the book of delinquent taxes kept in the clerk's office, indexed in the name of the parties against whom said taxes are assessed, and said clerk shall be paid for so recording said list of delinquent taxes the same sum that he has been heretofore paid for recording delinquent state taxes. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209) 
Sec. 58. - Same-Lien created; sale of property to satisfy; interest and expenses of collection. 
    There shall be a lien on all real estate, and on each and every interest therein, for the city taxes assessed thereon from the commencement of each year for which they are assessed. The city council may require real estate in the city delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes, to be sold for the said taxes, with interest thereon at eight per centum per annum, and such per centum as they may prescribe for expenses of collection. Such real estate shall be sold and may be redeemed under the provisions of other sections of this charter. 
(Acts 1942, ch. 167, p. 209; Acts 1974, ch. 22, p. 37) 
Sec. 59. - Same-Sale for delinquent taxes; notice. 
    On the second Monday in December in the year next after the year in which the real estate shall have been returned delinquent for taxes thereon for the preceding year, the city collector shall sell, as hereinafter provided, all real estate embraced in his said list of delinquent real estate for the said year, on which the levies for which the same were returned delinquent, or any part thereof, may remain unpaid on the day of sale. 
    Before making any such sale the collector shall give general notice thereof by posting a printed list of the real estate to be sold at the front door of the courthouse of the corporation court for the city, and he shall also post a copy of said list at the front door of his office or in the lobby of the City Hall, and shall publish said list in one issue of some newspaper published in the city, such list to be published and posted at least thirty days before the delinquent sale. 
    The list to be so published and posted shall contain the names of the persons in whose names said real estate was returned delinquent and a description of the property in the same way it appears on the land books, and the amount for the satisfaction of which each certain parcel will be sold, and said list shall have appended thereto a notice to the effect that each and every parcel of real estate therein contained, or so much thereof as may be necessary, will be sold at public auction on the second Monday in December of said year, between the hours of ten in the morning and four in the afternoon, at the front door of the courthouse of the city, to satisfy all levies, penalties, interest and charges due thereon, unless the same shall have been previously paid to the city collector. 
    The cost of printing and publishing such notices, and all other proper expenses in connection with such sale, shall be apportioned among the delinquents embraced in said list, according to the amount of levies, penalties, and interest due by them respectively. 
    If the sale be not completed on the day fixed in said notice, it shall be adjourned from day to day between the same hours until it shall be completed. 
(Acts 1946, ch. 381, p. 721) 
Sec. 60. - Same-Conduct of sale; adjournments; certificates of sale. 
    If such taxes, levies, interest, costs, and charges and a due proportion of said expenses be not previously paid, the collector shall proceed to make sale of the said several parcels of real estate according to said notice so published, and sell the several parcels of real estate separately, or such portion of each as shall be sufficient to satisfy the taxes, penalties, interest, and costs thereon, including the proportionate cost of expenses of sale; and the sale may be adjourned from day to day, and proceed between the hours aforesaid, until it shall be completed. 
    The city collector, on receipt from the purchaser of the amount of purchase and also an additional sum of fifty cents as a prerequisite, shall execute to the purchaser a certificate in which he shall set forth with reasonable certainty the quantity of land so sold, the land book description of the same, in whose name it was sold, the price paid, and the aggregate amount of taxes, penalties, interest and expenses of sale against said parcel, and also the fact that the additional sum of fifty cents as a fee for the certificate was received. 
    The city collector shall not for himself, either directly or indirectly, purchase any real estate so sold. If he does, he shall forfeit to the city fifty dollars for every such purchase, and the purchase shall be absolutely void. 
(Acts 1946, ch. 381, p. 723) 
Sec. 61. - Same-Where no bids or inadequate bids received to pay taxes. 
    If at any such sale no bid shall be made for any such parcel of land, or such bid shall not be equal to the tax or assessment, with interest and charges, then the same shall be struck off to the city. As soon as practicable after the completion of such sales the city collector shall make out a list of all sales made to the city, or to others, in which the property purchased shall be described, and the aggregate amount of tax or assessment with charges and expenses specified, and shall deposit the same with the city auditor, and a copy thereof with the clerk of the corporation court, who shall record the same in a book kept for the purpose, and indexed as heretofore provided for state taxes. 
Sec. 62. - Same-Redemption. 
(a)  Where sold to city. In all cases where the city has become the purchaser of any lot at any such sale as herein provided, the original owner, or his heirs or assigns, or anyone holding a lien thereon, may, within two years from the sale, redeem the same by paying to the collector of the city the amount for which the same was sold, and such additional taxes thereon as would have accrued to the city had it not been the purchaser, with interest on such purchase money and taxes at the rate of six per centum per annum from the time the same may have or would have been paid, and all costs of sale and also the additional sum of fifty cents as a fee for the receipt therefor; and the city collector upon such payment shall give the party paying the same a receipt acknowledging receipt of taxes, interest, penalties, and costs, which receipt shall state the name of the owner in whose name the property was assessed for the year or years in which sold, the number of the lot, the feet frontage, the location, the amount of the tax due for each year, the penalty, interest and costs, and which receipt shall be acknowledged before a notary public for the purpose of providing for the satisfaction of the taxes on the delinquent land books and sale books in the clerk's office as provided in section sixty-one of this Charter. 
(b)  Where sold to others. The owner of any real estate so sold to others than the city, his heirs or assigns, or any person having a right to charge such real estate for a debt, or any person having interest in said real estate by way of reversion, remainder or otherwise, may redeem the same by payment to the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, within two years from the sale thereof, of the amount for which the same was sold (including the fifty cents fee for a certificate of purchase), and such additional taxes thereon as may have been paid by the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, with interest on the purchase money at the rate of six per centum per annum from the time the same may have been paid, or the same may be paid within the said two years, to the collector in any case in which the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, may refuse to receive the same, or may not reside or cannot be found in the city. 
(Acts 1946, ch. 381, p. 721) 
Sec. 63. - Same-Owned by infants, insane persons, etc. 
    Any infant, insane person, or person imprisoned, whose real estate may have been sold, or his heirs, may redeem the same by paying to the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, within two years after the removal of the disability, the amount for which the same was so sold, with the necessary charges incurred by the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, in obtaining the title under the sale, and such additional taxes on the estate as may have been paid by the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, and the appraised value of any improvement that may have been made thereon, with interest on the said items at the rate of six per centum per annum within two years after the removal of such disability, the purchaser, his heirs or assigns, shall, at the cost of the original owners, his heirs or assigns, convey to him or them, by deed with special warranty, the real estate sold. 
Sec. 64. - Same-Purchaser's deed. 
    The purchaser of any real estate sold for taxes and not redeemed shall, after the expiration of two years from the sale, obtain from the city auditor a deed conveying the same, wherein shall be set forth what appears in the auditor's office in relation to the sale. In no case shall a deed to any such real estate be made to any such purchaser until he has paid in full any other delinquent taxes against said real estate and until after he has given to the person in whose name the real estate so sold stood at the time of said sale and to the person to whom said real estate so sold has been conveyed by record subsequent to the time of such sale, or if any of said persons be dead, then to his or their personal representatives and heirs or devisees, and to the trustees, mortgages, and beneficiaries as shown by the records in any deed of trust or mortgage of such property, or their personal representatives, four months' written notice of his said purchase; provided, that no notice need be given to any trustee, mortgagee or beneficiary of a mortgage which has been recorded, or the lien thereon renewed, more than twenty years prior to the date of such sale, and the person entitled to redeem the real estate shall have such right of redemption at any time before the expiration of said four months, although such time extends beyond the two years mentioned herein. Such notice to any person entitled to redeem, who is a resident of Virginia, shall be served by an officer authorized to serve process without the necessity of court procedure. Where, however, one or more persons entitled to redeem are nonresidents of the state, or where diligence has been used by and on behalf of the purchaser to ascertain in what county or corporation such persons are, without effect, or where a copy of the notice has been twice delivered to the proper officer of the county or city in which he resides without being executed, or where the names of persons who may be interested in said real estate are unknown, the purchaser may file a petition in any court of record for the city, in which petition shall be set forth the facts relating to his purchase, and the person or persons, known or unknown, who are or may be entitled to redeem shall be made parties defendant to the proceeding. After the filing of the petition, on affidavit by the purchaser setting forth the reason or reasons why personal service of notice could not be had and also setting forth the last known post office address of any person entitled to redeem, or that such address is unknown, an order of publication may be entered by the court, or clerk thereof, against such parties. The object of the proceedings shall be to give notice to parties who are or may be entitled to redeem the real estate from the purchaser, and to determine whether any party claiming the right to redeem is in fact so entitled. The order of publication shall direct such parties, including unknown parties, if any there be, to appear within four months after due publication thereof and do what is necessary to protect their interests. It shall be published once a week for four successive weeks in some newspaper published in the city, and shall be posted by the clerk at the front door of the courthouse wherein the court is held, on or before the first day of the next term of court. The clerk shall also mail a copy thereof to each party whose address is stated in said affidavit directed to the post office address as stated therein, and file an affidavit stating the fact of such publication, posting and mailing of the papers in the proceeding. 
    When such order shall have been published as heretofore provided, if the defendants against whom it is published shall not appear within four months after the completion of the expiration of the four weeks required for the completion of such publication, the proceeding may be tried or heard as to them, and no other publication or notice shall thereafter be required. Any party having the right to redeem and who desires so to do may, within the time limit hereinbefore provided, file an answer to said petition setting forth the facts on which his right to redeem is based. If on the trial the court adjudicates that such person is entitled to redeem, an order shall be entered providing for such redemption on the payment to the purchaser of the amount set forth in section sixty-two (b) hereof, and, in addition, the costs of the proceeding. In the event, however, that no party shall appear, or in the event that any party appears and upon trial the court adjudicates that such party is not entitled to redeem, the court shall enter an order directing the auditor to convey the property to the purchaser. An appeal shall lie from the judgment of said court to the Supreme Court of Appeals in the same manner as provided by law for appeals in civil cases. 
    When any purchaser has assigned the benefit of his purchase, the deed may, with his assent, evidenced by his joining therein, or by writing annexed thereto, be executed to his assignee. If the purchaser shall have died, his heirs or assigns may move the corporation court of said city to order the auditor to execute a deed to such heirs or assigns. Such deed shall be executed in the name of the city by the auditor, under the seal attested by the treasurer, and shall be with special warranty. For each deed the auditor shall be paid by the purchaser one dollar. 
(Acts 1946, ch. 381, p. 721) 
Sec. 64-a. - Same-When section 64 applicable. 
    The provisions of section 64, as amended, shall apply to lands sold for taxes whether the same were purchased prior or subsequent to the enactment of the section, as amended; but this section shall not operate to defeat any person's right of redemption provided by law. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 623, p. 1072) 
Sec. 65. - Same-When title vests in purchaser generally. 
    When the purchaser of any real estate sold for taxes, his heirs or assigns, shall have obtained a deed therefore, within sixty days from the date of such deed shall have caused the same to be recorded, a fee simple estate shall stand vested in the grantee in such deed at the commencement of the year for which the said taxes were assessed, subject to be defeated only by proof that the taxes for which said real estate was sold were not chargeable thereon, or that the taxes properly chargeable on such real estate have been paid. And if it be alleged that the taxes, for the nonpayment of which sale was made, were not in arrears, the party making such allegations must establish the truth thereof by proving that the taxes were paid; but nothing in this section shall be construed to affect or impair the lien of the city on the real estate and on each and every interest therein, or affect, limit or impair the right of the city, when it becomes a purchaser of real estate under the next succeeding section. 
Sec. 66. - Same-When title vests in city as purchaser; certificate of sale. 
    In case that any real estate struck off to the city as hereinbefore provided, shall not be redeemed within the time specified, the auditor shall, within sixty days after the expiration of two years from the sale, cause to be recorded in the clerk's office of the corporation court, a certificate of sale with his oath that the same has not been redeemed, and thereupon the said corporation, or its assignee, shall acquire an absolute title in fee to such real estate, and every interest therein for life, in reversion, in remainder and otherwise, subject to be defeated only by proof that the taxes for which said real estate was sold were not properly chargeable thereon, or that the taxes properly chargeable thereon had been paid at the time of the execution of such certificate. The said certificate shall be recorded in the said clerk's office in a record book known as "deed book, recording conveyances to city of lands sold for delinquent taxes", for recording which certificate the clerk shall be entitled to a fee of ten cents, payable out of the city treasury. The city council may impose penalties upon its officers for their failure to comply with the requirements of this section. The said certificate, or the record thereof, or a certified copy thereof, shall, in all courts and other places, be evidence of the facts therein stated; provided, however, that the failure to obtain or record such certificates shall not invalidate the lien of the city for all taxes assessed against such real estate, but the city may, at any time, elect to enforce its lien for taxes in a court of equity and release its right as purchaser, or to become a purchaser of such real estate. 
Sec. 67. - Same-Procedure when property redeemed. 
    When lands and lots returned delinquent for taxes are sold for taxes and have been redeemed as hereinbefore provided, and a receipt of the city collector or a receipt of the purchaser at a tax sale showing that all taxes, costs or other expenses to which he is entitled upon such redemption, duly assigned by him and acknowledged as a deed is required to be acknowledged, has been delivered to the clerk of the corporation court, the clerk shall endorse the satisfaction of such payment upon the delinquent land book opposite the entry of such tract or lot for the year or years for which it was redeemed, or in case the property has been purchased, on the delinquent sales book for the year or years for which it was sold to the purchaser. The clerk shall receive a fee of twenty-five cents to be paid by the person for whose benefit the endorsement was made for endorsing the fact of redemption or payment on delinquent land book or sales book. 
CHAPTER 9. - STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES: CLAIMS AGAINST CITY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Parks, public places, Ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 35. 

Sec. 68. - Private property not to be taken for public purpose without just compensation. 
    The city shall not take or use any private property for streets or any other public purpose without making just compensation for the same, but where the city cannot obtain title to ground necessary for its purpose, it may proceed to condemn the same in the mode prescribed by law. 
Sec. 68-a. - Limited-access streets. 
(a)  A limited-access street is defined as a street especially designed for through traffic over which abutters have no easement or right of light, air, or access or by reason of the fact that their property abuts upon such limited-access street. 
(b)  The city shall have the same power and authority with respect to the planning, designation, acquisition, opening, construction, reconstruction, improvement, maintenance, discontinuance, and regulation of the use of limited-access streets; the designation of existing streets as limited-access streets, and the extinguishment of easements in connection therewith; the regulation and restrictions of access to such streets; the construction of service roads in connection therewith; and all other authority with respect to such streets, and incidental thereto as the state highway commission has under the provisions of chapter seventy-eight of the Acts of the General Assembly, nineteen hundred forty-two, approved February twenty-sixth, nineteen hundred forty-two, or as said state highway commission may hereafter be granted, by amendment to said act or otherwise. 
(Acts 1948, ch. 130, p. 300) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 33.1-57 et seq. 
Sec. 69. - Courts to enter no orders of injunction staying power of city over streets and railroads except as provided herein. 
    No order shall be made and no injunction shall be granted by any judge or court of this Commonwealth to stay the proceedings of the city in the exercise of any power herein granted it over its streets and railways, unless it be manifest that it is exceeding its powers and that the interposition of the court is necessary to prevent injury which cannot be adequately compensated in damages. 
Sec. 70. - Removal of encroachments upon streets. 
    In every case where there has been or shall be encroachments upon a street by a fence, building or otherwise, the judge of the municipal court may require the owner to remove the same. If such removal shall not be made within the time ordered, the judge of the municipal court may impose a penalty to be fixed by the council for each day which it is allowed to continue thereafter, and may cause the encroachment to be removed at the risk and cost of the owner, although the right to impose such penalty or require the removal of such encroachment involves the validity of a bona fide title to real estate. 
Sec. 71. - Dedication of streets to public after ten years' use. 
    Wherever any ground shall have been opened to and used by the public as a street for ten years it shall be considered as dedicated to the public, and the city shall have the same authority and jurisdiction over and right and interest therein as it has over other streets. 
Sec. 72. - Council to approve laying out of streets and alleys. 
    No property within the territorial limits of the city shall be laid out by the owner thereof with streets and alleys therein except upon a plan to be first approved by the council. Any street or alley reserved in the division or subdivision into lots of any portion of the territory within the corporate limits of the city by a plan or plat of record shall be deemed and held to be dedicated to the public use and the council shall have authority, upon the petition of any person interested therein, to open any such street or alley or any portion of the same. No agreement between or release of interest by the persons owning the lands immediately contiguous to any such alley or street, whether the same has been opened or used by the public or not, shall avail or operate to abolish said alley or street so as to divest the interest of the public therein or the authority of the council over the same; provided, however, that the right may be reserved by the owner of any subdivision and set forth on said plat to modify said plat by abolishing any block with the streets or alleys in said block, provided no lot has been sold in said block; and, provided, further, that so such change shall be made which shall cut off the owner of any other property from convenient access to the main avenues of the city; and provided, further, that where said plat has been submitted for approval by the council before its recordation, so such modification shall be allowed without the approval of the council. 
Sec. 73. - Action against city for negligence in construction and maintenance of streets, etc., where city and others are jointly liable. 
(a)  In any action against the city to recover damages against it for any negligence in the construction or maintenance of its streets, alleys, lanes, parks, public places, sewers, reservoirs or water mains, where any person or corporation is liable with the city for such negligence, every such person or corporation shall be jointed as defendant with the city in any action brought to recover damages for such negligence, and where there is judgment or verdict against the city, as well as the other defendant, it shall be ascertained by the court or jury which the defendants is primarily liable for the damages assessed. 
(b)  If it be ascertained by the judgment of the court that some person or corporation other than the city is primarily liable, there shall be a stay of execution against the city until execution against such person or persons or other corporation or corporations shall have been returned without realizing the full amount of such judgment. 
(c)  If the city, where not primarily liable, shall pay the said judgment, in whole or in part, the plaintiff shall, to the extent that said judgment is paid by the city, assign the said judgment to the city without recourse on the plaintiff, and the said city shall be entitled to have execution issued for its benefit against the other defendant or defendants who have been ascertained to be primarily liable, or may institute any suit in equity to enforce the said judgment, or an action at law, or scire facias to revive or enforce said judgment. 
Secs. 74 and 75. - [Reserved.] 
    (Through error no sections of the Charter were assigned these numbers.) 
Sec. 76. - Claims against city for damages for negligence. 
    No action shall be maintained against the same city for damages for any injury to any person or property alleged to have been sustained by reason of the negligence of the city or of any officer, agent, or employee thereof, unless a written statement verified by the oath of the claimant, his agent or attorney, or the personal representative of any decedent whose death is the result of the alleged negligence of the city, its officers, agents or employees, of the nature of the claim and the time and place at which the injury is alleged to have occurred or to have been received, shall have been filed with the city attorney of said city within six months after such cause of action shall have accrued. And no officers, agents or employees of the city shall have authority to waive such conditions precedent or any of them. 
CHAPTER 10. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 77. - Repealing clause; when Charter takes effect. 
    All Acts and parts of Acts inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed; and all Acts and parts of Acts in any way concerning the City of Lynchburg and the rights of the people thereof, or any of them, not inconsistent with this Act, shall be in full force, to all intents and purposes, as if this Act had never been passed. 
    An emergency existing, this Act shall be in force from its passage. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How designated, cited. 
    The chapters, articles, divisions and sections embraced in this Code of Ordinances shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia," and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "Lynchburg City Code." 
(Code 1959, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances, § 38-a. 
State Law reference- Codification of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.137.3. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction, definitions. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of this city, the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed, unless such construction or definition would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council, be repugnant to the context of the provisions or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Generally. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
    City. The City of Lynchburg in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    City council. The governing body of the city. 
    Code. This Code of Ordinances as designated and cited in section 1-1 above. 
    Commonwealth. The word "commonwealth" shall mean the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Computation of time. [1] The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears in this Code requiring an officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize such officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section expressly designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males. 
    In the city. The words "in the city" or "in this city" mean and include any territory within the corporate limits of this city and the police jurisdiction thereof, and any other territory over which regulatory power has been conferred on the city by general or special act, except as otherwise specified. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise specifically declared. 
    Law. Any statute, ordinance or regulation promulgated by the United States, the state, the county, the city or any agencies thereof, as well as the rules and regulations of other bodies politic that may be appropriate. 
    Misdemeanor. Any offense not punishable by death or confinement in the penitentiary. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Officials, employees, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city by title only, i.e., "mayor," "clerk," "manager," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of this city. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the context of the provision requires it. Owner. The word "owner" shall, when applied to a building or land, include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include and be applied to a firm, partnership, association, corporation, organization, club, society, group acting as a unit, or body politic and corporate, as well as to an individual. 
    Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include money, goods, chattels, evidences of debt, things in action, and any other species of property, except real property. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real, personal and mixed property. 
    Public place. Any public way, park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto; any public lake or stream; and any place or business open to the use of the public in general, open to public view or to which the public has access. 
    Public way. Any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare. 
    Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Reasonable time. In all cases where any section of this Code or city ordinance shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice. 
    Residence. The place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    Roadway. That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is discretionary. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write, when his name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a person who writes his own name as witness. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Street. The word "street" shall mean and include public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges, public ways and approaches thereto and other public thoroughfares in the city devoted to public use. 
    Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future as well as the past or present. 
    Writing, written. The words "writing" and "written" shall include typewriting, printing on paper and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1959, § 1-2; Ord. of 9-30-75, § 1) 
State Law reference- Rules of construction, Code of Virginia, §§ 1-13-1-13.33. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Computation of time, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.3. 

Sec. 1-3. - When section 1-2 does not apply. 
    The rules of construction and definitions set forth in section 1-2 shall not be applied to any section of this Code or city ordinance which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction or definition, or when the subject matter or context of such provisions or ordinances may be repugnant thereto. 
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the 1959 Code, and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the 1959 Code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1959, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Parenthetical and reference matter. 
    The matter in parentheses at the ends of sections is for information only and is not a part of the Code. Citations to the 1959 Code of the city (Code 1959) and to later ordinances indicate only the source of such section and the text may or may not be changed by this Code. Reference matter not in parentheses is for information only and is not a part of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1959, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9. 
Sec. 1-7. - Incorporation by reference. 
    All standard codes, rules, regulations and other subject matter herein or hereafter properly incorporated by reference, together with subsequent amendments thereto, pursuant to state law, and future incorporations by reference shall be kept and preserved in the office of the clerk of council. Whenever the City Code references a section in the Code of Virginia and such section number is changed by amendment to or recodification of the Code of Virginia, the reference in the City Code shall automatically incorporate and refer to the new section number in the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. O-08-148, 12-9-08) 
Sec. 1-8. - Reference to code, conflicts. 
    In addition to the rules of construction and definitions specified in this chapter, the following rules shall be observed in the construction of this Code: 
(a)  All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(b)  If the provisions of different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter. 
(c)  If conflicting provisions be found in different sections of the same chapter the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall prevail unless such construction would be inconsistent with the meaning of such chapter. 
Sec. 1-9. - Police power extended to city property. 
    The police power of the city is hereby extended to include all lands or property owned or leased by the city or any agency of the city and the general ordinances of the city shall be applicable on such property. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering code. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby; provided, that supplementation of this Code by authorized persons shall be permitted. 
Sec. 1-11. - Classification of misdemeanor criminal offenses. 
    Misdemeanors are classified, for the purposes of punishment and sentencing, into four classes: 
(a)  Class 1 misdemeanor; 
(b)  Class 2 misdemeanor; 
(c)  Class 3 misdemeanor; 
(d)  Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 1-5.2; Ord. of 9-30-75, eff. 10-1-75) 
Sec. 1-12. - Punishment for conviction of misdemeanor. 
    The authorized punishments for conviction of a misdemeanor are: 
(a)  For class 1 misdemeanors, confinement in jail for not more than 12 months and a fine of not more than $2,500.00, either or both; 
(b)  For class 2 misdemeanors, confinement in jail for not more than six months and a fine of not more than $1,000.00, either or both; 
(c)  For class 3 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than $500.00; 
(d)  For class 4 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than $250.00. 
(Code 1959, § 1-5.3, Ord. of 9-30-75, eff. 10-1-75; Ord. No. O-90-211, 7-10-90; Ord. No. O-91-058, 3-26-91) 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished as a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day any violation of this Code or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1959, § 1-6; Ord. of 9-30-75, eff. 10-1-75) 
Sec. 1-14. - Unclassified offenses; how punished. 
    Offenses defined in this Code, for which punishment is prescribed without specification as to the class of the offense, shall be punished according to the punishment prescribed in the section or sections thus defining the offense. 
(Code 1959, § 1-6.1; Ord. of 9-30-75, eff. 10-1-75) 
Charter reference- General penalty, § 38(34). 
Sec. 1-15. - Penalty not exclusive. 
    The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this Code shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of any license, franchise or permit issued or granted under the provisions of this Code. 
    In the event any violation of this Code is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the city in addition to the imposition of a fine or imprisonment. 
Sec. 1-16. - Severability of parts of code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity, unenforceability or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-17. - Effect of repeals. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed § 1-18. 
Sec. 1-19. - Local time. 
    The mean local time of the meridian 75 degrees west of Greenwich, known and designated as the "Eastern Standard Time," shall be the local time of the city; provided, however, during such portions of the year that federal law so dictates, local time shall be advanced one hour in compliance with "Eastern Daylight Saving Time." 
(Code 1959, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-20. - Geographic coordinates. 
U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey Office, 
Washington, Oct. 7th, 1884. 
Mr. Thomas D. Davis, Lynchburg, Va.: 
    Sir:-At the request of Assistant B. A. Colonna, I enclose you herewith a memorandum of the geographical position of the Court House, Lynchburg, Va. I am, 
Very respectfully, 
C. O. Boutelle, 
Assistant in Charge of Office. 
Computing Division C. and G. Survey, 
October 7th, 1884. 
    The geographical position of the Lynchburg Court House, Va., as determined by the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, is as follows: 
Latitude, 37° 24' 49.1". 
Longitude, 79° 08' 40.5". 
    Hence on railroad or 75th meridian time the clocks at Lynchburg must be kept in advance of local time 16m. 34.7s. 
Charles A. Schott, Assistant. 
(Code 1959, § 1-9) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Government and administration of city, § 4. 
Cross reference- Elections, Ch. 14; public schools, Ch. 32. 
State Law reference- Cities and towns, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 2-1. - Corporate seal. 
    The corporate seal of the city shall be a design within a circle, one and three-quarter inches in diameter, representing a standing female figure, with a pair of scales in one hand and a cornucopia in the other, and a railway train in the background; in the exergue this inscription, "CORPORATION OF LYNCHBURG, VIRGINIA." No other seal shall be used for the city, and no paper issued by municipal authority, which requires the seal of the city, shall be valid unless the seal prescribed above shall be duly affixed thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 1-8) 
Cross reference- Custodian of seal, § 2-124. 
Secs. 2-2-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Council generally, §§ 4-16, 37-38-e. 
Cross reference- City manager, § 2-96 et seq.; city attorney, § 2-106 et seq.; clerk of council, § 2-122. 

Sec. 2-16. - How composed; how and when elected; term of office. 
(a)  The council of the city shall consist of one body, composed of seven citizens, who are electors, over 21 years of age, to be elected from the city at large, at the regular municipal election in May, who shall enter upon their duties September first following their election. At the municipal election to be held June 1932, three members shall be elected for a term of four years, and at the election held in June 1934, four members shall be elected for a term of four years, and thereafter biennially, there shall be elected alternately three or four members as the case may be, for a term of four years. 
(b)  On and after July 1, 1976, the council shall consist of seven members of whom four shall be elected from wards and three of whom shall be elected at large as hereinafter provided. The terms of councilmen elected in 1976 and thereafter shall begin July 1, succeeding their election. 
(c)  At the election to be held in May 1976, successors to four councilmen whose terms expire June 30, 1976, shall be elected for a term of four years. The four councilmen shall be elected from and be registered voters in the wards established under chapter 14 of this Code with one councilman to be elected from each ward. At the same election to be held in May 1976, three successors to the councilmen whose terms expire in such year shall be chosen by election at large in the city to serve for terms of two years. 
(d)  After May 1976, successors to the councilmen elected under paragraph (c) hereof shall be elected for a term of four years by ward or at large, as the case may be, depending on whether the respective office was filled by election at large or by ward. 
(e)  Vacancies occurring in the membership of the council shall be filled by the council within 30 days for a term to expire when the qualified voters of the city at large or the ward in which the vacancy occurred, as the case may be, have elected a successor at the next ensuing general election for councilmen and the person so chosen has duly qualified. If the vacancy occurs in a ward, the successor so chosen shall be a registered voter of that ward. All vacancies filled by the council shall be by majority of the remaining members. 
(Code 1959, § 2-10; Ord. of 2-10-76) 
Sec. 2-16.1. - Salaries of members of council. 
    Present members of council shall be paid their current salary until the first of July 2008, thereafter the salary of each member of council shall be $10,000.00 per annum, except that member who shall be elected mayor, whose salary shall be $12,000.00 per annum, payable out of the treasury of the City of Lynchburg in bi-weekly installments. 
(Ord. No. O-84-146, § 1, 6-12-84, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-90-142, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-96-201, 7-9-96; Ord. No. O-03-193, 12-16-03; Ord. No. O-07-157, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 2-17. - Fine of members. 
    Fines imposed under Section 37 of the Charter shall be certified to the judge of the general district court, and collected in the same manner as fines imposed by the judge of the municipal court. 
(Code 1959, § 2-11) 
Secs. 2-18-2-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-18-2-23. 
Sec. 2-24. - Rules of procedure. 
    From time to time the city council may adopt rules of procedure to help council conduct its business in an efficient and orderly manner. Once rules of procedure have been adopted by council they shall remain in force and effect until amended or repealed. At its biennial organizational meeting, city council will review its rules of procedure and decide if any changes thereto are needed. Any rules of procedure adopted by council are for the benefit and convenience of council and do not create substantive rights for third parties or participants in proceedings before council. The failure of city council to strictly comply with its rules of procedure shall not invalidate any action of council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-18; Ord. No. O-08-148, 12-9-08) 
Secs. 2-25-2-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-2008, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-25-2-28. 
ARTICLE III. - LEGISLATION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Keeping of ordinances, § 2-125; distribution of copies, § 2-126. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-41. - Passage and amendment of ordinances. 
    No ordinance shall be passed, amended or repealed, except by ordinance regularly introduced and passed, nor shall any section of an ordinance be amended, unless the whole section be reordained, and all ordinances, amendments or resolutions which are duly passed shall bear the certificate of the clerk of council, or the deputy clerk of council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-23) 
Sec. 2-42. - Ordinances appropriating money and imposing taxes. 
(a)  Every ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding $100.00, imposing or releasing taxes, or authorizing the borrowing of money, or donating any property of the city, or increasing any salary or pay of any employee, where the value of such property is $100.00 or more, or the aggregate of such increase of salary is $100.00 or more for any one year, shall require for its passage an affirmative vote of a majority of the members elected to council. 
(b)  No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding the sum of $1,000.00, imposing taxes or authorizing the borrowing of money, shall be passed on the same day on which it was introduced, nor be valid unless at least three days intervene between its first introduction and final passage. 
(c)  No ordinance or resolution looking to the appropriation of money, the imposition of taxes or assessments or the contracting of any debt or obligation on behalf of the city, or which creates, continues or revives any appropriation of money or property, or releases or discharges or commutes any claim or demand of the city, shall be passed except by a recorded affirmative vote of a majority of the whole number of members elected to council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-24) 
Charter reference- General restriction, § 10. 
Sec. 2-43. - Ordinances appropriating money for highways outside city. 
    No ordinance or resolution appropriating money for the purpose of improving highways and bridges located outside of the city shall be passed except by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to council, and no such construction or other work shall be done at the expense of the city, until plans and specifications and the estimated cost thereof have been submitted to and approved by the council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-25) 
Charter reference- Authority to aid in construction of roads leading into city, § 38(37). 
Sec. 2-44. - Ordinances appropriating money in excess of annual appropriation. 
    No money shall be expended for any department of the city government beyond the amount dedicated to such department in the general appropriation ordinance for that fiscal year, unless such expenditure be authorized by the votes of five-sevenths of all the members elected to the council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-45. - Ordinances granting aid to various associations. 
    No ordinance or resolution granting aid to military companies maintained within the city, to associations for the advancement of agricultural and mechanical arts, to scientific, literary, educational or benevolent organizations or institutions, or to public libraries located in or near the city, by appropriations for such purposes, or by exemption from municipal taxation, or from charge for the use of water or light furnished by the city, or by the extension of light, sewer or water facilities, either with or without charge, beyond the city limits, shall be passed except by the vote of five-sevenths of all the members elected to council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-27) 
Sec. 2-46. - Procedure with respect to sale of city-owned real estate. 
(a)  No resolution or other authorization to sell any real estate of value exceeding $1,000.00 owned by the city shall be passed on the same day on which it was introduced, nor shall such resolution or other authorization be valid unless at least three days intervene between its introduction and final passage. 
(b)  Where the city-owned real estate proposed to be sold consists of streets, parks, bridges, public places or the waterworks, the following additional requirements shall be necessary: 
(1)  The sale shall be authorized by resolution or ordinance; and, 
(2)  Such resolution or ordinance shall receive an affirmative vote of three-fourths of all members elected to council as provided in Article VII, Section 9, of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(Code 1959, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-47. - Procedure for appointments to board and commissions. 
(a)  All appointments to the city's boards and commissions shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of all of the members elected or appointed to city council. 
(b)  This section of the City Code shall not be repealed or amended except by an affirmative vote of a majority of all of the members elected or appointed to city council. 
(Ord. No. O-07-120, 9-11-07) 
Secs. 2-48-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS TO CODE 

Sec. 2-61. - Effect. 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 2-62. - Manner. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
Sec. 2-63. - Language. 
    Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That Section of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, is hereby amended to read as follows:... ." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
Sec. 2-64. - New material. 
(a)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be), to be numbered, which reads as follows:... ." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  In lieu of subsection (a) hereof, when the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the city council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
Sec. 2-65. - Repeal. 
    All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 2-66. - Subject to general penalty. 
    In case of the amendment by the city council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-13 of this Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Sec. 2-67. - Supplementation of code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division" etc., as the case may be, or to "sections .... to ...." (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Secs. 2-68-2-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Election of certain officers by council, § 16. 
State Law reference- Officers generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-38 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-79. - Terms of office; vacancies. 
    Unless otherwise specially provided, every municipal officer elected by the council shall hold his office at the pleasure of the council; provided, however, that the tenure of any office which the city has the right to abolish shall be subject to such right. 
(Code 1959, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-80. - Compensation. 
    City officers and employees, whether appointed or elected by the city council or appointed by the city manager, shall be paid such salaries or wages as are set out by the council, and in such installments as approved by council; provided, however, that no such compensation shall be paid to any officer or employee who is in arrears to the city, or is in default in rendering any account or report required of them. 
(Code 1959, § 2-2) 
Charter reference- Salaries of councilmen, § 7; of municipal court judge, § 34. 
Sec. 2-81. - Official bonds. 
(a)  The director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to procure blanket corporate surety bonds for $5,000.00 to cover all officers and employees of the city in such form as may be satisfactory to the city attorney, for the faithful performance of their respective duties by all city officers and employees and to indemnify the city against any and all pecuniary loss sustained as the result of any act or acts of any of said officers and employees. 
(b)  The director of finance is hereby further authorized and directed to procure corporate suretyship bonds upon the respective positions hereinafter referred to in either the form of separate bonds or an additional coverage incorporated in the blanket coverage authorized in paragraph (a) above of this section, in amounts set opposite the respective positions for the faithful discharge of the holders of the respective positions and their respective deputies, assistants and other subordinates, of the duties imposed on the holders of such positions by the Charter of the city and all ordinances passed in pursuance thereof, and to indemnify the city against any and all pecuniary loss sustained as a result of any act or acts of any of said officers and employees, which positions and the amounts of the respective bonds thereon are as follows: 
(1)  City manager ..... $ 10,000.00 
(2)  Director of finance ..... 100,000.00 
(3)  City collector ..... 25,000.00 
(4)  Deputy city collector ..... 5,000.00 
(5)  Director of management and budget ..... 20,000.00 
(c)  The premium on all bonds given hereunder shall be paid by the city and all such bonds shall be filed with the clerk of the circuit court of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 2-3; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81) 
Charter reference- Bonds of officers, employees, § § 22, 23. 
State Law reference- Bonds of certain officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-41 et seq. 
Sec. 2-82. - Appointment of substitute. 
    If any officer elected by the council be at any time unable, by reason of sickness or other unavoidable cause, to discharge the duties of his office, the council may appoint a substitute to act for him during such inability. Nothing herein shall be construed to affect the right of the council to remove any officer elected by it. 
(Code 1959, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-83. - Certain officers and employees to live within the city. 
(a)  The city manager and the directors of departments shall reside within the city during their continuance in office or employment. The appointing authority, however, may permit an appointee a reasonable time after employment within which to establish residence within the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, directors of departments shall include the city assessor, the city attorney, the clerk of council, the city collector and the director of management and budget. 
(Code 1959, § 2-4.1; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81) 
Sec. 2-84. - Oaths of office. 
    Every person elected or appointed to any office in the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take the oath of office prescribed by the laws of the state to be taken by persons holding offices under the state. Such oath shall be taken before any person duly qualified to administer it under the laws of the state, and his certificate that such oath has been taken shall be filed with the clerk of the council, who shall enter the same upon the minutes to be kept of the proceedings of the meetings of the council. If any person appointed or elected to any office in said city neglects to take such oath for 30 days after receiving notice of his election or appointment, his office shall be deemed vacant. 
(Code 1959, § 2-5) 
Charter reference- Oaths of office, § 20. 
State Law reference- Oaths of office, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-38. 
Sec. 2-85. - Removal. 
    For malfeasance, misfeasance, neglect of duty, incapacity or any other good cause, the council may remove from office any officer elected or appointed by it. 
(Code 1959, § 2-6) 
Sec. 2-86. - Proceedings against defaulting officers. 
    In cases of default on the part of any officer whose duty it is to collect taxes, assessments, water rents, water rates and assessments, or any other sums due the city, proceedings against such officer and his sureties may be either by regular suit at law on his official bond, or by motion in the circuit or general district court of the city for judgment and award of execution against him and his sureties upon such bond for the amount of such default, with interest thereon and such penalties as, under the ordinances, may have attached thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-87. - Settlement of disputes between officers. 
    In case of any dispute as to duties or procedure between officers appointed or elected by the council, or between officers appointed or elected by the council and those appointed by the city manager, the city manager shall resolve such disputes; provided, however, that any officer appointed or elected by the council shall have the right of appeal to the council from the decision of the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 2-8) 
Sec. 2-88. - City property; care and surrender. 
    Every officer of the city, when entering upon his duties, shall be responsible for the safekeeping of such personal property as may be furnished his office by the city, and, at the expiration of his term of office, shall surrender the same to the city in as good condition as received by him, save reasonable wear and tear. The director of finance shall have the authority at any time he deems necessary to call upon the officers for a detailed inventory of all city personal property under their control. 
(Code 1959, § 2-9; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81) 
Sec. 2-89. - Authority to obtain criminal history record information. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of Sections 15.2-1505.1 and 19.2-389 of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, in the conduct of investigations of applicants for public employment with the city, permits or licenses, or for public employment with the Lynchburg school system, whenever, in the interest of the public welfare or safety, it is necessary to determine if the past criminal conduct of a person would be compatible with the nature of the employment, permit or license under consideration, the city manager or the superintendent of schools or their designees shall be authorized to request the chief of police or other appropriate person to obtain the criminal history records of such applicant from the Virginia Criminal Records Exchange, the Federal Bureau of Investigation or other appropriate sources, and the chief of police or other appropriate person shall be authorized to obtain and disseminate such criminal history record to the city manager or the superintendent of schools or their designees. If an applicant is denied employment because of information appearing in his criminal history record, the applicant shall be notified that information from his criminal history record contributed to such denial. 
(b)  The city is authorized to obtain the criminal history records from the Virginia Criminal Records Exchange, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the registry maintained by the Department of Social Services of founded complaints of child abuse and neglect, or other appropriate sources, for applicants for positions on the Lynchburg School Board and the Lynchburg Youth Services Citizens Board. 
(Ord. No. O-91-228, 9-24-91; Ord. No. O-11-089, 7-12-11; Ord. No. O-18-023 , § 1, 4-10-18) 
Secs. 2-90-2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- City manager generally, §§ 13-14-a. 
Cross reference- City manager's bond, § 2-81; department of human services, § 2-141 et seq.; department of parks and recreation, § 2-248 et seq.; department of personnel and employee development, § 2-296 et seq.; department of finance, § 2-324 et seq.; fire department, § 19-16 et seq.; authority relative to traffic, § 25-37. 

Sec. 2-96. - Duties and powers of city manager. 
    The city manager shall be responsible for the administration of the business of the city. In addition to any other powers prescribed by law, the City Charter or the City Code, the manager shall have the following authority: 
(a)  Except as may be otherwise provided, the manager or his designee shall have the power to make and to execute all agreements, contracts and documents on behalf of the city. 
(b)  To establish the city's organizational structure by creating such city departments, divisions and administrative units as the manager determines are needed for the efficient operation of the city. Such departments, divisions and administrative units shall have the duties and functions assigned to them by the manager. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to appoint, to supervise and to discipline or remove all heads or directors of departments and all subordinate officials and employees of the city as the council determines are necessary for the proper administration of the affairs of the city, except those in the legal department, the office of the internal auditor, and the clerk and other attendants to the council. 
(d)  During the absence or incapacity of the city manager, the deputy city manager or other designee of the city manager, shall have the authority to carry out the duties and exercise the powers of the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 2-29; Ord. of 4-13-76; Ord. No. O-08-148, 12-9-08) 
Secs. 2-97-2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to appoint city attorney, § 16. 
Cross reference- City Council, § 2-16 et seq. 

Sec. 2-106. - Qualifications. 
    The person elected to serve as city attorney shall have been admitted to practice law in the courts of the state. 
(Code 1959, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-107. - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city attorney to take the management, charge and control of all law business of the city, and to be, in regard to all municipal affairs, the legal adviser of the council, city manager, or any of the several officers and departments of the city government, and when requested by the council, city council member or by any department of the city government, he shall furnish written or verbal opinions upon subjects involving questions of law in which the city is interested. 
(b)  It shall be his duty to draft all bonds, deeds, obligations, contracts, leases, conveyances, agreements and other legal instruments of whatsoever nature, which may be required of him by any ordinance or order of the council, or which, by law, usage or agreement, the city is to bear the expense of drawing. It shall also be his duty to commence and prosecute all actions and suits to be brought by the city before any tribunal in this commonwealth, and also to appear, defend and advocate the rights and interests of the city, or any officers of the city, in any suit or prosecution for any act, in the discharge of his official duties, wherein any estate, right, privilege, ordinances or acts of the city government may be brought in question. In every prosecution for a breach of a city ordinance he shall appear for the prosecution when the case shall come into the general district court; and he shall perform such other duties as are or may be required of him for the city by any ordinance or resolution of the council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-33(a)) 
Sec. 2-108. - Assistant-Authorized. 
    The council may also elect one or more assistants to the attorney, by such title of office as the council may direct, who shall have the same qualifications as the city attorney. 
(Code 1959, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-109. - Same-Duties. 
    The assistants to the city attorney shall perform such of the duties of the city attorney as may be delegated to them by the city attorney. They shall have the same authority to represent the city in all matters as the city attorney, and any and all duties imposed by this division or otherwise upon the city attorney may be performed by his assistants. 
(Code 1959, § 2-33(b)) 
Sec. 2-110. - Annual reports. 
    The city attorney shall make an annual report to the council on or before September first in each year, giving a condensed statement of the business done in his office for the city in the fiscal year immediately preceding such report with a list of all deeds and contracts prepared, to which the city was a party, of all opinions given upon city business, of all suits ending during such year and those pending at the date of such report; and he shall make such suggestions touching the interests of the city in connection with his official duties as he may deem pertinent. 
(Code 1959, § 2-34) 
Secs. 2-111-2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CLERK OF COUNCIL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- City council, § 2-16 et seq. 

Sec. 2-121. - Deputies authorized. 
    The council may elect one or more deputies to the clerk of council, by such title of office as the council may direct. 
Sec. 2-122. - Duties generally. 
    The clerk of council, or his deputies, shall attend every meeting of the council and keep, in a book provided for that purpose, an accurate record of its proceedings. The clerk of council shall file and preserve all written opinions furnished by the city attorney to the council; also a copy of every contract entered into by the city, and such other papers and books as may come into the hands of the clerk. The clerk of council shall also arrange for and supervise the printing of all official reports and ordinances requiring publication, serve all notices required to be served and generally perform all such duties as properly appertain to the office, or may hereafter be assigned. 
(Code 1959, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-123. - Custodian of papers. 
    The clerk of council shall have the custody of deeds, contracts, plats, surveys and other muniments of title belonging to the city, including all such papers the custody of which is not otherwise provided for by the council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-124. - Custodian of seal. 
    The clerk of council shall be the custodian of the seal of the city, and shall affix it to any papers to which, by ordinance or resolution of the council, or order of the city manager, may require the seal of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 2-35) 
Cross reference- City seal, § 2-1. 
Sec. 2-125. - Keeping of ordinance book and other documents, books and papers. 
    The clerk of council shall keep a book in which shall be recorded all ordinances and resolutions, or amendments thereto, which book shall be indexed and open to public inspection. Except as otherwise provided by the state freedom of information act, other documents, books or papers in the possession of the clerk which may affect the interests of the city shall not, without special order of the council be exhibited, nor copies thereof furnished to other persons than city officials entitled thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-126. - Copies of ordinances to city manager. 
    The clerk of council shall, after each session of the council, furnish to the city manager a copy of every ordinance or resolution having the effect of an ordinance, passed by the council; provided, that copies of all ordinances making appropriations or authorizing the payment of money shall be furnished to the director of finance. 
(Code 1959, § 2-37; Ord. No. O-08-148, 12-9-08) 
Sec. 2-127. - Notice of action on petitions, communications. 
    The clerk of council shall notify persons who have presented petitions or communications to the council of the final action of that body in regard thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 2-37; Ord. No. O-08-148, 12-9-08) 
Sec. 2-128. - Notice of election to office. 
    The clerk of council shall notify all persons elected to any office by the council of such election. 
(Code 1959, § 2-37) 
DIVISION 5. - INTERNAL AUDITOR AND AUDIT COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-129. - Established. 
    The audit committee and the office of internal auditor are hereby established and shall have the duties as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.1. - Appointment of internal audit director. 
    An internal audit director shall be selected by the audit committee and ratified by a majority vote of the city council. The auditor shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and shall report administratively to the city manager. The director may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.2. - Qualifications. 
(a)  The director shall be knowledgeable in performance and financial auditing, public administration, and government financial and fiscal practices. 
(b)  The director shall be a certified internal auditor (CIA), certified public accountant (CPA) or have an advanced degree in a relevant field with at least five years experience in the field of government auditing, evaluation or analysis. He/she shall have a bachelors degree in accounting, business administration, public administration or a related field. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.3. - Standards. 
    The director and the internal audit staff shall adhere to applicable standards issued by the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) and the United States General Accounting Office (GAO) in conducting its work and shall be considered independent as defined by those standards. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-02-145, 8-13-02; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.4. - Assistants and employees. 
(a)  The office shall be provided a separate budget to carry out the responsibilities and functions established in this division. 
(b)  The director shall establish an organizational structure appropriate to carrying out his/her responsibilities and functions. 
(c)  Within the budget approval process and in accordance with established personnel policies for all departments, the director shall have the power to appoint, employ, and remove such assistants, employees and personnel as may be authorized from time to time for the efficient and effective administration of the office. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.5. - Responsibilities and scope of audits. 
(a)  The director shall conduct his/her audit work in accordance with government auditing standards applicable to financial and performance audits and IIA standards applicable to process reviews and consulting engagements. 
(b)  The director shall not conduct nor supervise an audit of an activity for which he/she was responsible or for which he/she was employed during the preceding two years. 
(c)  The director shall have authority to conduct performance and financial audits of all departments, offices, boards, activities and agencies of the city in order to independently determine whether: 
(1)  Activities and programs being implemented have been authorized by the City Code, state law or applicable federal law or regulations and are being conducted in a manner consistent with the intended objectives; 
(2)  The audited entity is acquiring, protecting, and using its resources (such as personnel, property and space) economically and efficiently, and the effectiveness of organizations, programs, activities, functions or policies, and the extent to which desired results or benefits are being achieved; 
(3)  Financial and other reports are being provided that disclose fairly, accurately and fully all information that is required by law, that is necessary to ascertain the nature and scope of programs and activities, and that is necessary to establish a proper basis for evaluating the results of programs and activities including the collection of, accounting for and depositing of revenues and other resources; 
(4)  Activities or programs efficiently and effectively serve the purpose intended by the city, state law or applicable federal law or regulations and are being conducted and funds expended in compliance with applicable laws; 
(5)  Resources, including funds, property and personnel are adequately safeguarded, controlled and are being used efficiently and effectively, and in a manner consistent with the objectives intended by the city or enabling ordinance, statute or regulation; 
(6)  management has established adequate operating and administrative procedures and practices, systems or accounting internal control systems and internal management controls; and 
(7)  Indications of fraud, abuse or illegal acts are present. 
(d)  Process reviews and consulting engagements will be performed as negotiated with the appropriate city official(s) requesting the review. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-02-145, 8-13-02; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.6. - Audit schedule. 
(a)  At the beginning of each fiscal year, the director shall submit an annual work plan to the audit committee for review and comment. The schedule shall include the departments, offices, boards, activities, subcontractors and agencies subject to audit, process reviews or consulting engagements for the period. This schedule may be amended during the period after review with the audit division. Additionally, the director may spontaneously initiate and conduct any other audit deemed necessary. 
(b)  In the selection of audit areas, the determination of audit scope and the timing of audit work, the director should consult with federal and state auditors and external auditors so that the desirable audit coverage is provided and audit effort is properly coordinated. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-02-145, 8-13-02; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.7. - Special audits. 
    The audit committee may request special audits that are not included in the annual audit schedule. After consultation with and approval of the audit committee, a special audit or consulting engagement requested by the city manager may become an amendment to the annual work plan. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-02-145, 8-13-02; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.8. - Funding and evaluation. 
    Funds that in the opinion of the city council are sufficient to carry out the responsibilities specified herein shall be provided (subject to available resources). The director's performance shall be evaluated annually by the audit committee. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.9. - Records. 
    The director shall retain a complete file of each audit report and each report of other examinations, investigations, surveys and reviews made under legislative authority as required by general law. The file should include audit work papers and other supportive material directly pertaining to the audit report. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.10. - Access to records and property. 
(a)  All officers and employees of the City of Lynchburg and city agencies and commissions shall furnish the internal audit staff with requested information and records (including automated data) within their custody regarding powers, duties, activities, organization, property, financial transactions, contracts and methods of business required to conduct an audit or otherwise perform audit duties. In addition, they shall provide access for the audit staff to inspect all property, equipment and facilities within their custody. If such officers or employees fail to produce the aforementioned information, then the internal audit director may cause a search to be made and exhibits to be taken from any book, paper, or record of any such official or employee, or outside contractor or subcontractor, except for personal information (as governed by state statute). Further, all contracts with outside contractors and subcontractors shall provide for auditor access to all financial and performance-related records, property, and equipment purchased in whole or in part with governmental funds and facilities. 
(b)  The director shall not publicly disclose any information received during an audit that is considered confidential in nature by any local, state or federal law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.11. - Agency response. 
    Drafts of all audit reports will be forwarded to the appropriate supervisor and the city manager for review and comment regarding content before being finalized and released. Management of the audited area must respond in writing specifying agreement with finding and recommendations or reasons for disagreement with findings and/or recommendations, plans for implementing solutions to identified problems and a time table to complete such activities. The response must be forwarded to the audit director within 30 days. If no response is received, the director will note that fact in the transmittal letter and will release the audit report. In the case of contracted audits, reports may be released without inclusion of a response. Any subsequent responses shall be distributed to those who received the audit report. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-02-145, 8-13-02; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.12. - Audit reports. 
(a)  Each audit, examination, investigation, survey, and review will result in a written report. The report shall be available for public examination. 
(b)  The director of internal audit shall submit each audit report to the audited activity, the audit committee, city council and the city manager and shall retain a copy in the audit office as a permanent record. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-02-145, 8-13-02; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.13. - Report of irregularities. 
    If during an audit or other review, the auditors become aware of abuse or illegal acts or indications of such acts that could affect the city, the director shall report the irregularities to the audit committee and the city manager. If the city manager is believed to be a party to abuse or illegal acts, the audit director shall report the acts directly to the city attorney and the audit committee. If it appears that the irregularity is criminal in nature, the director shall immediately notify the commonwealth's attorney (when appropriate) in addition to those officials previously cited. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-02-145, 8-13-02; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.14. - Annual report. 
    The director and the city manager shall submit an annual report to the audit committee within 30 days before the end of the fiscal year indicating audits completed, major findings, corrective actions taken by administrative managers, and significant findings which have not been fully addressed by management. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.15. - Audit follow-up. 
(a)  The internal audit director will conduct follow-up reviews of prior findings and report unaddressed issues to the city manager who will assume responsibility for management taking appropriate action. 
(b)  The internal audit director may request periodic status reports from audited entities regarding action taken to address reported deficiencies and audit recommendations. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03; Ord. No. O-04-033, 3-9-04) 
Sec. 2-129.16. - Contract auditors, consultants and experts. 
    Upon approval of the audit committee, the director may obtain the services of public accountants, qualified management consultants, or other professional experts necessary to assist in the discharge of his/her responsibilities. An audit that is performed by contract must be conducted by persons who have no financial interests in the affairs of the governmental unit or its officers. The director will coordinate and monitor auditing performed under contract. Contracts for external audits will be awarded in accordance with the city procurement ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.17. - Quality assurance reviews. 
(a)  The audit activities of the office of internal audit shall be subject to quality review at least once every three years by a professional, non-partisan objective group utilizing guidelines endorsed by NALGA or the U.S. General Accounting Office. A copy of the written report of this independent review shall be furnished to each member of the city council. This report shall be available to the public. 
(b)  The quality control review shall determine compliance with government auditing standards and the quality of audit effort and reporting, including: 
(1)  General standards such as staff qualifications, due professional care, and quality assurance; 
(2)  Fieldwork standards such as planning, supervision, and audit evidence; and 
(3)  Reporting standards such as report content, presentation, and timeliness. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.18. - Responsibilities of the audit committee. 
    There is hereby established in and for the city an audit committee. The audit committee shall provide oversight of the internal audit activities and shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  Recommend selection of the external auditor; 
(b)  Participate in the external audit through the review of significant operational or reporting issues affecting the financial statements which were discussed by management and the external auditor, review of auditor performance, and meeting with external auditor to discuss pertinent matters; 
(c)  Select the internal audit director subject to council approval; 
(d)  Review plans and objectives of the internal audit director; 
(e)  Review results of internal audits and other engagements; 
(f)  Request special audit projects; 
(g)  Review progress toward resolving previous findings and recommendations; 
(h)  Participate with the city manager in performing an annual performance evaluation of the internal audit director. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-02-145, 8-13-02; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-129.19. - Membership of the audit committee and selection. 
    The audit committee shall be comprised of two members of city council, the city manager who will be ex officio, and two private sector members. The mayor shall select two members of city council to serve on the audit committee for three-year terms. The members of the audit committee shall annually select one of the council members to be the chair. The responsibility of the chair of the audit committee will be to preside over its meetings. The two council members shall select the two private sector members. The private sector members shall serve three-year terms and shall not serve more than three consecutive full terms. 
(Ord. No. O-95-157, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-98-218, 10-13-98; Ord. No. O-00-109, 5-23-00; Ord. No. O-03-188, 11-11-03) 
Secs. 2-130-2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Local boards of public welfare, Code of Virginia, § 63.1-38 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-141-2-151. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTOR 

Secs. 2-152-2-160. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-152-2-154. 
DIVISION 3. - SUPERINTENDENT 

Secs. 2-161-2-173. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-161 and 2-162. 
DIVISION 4. - LYNCHBURG NURSING HOME 

Secs. 2-174-2-177. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Division 4 consisting of §§ 2-174-2-177, was repealed by Ord. No. O-95-155, adopted June 13, 1995, to become effective on June 1, 1995. 
DIVISION 5. - PARKS AND RECREATION 

Secs. 2-178-2-188. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-178 and 2-178.1. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 

Secs. 2-189-2-202. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-189 and 2-190. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED 

Secs. 2-203-2-224. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Article VII containing §§ 2-203-2-213 pertaining to the office of management and budget was repealed by Ord. No. O-91-224, adopted Sept. 10, 1991, and became effective Oct. 1, 1991. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-225-2-233. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-225-2-227. 
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTOR 

Secs. 2-234-2-284. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-234-2-236. 
ARTICLE IX. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION 

Secs. 2-285-2-295. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-95-155 repealed sections relating to Parks and Recreation from an independent department to a division of Human Services, adopted June 13, 1995, effective on June 1, 1995. 
ARTICLE X. - EMPLOYEE RESOURCES GROUP 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-296-2-308. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-296 and 2-297. 
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTOR 

Secs. 2-309-2-323. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-309-2-312. 
ARTICLE XI. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-324-2-335. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-324-2-326. 
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTOR 

Secs. 2-336-2-343. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-336 and 2-337. 
ARTICLE XI.I. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 

Secs. 2-343.1-2-348. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed §§ 2-343.1-2-343.5. 
ARTICLE XII. - DISTRICT HEALTH DEPARTMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Rabies control, § 7-95 et seq.; food and food products, Ch. 20; housing and hygiene, Ch. 22; nuisances, Ch. 26; sewers, Ch. 34; water, Ch. 39. 

Sec. 2-349. - Creation. 
    A district health department, created pursuant to Section 32-40.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950 as amended, with the boundaries of such district coinciding with the corporate limits of the city, shall be vested with all of the powers and duties relating to public health within the district and city, and shall administer and enforce all public health laws, including such ordinances of the city and provisions of the City Code which pertain or are related to public health. 
(Code 1959, § 2-68) 
Sec. 2-350. - Director. 
    The district health department shall be under the immediate control of a director appointed by the state health commissioner with the approval of the city manager; and, whenever the phrases "health officer" or "director of public health and welfare" are used in this Code, or in any other ordinance or resolution of the city, they shall henceforth be taken to mean "director of district health department," except as to duties heretofore performed by the director of public health with respect to the administration of the Virginia Public Welfare and Assistance Act and the Lynchburg Nursing Home, the latter duties having been specifically assigned to the director of social services, and the duties relating to the bureau of weights and measures, which bureau has been specifically placed under the jurisdiction of the police division of the department of public safety. 
    The director of district health department may also hold the title of director of public health of the city upon authorization of the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 2-68) 
Sec. 2-351. - Operation. 
    The district health department shall be operated pursuant to the terms and provisions of a contract between the city and the Department of Health of the Commonwealth of Virginia and all laws applicable thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 2-69) 
Secs. 2-352-2-362. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - COURTS AND JAIL[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- Courts generally, § 24 et seq. 
Cross reference- Bonds for officers of courts, § 2-81. 

Sec. 2-363. - Use and control of courthouse. 
    The courthouse is hereby dedicated to the use of such of the courts of the commonwealth as may hold their sessions in the city, and no part thereof shall be otherwise used, except by permission of the council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-64) 
Sec. 2-363.1. - Courthouse maintenance fees. 
    Beginning on July 1, 1990, and continuing thereafter until changed by council, there is hereby assessed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.1-281 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the sum of $2.00 as part of the fees taxed as costs in each civil action and in each criminal or traffic case filed in the circuit court, family court and the general district court of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, said fees to be used for the maintenance, repair, and renovation of the courthouse and court-related facilities and to defray increases in the cost of heating, cooling, electricity, and other ordinary maintenance costs. The fees provided for herein shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. 
    Fees hereby levied shall be collected by the clerks of the respective courts in which the criminal and traffic cases are heard, and shall be remitted to the finance department and be held by said finance department for the purposes set forth in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-90-179, 6-12-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-90-271, 9-11-90; O-12-135, 11-27-12) 
Sec. 2-363.2. - Courthouse security fees. 
    Beginning on July 1, 2007, and continuing thereafter until changed by city council, there is hereby assessed pursuant to the provisions of Section 53.1-120 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the sum of $10.00 as part of the costs taxed in each criminal or traffic case in the circuit court, juvenile and domestic relations district court and the general district court of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, in which the defendant is convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance, said fees to be used for the provision of courthouse and courtroom security. The fees provided for herein shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. 
    Fees hereby levied shall be collected by the clerks of the respective courts in which the criminal and traffic cases are heard, and shall be remitted to the city's billings and collections division and shall be held by the billings and collections division until appropriated by city council to the sheriff's office for the funding of courthouse and courtroom security. 
(Ord. No. O-02-110, 5-28-02; Ord. No. O-07-051, 4-24-07, eff. 7-1-07) 
Sec. 2-364. - Use and control of jail. 
    The city jail, local lockup and receiving unit, shall be under the special charge of the Blue Ridge Regional Jail Authority, and shall be used only as prescribed by the laws of the state, and for such purposes punishment as may be prescribed by council by ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 2-65; Ord. No. O-08-148, 12-09-08) 
Sec. 2-364.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed § 2-364.1. 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Dropping of advertisements by aircraft, § 9-10; licenses for advertising enterprises, §§ 36-42-36-45. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Violations. 
    Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of sections 3-2 through 3-7 shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959) 
Sec. 3-2. - Posting generally. 
    No person shall post any bills, signs, posters or advertisements on any buildings, fences, poles or other property belonging to another or belonging to the city without the consent of the owner thereof. Such consent shall be secured in writing, and such written consent shall be exhibited by the person having the same to any police officer on demand. 
(Code 1959, §§ 22-3, 22-4) 
Sec. 3-3. - Signs in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Except for the city, no one shall install any signs, banners, billboards or similar structures or objects in the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance. No person shall have any legal right to the continued presence of a sign in a public right-of-way in violation of this section, nor is there any legal remedy against any person solely for the removal from a public right-of-way of a sign which is in violation of this section. Any person may abate the nuisance created by a violation of this section without liability for doing so. If abatement is made by the city, the reasonable costs incurred in removal may be assessed against any person responsible for or benefited by the violation, and such costs shall be collected in the same manner as city taxes. For a willful violation, the city shall be entitled to recover costs, the reasonable value of attorney's fees, and punitive damages in any proceeding which it may bring to enjoin future violations. 
(Code 1959, Ord. No. O-04-074, 6-22-04; Ord. No. O-05-162, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 3-4. - Sound vehicles restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind by the use of any amplifying equipment used by or mounted on any vehicle without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city manager. 
(Code 1959) 
Sec. 3-5. - Signs, banners across streets. 
(a)  The city hereby creates a limited public forum for the purpose of allowing organizations that are promoting community, charitable, historical, religious or other civic events and activities to display banners across certain duly designated public streets and sidewalks. 
(b)  No person shall erect or place any sign or banner of wood, cloth, metal or other material across any street or sidewalk in the city without obtaining a permit from the city's department of parks and recreation. The application for a permit shall include (i) the name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit (ii) the name and address of any organization or group the applicant is representing (iii) the type of community, charitable, religious or other civic event or activity that is being promoted (iv) the length of time the applicant wishes to display the banner (v) the size of the banner, the materials out of which the banner is constructed and the location where the banner is to be displayed and (vi) any information the parks and recreation department may deem reasonably necessary for the public health safety and welfare. The department of parks and recreation shall either issue or deny the permit within ten days of receipt of the completed application. The permit shall contain such conditions as the department of parks and recreation deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and shall specify the period of time that the sign/banner may be erected. If two or more applications are submitted requesting a permit for a banner at the same time and location, the application first filed shall be granted if it meets the requirements of this section. The sign/banner shall not be closer than 15 feet to the street or sidewalk level. The applicant must execute an agreement holding the city harmless against all claims for personal injury or property damage resulting from the use of the public right-of-way and must furnish the city with a certificate of insurance with general liability and property damage coverage. The applicant shall submit a letter from the persons or firm, which includes the address and phone number that will be erecting and removing the sign/banner. 
(c)  Every person applying for a permit to erect a sign or banner over any public street or sidewalk shall furnish the department of parks and recreation a certificate of liability insurance, on forms furnished by said department for the purpose, certifying that the person applying for the permit has liability insurance for personal injury or death and damages to property resulting from the display of the sign or banner in such amount as shall be determined to be appropriate by the department of parks and recreation and the risk management division, the city shall be named as an additional insured on the certificate of insurance. The certificate of insurance shall show the name of the insurance company, name of insured, address of insured, location of insured premises, insurance policy number, date insurance policy issued, expiration date of insurance policy, limits of policy, type of insurance, and a clause providing that in case of cancellation of insurance policy the city shall be given ten days' notice prior to such cancellation. 
(d)  If the sign/banner is damaged or in need of repair and poses a threat to the safety of the general public the applicant will be notified and have two business days to remove same. If the applicant fails to remove the sign/banner after the two days notice the city will have the sign/banner removed at the expense of the applicant. When, in the opinion of the department of parks and recreation, the presence of the sign or banner results in a condition that creates an immediate and serious threat to the safety of the public, the department of parks and recreation may have the sign or banner removed without prior notice. The owner of the sign or banner shall be responsible for paying the costs of removal. 
(e)  If the applicant fails to remove the sign/banner after the event or upon expiration of the specified time period, whichever shall come first, the city shall have the sign/banner removed at the expense of the applicant. 
(f)  No permit shall be denied because of the content of the message of the banner. Any person or organization who is denied a permit may appeal the denial to the city manager or his designee, by filing with the city manager's office, within five working days of the denial, a written notice of the appeal and the grounds therefore. The city manager, or his designee, shall act upon the appeal within five, working days, after its receipt. The decision of the city manager, or his designee, may be appealed to the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg, in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(g)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-95-087, 4-11-95; Ord. No. O-97-083, 5-13-97; Ord. No. O-04-074, 6-22-04; Ord. No. O-97-050, 4-24-07) 
Sec. 3-6. - Destroying lawful posters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully and maliciously tear down, deface or cover up any posted advertisement or bill of any person when the same is lawfully posted and put up and during the time such sign or advertisement shall be of value. 
(Code 1959) 
Sec. 3-7. - Marking on streets, sidewalks prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, or attempt to advertise, by marking or painting on any of the streets or sidewalks within the city. 
(Code 1959) 
Secs. 3-8-3-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-04-074, adopted June 22, 2004, repealed § 3-8. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Littering, § 2-31 et seq. 

Sec. 3-21. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Handbill. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature. 
    Newspaper. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statutes or regulations, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public, and shall mean and include any other copyrighted material. 
    Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1959, § 30-25) 
Sec. 3-22. - Exemption for mail and newspapers. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1959) 
Sec. 3-23. - Violations. 
    Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
Sec. 3-24. - Inhabited private premises. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent the same from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulation. 
(Code 1959, § 30-25) 
Sec. 3-25. - Prohibited where properly posted. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on such premises a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not wish to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills left upon such premises. 
(Code 1959) 
Sec. 3-26. - Depositing on uninhabited, vacant premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which is uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1959, § 30-25) 
Sec. 3-27. - Placing on vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 30-25) 
Sec. 3-28. - Restricted in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place; except that a handbill may be personally delivered to any person willing to accept the same. 
(Code 1959) 
Chapter 4 - AIR POLLUTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-225 et seq. 
State Law reference- Air pollution control, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1300 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-81-149, § 3, adopted June 23, 1981, amended the Code by repealing Art. I, §§ 4-1-4-12, containing general provisions relative to air pollution, which derived from Code 1959, §§ 3.4-2(a), (b), 3.4-3, 3.4-5-3.4-7, 3.4-8(a), (b), 3.4-9, 3.4-10, 3.4-12, 3.4-13; and an Ordinance of Dec. 14, 1976. Section 1 of Ord. No. O-81-149 enacted provisions relative to open air burning and designated as a new Ch. 4.1. In order to better facilitate inclusion this new material and in order to preserve the alphabetical sequence of the table of contents, the editor, at his discretion, has redesignated the provisions of Ord. No. O-81-149, § 1, as a new Art. IV as set out herein. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. O-82-149, § 1, enacted Aug. 10, 1982, repealed Art. II, containing §§ 4-21-4-32, concerning the air pollution control board. Former §§ 4-21-4-32 were derived from Code 1959, § 3.4-4(a)-(c); and an ordinance of Dec. 14, 1976. 

Secs. 4-21-4-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Article III, containing §§ 4-41-4-47, which provided for variances from the provisions of this chapter, and which derived from Code 1959, § 3.4-11(a)-(e), and an ordinance enacted Dec. 14, 1976, was repealed by Ord. No. O-82-149, § 1, enacted Aug. 10, 1982. 

Secs. 4-41-4-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPEN AIR BURNING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to §§ 4-1-4-12. 

Sec. 4-58. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the Lynchburg ordinance for the regulation of open burning. 
(Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-59. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect public health, safety, and welfare by regulating open burning within the city to achieve and maintain, to the greatest extent practicable, a level of air quality that will provide comfort and convenience while promoting economic and social development. This article is intended to supplement the applicable regulations promulgated by the State Air Pollution Control Board and other applicable regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-60. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article and subsequent amendments or any orders issued by the city, the words or phrases shall have the meaning given them in this section. 
(a)  Automobile graveyard. Means any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically practical to make operative, are placed, located or found. 
(b)  Built-up area. Means any area with a substantial portion covered by industrial, commercial or residential buildings. 
(c)  Clean burning waste. Means waste which is not prohibited to be burned under this ordinance and which consists only of (i) 100 percent wood waste, (ii) 100 percent clean lumber or clean wood, (iii) 100 percent yard waste, or (iv) 100 percent mixture of only any combination of wood waste, clean lumber, clean wood or yard waste. 
(d)  Clean lumber. Means wood or wood products that have been cut or shaped and include wet, air-dried, and kiln-dried wood products. Clean lumber does not include wood products that have been painted, pigment-stained, or pressure-treated by compounds such as chromate copper arsenate, pentachlorophenol, and creosote. 
(e)  Clean wood. Means uncontaminated natural or untreated wood. Clean wood includes, but is not limited to, by-products of harvesting activities conducted for forest management or commercial logging, or mill residues consisting of bark, chips, edgings, sawdust, shavings or slabs. It does not include wood that has been treated, adulterated, or chemically changed in some way; treated with glues, binders or resins; or painted, stained or coated. 
(f)  Construction waste. Means solid waste which is produced or generated during construction remodeling, or repair of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Construction waste consists of lumber, wire, sheetrock, broken brick, shingles, glass, pipes, concrete, and metal and plastics if the metal or plastics are a part of the materials of construction or empty containers for such materials. Paints, coatings, solvents, asbestos, any liquid, compressed gases or semi-liquids, and garbage are not construction wastes and the disposal of such materials must be in accordance with the regulations of the Virginia Waste Management Board. 
(g)  Debris waste. Means wastes resulting from land clearing operations. Debris wastes include but are not limited to stumps, wood, brush, leaves, soil and road spoils. 
(h)  Demolition waste. Means that solid waste which is produced by the destruction of structures and their foundations and includes the same materials as construction waste. 
(i)  Garbage. Means readily putrescible discarded materials composed of animal, vegetable or other organic matter. 
(j)  Hazardous waste. Means a "hazardous waste" as described in 9 VAC 20 Chapter 60 (9 VAC 20-60) (Hazardous Waste Management Regulations). 
(k)  Household waste. Means any waste material, including garbage, trash and refuse derived from households. For purposes of this regulation, households include single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day-use recreation areas. Household wastes do not include sanitary waste in septic tanks (septage) which is regulated by state agencies. 
(l)  Industrial waste. Means any solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial process that is not a regulated hazardous waste. Such waste may include but is not limited to waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer/agricultural chemicals; food and related products/by products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel manufacturing; leather and leather products; nonferrous metals manufacturing/foundries; organic chemicals; plastics and resins manufacturing; pulp and paper industry; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay and concrete products; textile manufacturing; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
(m)  Junk. Means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. 
(n)  Junkyard. Means an establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and the term shall include garbage dumps and sanitary landfills. 
(o)  Landfill. Means a sanitary landfill, an industrial waste landfill, or a construction/demolition/debris landfill. See Solid Waste Management Regulations (9 VAC 20-80) for further definitions of these terms. 
(p)  Local landfill. Means any landfill located within the jurisdiction of a local government. 
(q)  Open burning. Means the combustion of solid waste without: 
(1)  Control of combustion air to maintain adequate temperature for efficient combustion; 
(2)  Containment of the combustion reaction in an enclosed device to provide sufficient residence time and mixing for complete combustion; and 
(3)  Control of the combustion products' emission. 
(r)  Open pit incinerator. Means a device used to burn waste for the primary purpose of reducing the volume by removing combustible matter. Such devices function by directing a curtain of air at an angle across the top of a trench or similarly enclosed space, thus reducing the amount of combustion byproducts emitted into the atmosphere. The term also includes trench burners, air curtain incinerators and over draft incinerators. 
(s)  Refuse. Means all solid waste products having the characteristics of solids rather than liquids and which are composed wholly or partially of materials such as garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, residues from clean up of spills or contamination or other discarded materials. 
(t)  Salvage operation. Means any operation consisting of a business, trade or industry participating in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, such as, but not limited to, reprocessing of used motor oils, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums, and specifically including automobile graveyards and junkyards. 
(u)  Sanitary landfill. Means an engineered land burial facility for the disposal of household waste which is so located, designed, constructed, and operated to contain and isolate the waste so that it does not pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment. A sanitary landfill also may receive other types of solid wastes, such as commercial solid waste, nonhazardous sludge, hazardous waste from conditionally exempt small quantity generators, construction, demolition, or debris waste and nonhazardous industrial solid waste. See Solid Waste Management Regulations (9 VAC 20-80) for further definitions of these terms. 
(v)  Smoke. Means small gas-borne particulate matter consisting mostly, but not exclusively, of carbon, ash and other material in concentrations sufficient to form a visible plume. 
(w)  Special incineration device. Means an open pit incinerator, conical or teepee burner, or any other device specifically designed to provide good combustion performance. 
(x)  Wood waste. Means untreated wood and untreated wood products, including tree stumps (whole or chipped), trees, tree limbs (whole or chipped), bark, sawdust, chips, scraps, slabs, millings, and shavings. Wood waste does not include: 
(1)  Grass, grass clippings, bushes, shrubs, and clippings from bushes and shrubs from residential, commercial/retail, institutional, or industrial sources as part of maintaining yards or other private or public lands. 
(2)  Construction, renovation, or demolition wastes. 
(3)  Clean lumber. 
(y)  Yard waste. Means grass, grass clippings, bushes, shrubs, and clippings from bushes and shrubs that come from residential, commercial/retail, institutional, or industrial sources as part of maintaining yards or other private or public lands. Yard waste does not include (i) construction, renovation, and demolition wastes or (ii) clean wood. 
(Ord. No. O-81-149, § 1 [Art. I, § 4.1-1], 6-23-81; Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-61. - Prohibitions on open burning-Generally. 
    Except as provided in sections 4-62 through 4-65 of this article, within the Lynchburg city limits: 
(a)  No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning of household waste. 
(b)  No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for the destruction of refuse except as provided in this ordinance. 
(c)  No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for the destruction of rubber tires, asphaltic materials, crankcase oil, impregnated wood or other rubber or petroleum based materials except when conducting bona fide fire fighting instruction at fire fighting training schools having permanent facilities. 
(d)  No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for the destruction of hazardous waste or containers for such materials. 
(e)  No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device for the purpose of a salvage operation or for the destruction of commercial/industrial waste. 
(f)  Open burning or the use of special incineration devices permitted under the provisions of this ordinance does not exempt or excuse any owner or other person from the consequences, liability, damages or injuries which may result from such conduct; nor does it excuse or exempt any owner or other person from complying with other applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and orders of the governmental entities having jurisdiction, even though the open burning is conducted in compliance with this ordinance. In this regard special attention should be directed to § 10.1-1142 of the Forest Fire Law of Virginia, the regulations of the Virginia Waste Management Board, and the State Air Pollution Control Board's Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution. 
(g)  Upon declaration of an alert, warning or emergency stage of an air pollution episode as described in 9 VAC 5 Chapter 70 (9 VAC 5-70) or when deemed advisable by the fire marshal's office to prevent a hazard to, or an unreasonable burden upon, public health or welfare, no owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or use of a special incineration device; and any in process burning or use of special incineration devices shall be immediately terminated in the designated air quality control region. 
(Ord. No. O-81-149, § 1 (Art I, § 4.1-2), 6-23-81; Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-62. - Same-Exceptions. 
    The following activities are exempted to the extent covered by the State Air Pollution Control Board's Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution: 
(a)  Open burning for training and instruction of government and public fire fighters under the supervision of the designated official and industrial in-house fire fighting personnel; 
(b)  Open burning for camp fires or other fires that are used solely for recreational purposes, for ceremonial occasions, for outdoor noncommercial preparation of food, and for warming of outdoor workers; 
(c)  Open burning for the destruction of any combustible liquid or gaseous material by burning in a flare or flare stack; 
(d)  Open burning for forest management and agriculture practices approved by the State Air Pollution Control Board; and 
(e)  Open burning for the destruction of classified military documents. 
(f)  Open burning of leaves located on the premises of private residences is permitted, provided the requirements of section 4-63 of this chapter are met. 
(g)  Open burning of tree, yard and garden trimmings located on the premises of private residences is permitted, provided the accumulation of tree, yard and garden trimmings to be burned does not exceed eight feet in any direction, and provided the requirements of section 4-64 of this chapter are met. 
(h)  Open burning is permitted for the destruction of any combustible liquid or gaseous material by burning in a flare or flare stack. 
(Ord. No. O-81-149, § 1 [Art. I, § 4.1-3], 6-23-81; Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-63. - Permissible open burning of leaves. 
    Open burning is permitted on site for the destruction of leaves from September 15 through February 15, of each year, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., located on the premises of private property, with the permission of the property owner, provided that the conditions are met: 
(a)  The burning takes place on the premises of the private property; and 
(b)  The location of the burning is not less than 300 feet from any occupied building unless the occupants have given prior written permission, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted; and 
(c)  The location of the burning is at least ten feet from adjoining property lines and the public streets or other public rights-of-way. The location of the burning may be less than ten feet from adjoining property lines, provided the adjoining property owner(s) has given prior written permission for such burning. The location of the burning may be less than ten feet from the public streets or other public rights-of-way, provided the fire marshal's office has given prior written permission for such burning. 
(d)  At least one person of 16 years of age or older is supervising, and in close proximity to the burning at all times. 
(e)  A water hose, at least one-half inch in diameter, with nozzle, connected to a fully charged, operational, outside bib spigot, is in close proximity to the burning at all times. 
(f)  The atmospheric conditions are acceptable, as determined by the fire marshal's office. It shall be the duty of the fire marshal's office to advise the news media in the city on those days on which the atmospheric conditions are unacceptable. 
(g)  Citizens must check with the fire marshal's office prior to setting fires. 
(Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-64. - Permissible open burning of tree, yard and garden trimmings. 
    Open burning is permitted on site for the destruction of tree, yard and garden trimmings located on the premises of private property, provided that the conditions are met: 
(a)  The burning takes place on the premises of the private property; and 
(b)  The location of the burning is not less than 300 feet from any occupied building unless the occupants have given prior written permission, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted; and 
(c)  The location of the burning is at least ten feet from adjoining property lines and the public streets or other public rights-of-way. The location of the burning may be less than ten feet from adjoining property lines, provided the adjoining property owner(s) has given prior written permission for such burning. The location of the burning may be less than ten feet from the public streets or other public rights-of-way, provided the fire marshal's office has given prior written permission for such burning. 
(d)  At least one person of 16 years of age or older is supervising, and in close proximity to the burning at all times. 
(e)  A water hose, at least one-half inch in diameter, with nozzle, connected to a fully charged, operational, outside bib spigot, is in close proximity to the burning at all times. 
(f)  The accumulation of tree, yard and garden trimmings to be burned cannot exceed eight square feet in any direction. If the accumulation of tree, yard and garden trimmings to be burned exceeds eight feet in any direction, a permit must be obtained for such burning in accordance with the requirements of section 4-65 of this article. 
(g)  The atmospheric conditions are acceptable, as determined by the fire marshal's office. It shall be the duty of the fire marshal's office to advise the news media in the city on those days on which the atmospheric conditions are unacceptable. 
(h)  Citizens must check with the fire marshal's office prior to setting fires. 
(Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-65. - Permissible open burning of debris from property maintenance, etc. 
    Open burning is permitted on site for destruction of debris waste resulting from property maintenance, from the development or modification of roads and highways, parking areas, railroad tracks, pipelines, power and communication lines, buildings or building areas, sanitary landfills, or from any other clearing operations which may be approved by the fire marshal's office, provided the following conditions are met: 
(a)  All reasonable effort shall be made to minimize the amount of material burned, with the number and size of the debris piles approved by the fire marshal's office. Such efforts shall include, but are not limited to, the removal of pulpwood, saw logs and firewood; 
(b)  The material to be burned shall consist of brush, stumps and similar debris waste and shall not include demolition material or any materials brought in from other sites; 
(c)  The burning shall be at least 1,000 feet from any occupied building(s) unless the occupant(s) or owner(s) have given prior written permission for closer burning, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted, or shall be greater than 1,000 feet from any occupied building or buildings if the division of inspections determines that it is necessary to protect public health and welfare. 
(d)  The burning shall be conducted at the greatest distance practicable from highways and air fields. 
(e)  The burning shall be attended at all times and conducted to ensure the best possible combustion with a minimum of smoke being produced; 
(f)  The burning shall not be allowed to smolder beyond the minimum period of time necessary for the destruction of the materials; and 
(g)  The burning shall be conducted only when the prevailing winds and atmospheric conditions are acceptable, as determined by the fire marshal's office. 
(h)  The burning shall be supervised at all times by such personnel and equipment as the fire marshal's office determine is necessary to protect the public health and welfare. 
(i)  When any burning contemplated by this section is to occur, or where the burning permitted by subsection 4-64(f) of this article exceeds the maximum limits, the person or persons responsible for the burning shall, within 72 hours prior to such burning, apply for a permit from the fire marshal's office. Such permit may be granted only after an on-site inspection and confirmation by the fire marshal's office determines that the burning can and will comply with the conditions set forth in this section and any other conditions which are deemed necessary by the fire marshal's office to ensure that the burning will not endanger the public health and welfare or to ensure compliance with any applicable provisions of this chapter or the laws and regulations of any governmental entities having jurisdiction over such burning. Permits issued under this section shall be limited to a specific period of time deemed appropriate by the fire marshal's office. The fees for such permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  For open burning of five acres or less, a flat fee of $25.00 plus $1.00 for each acre to be burned or $1.00 for each acre from which materials have been gathered to be burned. 
(2)  For opening burning of ten acres or less, a flat fee of $50.00. 
(3)  For open burning in excess of ten acres, a flat fee of $100.00. 
In the event any open burning for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this section does not take place within three days from the issuance of such permit, the permit shall expire, and before the proposed open burning can take place, the permit must be renewed by the division of inspections. Any applicant who applies for renewal of a permit prior to the expiration of the same shall not be required to pay any additional fees for renewal of the permit. In the event any open burning for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this section does not take place within three days from the issuance of such permit, and the applicant later applies for renewal of such permit the payment of any additional license fees shall be at the discretion of the fire marshal's office. 
(j)  No owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning or the use of a special incineration device during May, June, July, August, or September. 
(Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-66. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the fire marshal's office. 
(b)  Whenever the fire marshal's office has reason to believe that a violation of any provision of this article or a rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto has occurred, it may cause written notice to be served upon the alleged violator or violators. 
(Ord. No. O-81-149, § 1 [Art. IV, § § 4.1-7, 4.1-10], 6-23-81; Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-67. - Penalties. 
    Any owner or other person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-81-149, § 1 [Art. IV, § 4.1-8], 6-23-81; Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-68. - Nuisances prohibited. 
    Nothing in this article relating to open burning shall in any manner be construed as authorizing or permitting the creation of or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. O-81-149, § 1 [Art. IV, § 4.1-9], 6-23-81; Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 4-69. - Emergency procedure. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this article or any other provision of law, if any member of the fire marshal's office finds that any owner or other person engaged in open burning is causing or creating an emergency which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, such member of the fire marshal's office shall order such owner or other person to discontinue such open burning immediately and such order shall be complied with immediately. Any owner or other person who fails to abide by such order shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. If any owner or other person so warned fails to immediately discontinue such burning, the fire marshal's office may take whatever action is necessary to stop such open burning and the owner or other person who refused to discontinue the burning shall be liable for the expense incurred by the city in stopping the open burning. 
(Ord. No. O-81-149, § 1 [Art. IV, § 4.1-11], 6-23-81; Ord. No. O-07-037, 3-13-07) 
Chapter 5 - AMBULANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 19-16 et seq.; police, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Ambulances, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.14 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
    Whenever used in this chapter the following terms shall be construed as set out herein: 
    Ambulance: Any motor vehicle that is specially designed or constructed, and equipped, and is intended to be used for and is maintained and operated for the transportation of patients. 
    Attendant: A trained qualified individual responsible for the operation of an ambulance and the care of the patients whether or not the attendant also serves as driver. 
    Attendant-driver: A person who is qualified as an attendant and a driver. 
    Certificate: A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the city council under the provisions of this chapter, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct an ambulance service in the city. 
    Patient: An individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-1; Ord. No. O-12-107, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 5-2. - Exceptions. 
    No certificate or license shall be required for an ambulance or for the driver, attendant or attendant-driver of an ambulance which is: 
(a)  Rendering assistance in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the certificated ambulances of the city are insufficient or unable to cope; or 
(b)  Is operated from a location or headquarters outside of the city in order to transport patients who are picked up beyond the city limits to locations within the city, but no such outside ambulance shall be used to pick up patients within the city for transportation to locations within the city unless the driver, attendant and attendant-driver and the person subject to the provisions of section 5-19 in respect of such ambulance, hold currently valid certificates and licenses issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-2(c)) 
Sec. 5-3. - Standards for vehicles, equipment and personnel. 
(a)  Each ambulance shall, at all times when in use as such, must be licensed by the Virginia Department of Health and comply with all applicable laws and regulations governing emergency medical services in the Commonwealth of Virginia (12VAC 5-31). 
(b)  Each approved ambulance vehicle, its equipment and the premises designated in the application and all records relating to its maintenance and operation as such, shall be open to inspection by the city manager or his designated representatives during usual hours of operation. 
(c)  No official entry made upon a certificate may be defaced, removed or obliterated. 
(d)  Each ambulance attendant and attendant-driver must meet the personnel requirements established by the Virginia Department of Health and comply with all applicable laws and regulations governing emergency medical services in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-4; Ord. No. O-12-107, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 5-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12-107, adopted Sept. 1, 2012, repealed § 5-4. 
Sec. 5-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12-107, adopted Sept. 1, 2012, repealed § 5-5. 
Sec. 5-6. - Rates-Generally. 
    Effective on January 1, 2018, and for each year thereafter, unless otherwise changed by city council, the following rates for ambulance services shall apply: 
(a)  The rates to be charged for the transportation of a patient from one point within the city to another point within the city on a non-emergency basis shall be at a base rate of $350.00 per trip, and $500.00 per trip when such transportation is conducted on an emergency basis; provided, however, that: 
(1)  In addition to the base charges provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, there shall also be a charge of $12.00 for each mile the patient is transported. 
(2)  In addition to the base charges provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section and subsection (a)(1), there shall also be a $50.00 oxygen supply charge. 
(b)  Whenever a patient receives advanced life support procedure performed by the emergency medical services personnel, the rate shall be $425.00 per patient, if provided on a non-emergency basis; $ $600.00 if provided on an emergency basis, and $850.00 if provided on an emergency basis and three or more different medications combined with at least one specialized ALS procedure are administered. 
(c)  Whenever an ambulance responds to a call for ambulance service, if the patient is evaluated by emergency medical services personnel and receives treatment but no transport occurs, the rate shall be $100.00 per patient. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-15.1; Ord. of 12-13-77; Ord. No. O-82-093, § 1, 5-25-82, eff. 7-1-82; Ord. No. O-84-141, § 1, 6-12-84, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-86-054, § 1, 4-8-86, eff. 7-1-86; Ord. No. O-88-062, § 1, 3-22-88, eff. 7-1-88; Ord. No. O-90-093, 3-27-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-92-119, 4-28-92; Ord. No. O-93-082, 3-23-93, eff. 7-1-93; Ord. No. O-93-105, 4-27-93; Ord. No. O-94-318, eff. 1-1-95; Ord. No. O-95-206, 7-11-95, eff. 9-1-95; Ord. No. O-96- 140, 5-28-96; Ord. No. O-00-238, 11-14-00, eff. 12-1-00; Ord. No. O-04-062, 6-8-04, eff. 7-1-04; Ord. No. O-11-130, 11-8-11, eff. 1-1-12; Ord. No. O-17-103 , 11-28-17, eff. 1-1-18) 
Sec. 5-6.1. - Same-Unnecessary calls. 
    Any person who without just cause therefor calls or summons, by telephone or otherwise, any ambulance shall pay the city a response and evaluation fee in the amount of one-half of the basic ambulance transport fee in order to reimburse the city for the expenses incurred by the city in responding to such summons. For the purposes of this section a person shall be deemed to have summonsed an ambulance without just cause if the person summonsing ambulance transportation has made two or more unfounded requests for assistance within the calendar year preceding the summons. Such fees shall be imposed on the third and all subsequent summonses. Whenever a person summonses an ambulance under circumstances where there was no reasonable basis for requesting ambulance transportation, the fee set forth shall be imposed for each request for an ambulance. 
(Ord. No. O-84-218, § 1, 9-11-84) 
Sec. 5-7. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter for which no other penalty is provided shall be deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor, in addition to the revocation or suspension of such person's certificate or permit by the city manager or his designee as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-16; Ord. No. O-12-107, 9-11-12) 
Secs. 5-8-5-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 

Sec. 5-19. - Required. 
    No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of the transportation of patients upon the streets, alleys or any public way or place of the city, unless he holds a current valid certificate of public convenience and necessity for such ambulance business or service issued by city council pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-2(a)) 
Sec. 5-20. - Application for ambulance certificate. 
    Applications for an ambulance certificate shall be made upon such forms as may be prepared or prescribed by the city manager or his designee and shall contain: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant and of the owner of the ambulance. 
(b)  The trade or other fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant does business and proposes to do business. 
(c)  The training and experience of the applicant in the transportation and care of patients. 
(d)  A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, motor and chassis number; current state license number; the length of time the ambulance has been in use; and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate applicant's ambulance. 
(e)  The location and descriptions of the place or places from which it is intended to operate. 
(f)  Such other information as the city manager or his designee shall deem reasonably necessary to a fair determination of compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-3; Ord. No. O-12-107, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 5-21. - Liability insurance required. 
(a)  No ambulance certificate shall be issued under this article, nor shall such certificate be valid after issuance, nor shall any ambulance be operated in the city unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to business in the state, for each and every ambulance owned and/or operated by or for the holder of a certificate, providing for the payment of damages: 
(1)  For injury to or death of individuals in accidents resulting from any cause for which the owner of said vehicle would be liable on account of liability imposed on him by law, regardless of whether the ambulance was being driven by the owner or his agent, and 
(2)  For the loss of or damage to the property of another, including personal property, under like circumstances, in such sums and under such terms as may be required in regulations promulgated by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Said insurance policies shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee for approval prior to the issuance of each ambulance certificate. Satisfactory evidence that such insurance is at all times in force and effect shall be furnished to the city manager or his designee, in such form as he may specify, by all certificate holders required to provide such insurance under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof notwithstanding any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the assured, and that until the policy is revoked the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on account of nonpayment of premium, failure to renew license at the end of the year, or any act or omission of the named assured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for the payment of any judgments up to the limits of said policy, recovered against any person other than the owner, his agent or employee, who may operate the same with the consent or acquiescence of the owner. 
(d)  Every insurance policy required hereunder shall extend for the period to be covered by the license applied for and the insurer shall be obliged to give not less than 15 days written notice to the city manager or his designee and to the assured before any cancellation or termination thereof earlier than its expiration date and the cancellation or other termination of any such policy shall automatically revoke and terminate the certificate issued for the ambulances covered by such policy, unless another insurance policy complying with the provisions of this section shall be provided and be in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-5; Ord. No. O-12-107, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 5-22. - Duties of city manager. 
    The city manager or his designee shall, within 30 days after receipt of an application for an ambulance certificate as provided for herein, cause such investigation as he deems necessary to be made of the applicant and of his proposed operations. If the city manager or his designee finds: 
(1)  That the public convenience and necessity requires the proposed ambulance service; 
(2)  That each such ambulance, its required equipment and the premises designated in the application, have been licensed by the Virginia Department of Health as provided for herein; 
(3)  That the applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct or work in the proposed business; 
(4)  That only duly licensed drivers, attendants and attendant-drivers are employed in such capacities; and 
(5)  That all the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances have been met; then the city manager or his designee shall recommend to the city council that the city council issue a certificate to the applicant; otherwise the city manager or his designee shall recommend to the city council that the application be denied. The city manager or his designee shall include a complete report of his findings in his recommendation to the council. The applicant and other certificate holders, if any, shall be given notice of the meeting of council when the report of the city manager or his designee will be considered. The decisions of the city council on the matter shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-6; Ord. No. O-12-107, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 5-23. - Inspections. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any ambulance certificates hereunder, the director of health shall cause to be inspected the vehicles, equipment and premises designated in each application hereunder, and shall certify his approval in a written report to the city manager when he finds compliance with the standards prescribed in subsection 5-3(a) and in section 5-4 of this chapter, and with the regulations promulgated under such sections; provided, however, that under the terms of this chapter the director of health shall have no responsibility, and shall exercise no authority, in connection with laws and ordinances of general applicability which deal with motor vehicle inspection. 
(b)  Subsequent to issuance of an ambulance certificate hereunder; the director of health shall cause to be inspected each such licensed vehicle, and its equipment and premises, whenever he deems such inspection to be necessary but in any event, not less frequently than twice each year, and he is required to reinspect each vehicle which has been repaired following an accident before it is placed back in service, and shall promptly report his findings in a written report to the city manager. The periodic inspection required hereunder shall be in addition to any other safety or motor vehicle inspection required to be made for ambulances or other motor vehicles, or other inspections required to be made, under general law or ordinances, and shall not excuse compliance with any requirement of law or ordinance to display any official certificate of motor vehicle inspection and approval nor excuse compliance with the requirements of any other applicable general law or ordinance. 
(c)  A copy of each initial, semiannual or other ambulance, equipment and premises inspection report submitted by the director of health to the city manager under the provisions of this section shall be promptly transmitted to the holder of the certificate to whom it refers. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-8) 
Sec. 5-24. - Issuance. 
    The certificate when issued, shall be filled out in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under the certificate and date of issuance. One copy shall be retained in the files of the city manager or his designee and the applicant shall receive the other copy. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-7; Ord. No. O-12-107, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 5-25. - Duration. 
    A certificate issued under the provisions of this article shall be effective until canceled and shall expire when the holder thereof fails for a period of 30 days to operate an ambulance service within the city in accordance with such certificate. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-7) 
Sec. 5-26. - Transfer. 
    A certificate issued under the provisions of this article shall not be transferable except upon the written consent of the city manager or his designee endorsed on any such certificate. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-7; Ord. No. O-12-107, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 5-27. - Termination of service; bond. 
    At least 90 days written notice to the city manager or his designee shall be required for a certificate holder to voluntarily cease operating or rendering of ambulance services in the city. In order to assure compliance with said requirement, each certificate holder shall prior to the issuance of a certificate to him be required to post bond in the amount of $500.00, with proper surety to be approved by the city attorney, which amount shall be forfeited to the city for failure to comply with said notice requirements. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-7; Ord. No. O-12-107, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 5-28. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may, and is hereby authorized to, suspend or revoke a certificate issued hereunder for failure of a certificate holder to comply and to maintain compliance with, or for his violation of, any applicable provisions, standards or requirements of this chapter, or of regulations promulgated hereunder, or of any other applicable laws or ordinances or regulations promulgated thereunder, but only after warning and such reasonable time for compliance as may be set by the city manager or his designee. Within ten days after a suspension, the certificate holder shall be afforded a hearing, after reasonable notice. The city manager or his designee shall, within ten days after conclusion of such hearing, issue a written decision (which shall include written findings) as to the suspension of said license. Such written decision shall be promptly transmitted to the licensee to whom it refers. An appeal from the decision of the city manager or his designee may be made to city council. 
(b)  The initial, semiannual or other ambulance, equipment and premises inspection reports of the Virginia Department of Health herein provided for shall be prima facie evidence of compliance or noncompliance with, or violation of, the provisions, standards and requirements provided herein, and of the regulations promulgated hereunder. 
(c)  Upon suspension, revocation or termination of an ambulance certificate hereunder, such ambulance shall cease operations as such and no person shall permit such ambulance to continue operations as such. Upon suspension, revocation or termination of a driver's, attendant's or attendant-driver's permit hereunder, such driver, attendant or attendant-driver shall cease to drive or attend an ambulance and no person shall employ or permit such individual to drive or attend an ambulance. 
(Code 1959, § 3.1-13; Ord. No. O-12-107, 9-11-12) 
Secs. 5-29-5-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVERS, ATTENDANTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 5-39-5-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Secs. 5-49-5-59. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12-107, adopted Sept. 11, 2012, repealed §§ 5-49-5-57. 
ARTICLE IV. - NON-EMERGENCY MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION CARRIERS 

Sec. 5-60. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Certificate: A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the city manager or his designee, under the provisions of this article, authorizing the holder thereof to operate as a non-emergency medical transportation carrier in the city. 
    Non-emergency medical transportation: Non-emergency medical transportation is a form of medical transportation which is provided in non-emergency situations to a person who is medically stable, but is in need of medical support during transportation and is being transported for the purpose of receiving treatment and/or medical evaluation. Non-emergency medical transportation includes, but is not limited to, visits to doctors and hospitals for testing and treatment, or other locations where a specially equipped vehicle is used to transport a person. Non-emergency medical transportation means there is not an emergency need or a life and death reason for the transport. 
    Non-emergency medical transportation carrier: A motor carrier that exclusively provides non-emergency medical transportation and provides such transportation only through the Virginia Department of Medical Assistance Services, through a broker operating under a contract with the Department of Medical Assistance Services, or as a Medicaid Managed Care organization contracted with the Department of Medical Assistance Services to provide such transportation. 
(Code 1981, Ord. No. O-14-019, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 5-61. - Certificate required. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate as a non-emergency medical transportation carrier within the city without first having obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the city manager or his designee and complying with the conditions, regulations and restrictions set out in this article. 
(Code 1981, Ord. No. O-14-019, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 5-62. - Application for non-emergency medical transportation carrier certificate. 
    An application for a non-emergency medical transportation carrier certificate shall be made upon such form as may be prepared or prescribed by the city manager or his designee, and shall include: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(b)  The trade or other fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant will do business. 
(c)  The location and descriptions of the place or places from which the applicant intends to operate. 
(d)  A copy of the applicant's license from the Virginia Office of Emergency Medical Services showing that the applicant has been properly certified as an emergency medical services agency. 
(e)  A list of the vehicles the applicant plans to use to provide non-emergency medical transportation services and a copy of the permits showing that such vehicles have been approved for non-emergency medical transportation. 
(f)  A copy of a certificate of insurance showing that the applicant has obtained the insurance coverage required by section 5-64 of this article and that such insurance is in full force and effect. 
(g)  Such other information as the city manager or his designee shall deem reasonably necessary to determine an applicant is qualified to provide non-emergency medical transportation services. 
(h)  Once all of the required information and documents are submitted to the city manager or his designee, the city manager or his designee shall have 30 days to review such information and documents to determine if they meet the requirements of this section, and to issue or deny the certificate. If the city manager or his designee, denies an application for a certificate, the city manager or his designee, will send the applicant a notice of his decision, stating the reasons for the denial of the certificate. 
(Code 1981, Ord. No. O-14-019, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 5-63. - Annual recertification. 
    No later than December 31 of each year, a non-emergency medical transportation carrier that holds a certificate to operate in the city shall file a letter with the city manager or his designee, recertifying that all of the information contained in the carrier's original application for a non-emergency medical transportation carrier certificate is still accurate and correct, and shall update such information if necessary. In any year in which a non-emergency medical transportation carrier's license has been renewed by the Virginia Office of Emergency Medical Services, or its vehicles have been issued new permits, copies of such new license and permits shall be included with the annual recertification letter. 
(Code 1981, Ord. No. O-14-019, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 5-64. - Liability insurance required. 
(a)  No non-emergency medical transportation carrier certificate shall be issued under this article, nor shall such certificate be valid after issuance, nor shall any non-emergency medical transportation carrier vehicle be operated in the city unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to business in the state, for each and every vehicle owned and/or operated by or for the holder of a certificate, providing for bodily injury and property damage coverage, in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000.00 for each medical accident and $3,000,000.00 annual aggregate: 
(1)  For injury to or death of individuals in accidents resulting from any cause for which the owner of said vehicle would be liable on account of liability imposed on him by law, regardless of whether the vehicle was being driven by the owner or his agent, and 
(2)  For the loss of or damage to the property of another, including personal property, under like circumstances, in such sums and under such terms as may be required in regulations promulgated by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Said insurance policies shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee, for approval prior to the issuance of each certificate. Satisfactory evidence that such insurance is at all times in force and effect shall be furnished to the city manager or his designee, in such form as he may specify, by all certificate holders that are required to provide insurance under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  A certificate holder shall give the city manager or his designee, not less than 30 days' written notice before any cancellation or termination thereof earlier than its expiration date of any of the insurance required by this article and the cancellation or other termination of any such insurance policy shall automatically revoke and terminate the certificate issued covered by such policy, unless another insurance policy complying with the provisions of this section shall be provided and be in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination. 
(Code 1981, Ord. No. O-14-019, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 5-65. - Subcontracting. 
    A non-emergency medical transportation carrier who has been issued a certificate under this article shall not contract with a third-party carrier to provide non-emergency medical transportation services unless such third-party carrier has obtained a certificate from the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1981, Ord. No. O-14-019, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 5-66. - Duration. 
    A certificate issued under the provisions of this article shall be effective until canceled by the city manager or his designee, and shall automatically expire when the holder thereof fails for a period of thirty days to operate as a non-emergency medical transportation carrier within the city in accordance with such certificate. 
(Code 1981, Ord. No. O-14-019, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 5-67. - Transfer. 
    A certificate issued under the provisions of this article shall not be transferable except upon the written consent of the city manager or his designee, endorsed on such certificate. 
(Code 1981, Ord. No. O-14-019, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 5-68. - Application of traffic and other laws of city and state. 
    All the traffic and other laws of the city and the state applicable thereto shall apply to the ownership and operation non-emergency medical transportation carrier vehicles within the city. 
(Code 1981, Ord. No. O-14-019, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 5-69. - No vested rights and revocation. 
(a)  No person operating as non-emergency medical transportation carrier under the provisions of this article shall acquire any vested rights to operate as a non-emergency medical transportation carrier in the city. Certificates may be suspended or revoked by the city manager or his designee, for failure of a certificate holder to comply and to maintain compliance with, or for his violation of, any applicable provisions, standards or requirements of this article, or of any laws and regulations that are applicable to the certificate holder's operation as a non-emergency medical transportation carrier, but only after warning and such reasonable time for compliance as may be set by the city manager or his designee. Prior to the suspension or revocation of a certificate, the holder of the certificate involved shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(b)  Upon suspension, revocation or termination of a non-emergency medical transportation carrier certificate hereunder, such non-emergency medical transportation carrier shall cease operations as such and no person shall permit such non-emergency medical transportation carrier to continue operations as such. 
(Code 1981, Ord. No. O-14-019, 3-11-14) 
Sec. 5-70. - Penalty. 
    Anyone who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor for a first offense, and shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor for a second or subsequent offense. 
(Code 1981, Ord. No. O-14-019, 3-11-14) 
Secs. 5-71-5-75. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate and control public amusements, § 38(26). 
Cross reference- License fee for dance halls, § 36-54; for circuses, menageries, etc. § 36-94; for freak shows, § 36-95; for side shows, merry-go-rounds, etc., § 36-96; gross receipts tax for amusements, § 36-113. 
State Law reference- Taxation of amusement machines, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3720. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Boxing, sparring and wrestling exhibitions. 
    No boxing, sparring or wrestling exhibition shall be conducted in the city, except under a license by the state athletic commission. All such exhibitions shall be conducted strictly in accordance with the state law and the rules and regulations of such commission. 
(Code 1959, § 26-1) 
State Law reference- Virginia Athletic Commission, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-800 et seq. 
Sec. 6-2. - Circuses, menageries, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make exhibition of a circus, carnival, menagerie or show of any kind, other than shows held in a permanent building, at any place within the city, unless the location of the same shall have been first approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 26-2) 
Cross reference- Location of circuses conditional, zoning ordinance, § 35.1-36E.5. 
Sec. 6-3. - Permit required for late shows. 
    It shall be unlawful for any theatrical or opera troupe, the manager of any motion picture theatre, or other organization or person to show or produce any play, stage show or motion picture between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except upon written application to and permission granted by the city manager; or, upon appeal from a ruling of the city manager denying such permission, permission granted by the council. 
(Code 1959, § 26-3; Ord. No. O-89-289, § 1, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 6-4. - Lectures, shows, etc., on sexual matters. 
    No person shall, within the city, for compensation, either directly or indirectly, give any lecture, entertainment, show or performance of any kind, dealing primarily with matters of sex or sex relations, and whether using picture slides, moving pictures or illustrations in connection therewith or not, or shall sell in connection with such lectures, entertainments, etc., any books or pamphlets dealing with sex matters or sex relations, unless such lecture, entertainment, show or performance is given under the auspices of the school board of the city or some other approved organization within the city and until a permit therefor shall have been obtained from the city manager. The manager shall have authority either to grant or refuse such permit as he may see fit. The provisions of this section shall apply to any lecture, entertainment, show or performance given in any theatre, picture house or other place of public gathering or over the radio. 
(Code 1959, § 26-4) 
Cross reference- Obscenity, § 27-12. 
Sec. 6-5. - Indecent and obscene shows. 
    It shall be unlawful for any theatrical or opera troupe, the manager of any moving picture house, or other organization or person to produce any show, opera or play, to exhibit any picture, or any other entertainment in which there is any indecent display, obscene, vulgar or licentious language, or immoral plot, or for the manager of any show, play or opera house, moving picture house, or other building under his control, to permit any such show, play, opera or moving picture as is above prohibited. Upon satisfactory evidence, the city manager may prohibit the production or exhibition of any such show, play, opera, picture or entertainment. This section shall not be construed to apply to motion pictures approved by the censors for the division of motion picture censorship in the state department of law. 
(Code 1959, § 26-5) 
Cross reference- Obscenity, § 27-12. 
Sec. 6-6. - Bond, liability insurance required for amusement rides. 
    No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement ride operated for hire or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing with the clerk of council a bond or certificate of liability insurance, in the amount of at least $100,000.00, indemnifying the public against damages sustained by reason of the operation of such ride. Such bond or certificate of insurance shall apply to all persons, whether or not a license or permit is required by any other provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
Sec. 6-7. - Special events. 
    Whenever the provisions of this chapter require that an amusement facility be closed between the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m., such restrictions shall not be construed as prohibiting an amusement facility from making its facilities available for special activities by church groups, civic organizations, and other similar groups. 
(Ord. No. O-92-368, 12-8-92) 
Secs. 6-8-6-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOWLING ALLEYS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- License fee, § 36-113. 

Sec. 6-18. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any bowling alley within the city or to keep such place of business open, or permit his bowling alley to be used between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. No person shall operate a bowling alley without first obtaining a permit as required by section 6-71 of this chapter and shall comply with the provisions of sections 6-72 through 6-80 of this chapter. The provisions of this section shall apply to both the owner and operator of a bowling alley. 
(Code 1959, § 26-12; Ord. No. O-89-289, § 1, 10-24-89) 
Secs. 6-19-6-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BILLIARD ROOMS AND POOLROOMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate and control persons keeping billiard tables, § 38(26). 
Cross reference- License fee, § 36-113. 

Sec. 6-46. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, a billiard room is a place where there is a table at which billiards, pool or bagatelle is played, but shall not include a club or business establishment in which there are kept or operated, as an incident to the operation of the club or business establishment, not more than two coin-operated tables at which billiards, pool or bagatelle is played. 
(Code 1959, § 26-13) 
Sec. 6-47. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, managing, or operating a billiard room to keep open or operate the billiard room on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for any person, except employees, to enter a billiard room during the hours in which it is closed. 
(Code 1959, § 26-14; Ord. No. O-89-289, § 1, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 6-48. - Minors generally. 
(a)  Any person owning, managing or operating a billiard room may, in his discretion, allow minors between the ages of 16 and 18 years to play or watch the play of billiards in the billiard room when: 
(1)  The interior of the billiard room is lighted throughout at a level of 40 footcandles; 
(2)  No partitions, other than those for toilet facilities, are maintained in the billiard room; and 
(3)  No window in the billiard room is covered or otherwise obstructed. 
    The minor shall be solely responsible for establishing his or her age. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, managing or operating a billiard room to permit any minor between the ages of 16 and 18 years to enter the billiard room unless the foregoing provisions of this section are complied with. 
(b)  Any person owning, managing or operating a billiard room in which any alcoholic beverage is sold or consumed in the billiard room or in any other area or place accessible from the billiard room, shall not allow minors under the age of 16 years to play or watch the play of billiards in such billiard room unless the billiard room meets the same conditions and circumstances under which minors between the ages of 16 and 18 years are allowed to play or watch the play of billiards in a billiard room and unless each minor is accompanied by one of his or her parents or person in loco parentis or legal guardian. The person accompanying a minor under the age of 16 years shall be solely responsible for establishing the age of the minor and the relationship of the minor to such person. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, managing or operating a billiard room to permit any minor under the age of 16 years to enter the billiard room unless the foregoing provisions of this subsection are complied with. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to accompany a minor under the age of 16 years in a billiard room unless such person is a parent or person in loco parentis or legal guardian of the minor. It shall be unlawful for a parent, person in loco parentis or legal guardian to permit his or her child who is under the age of 16 years to enter a billiard room unless the child is accompanied by such parent, person or guardian. It shall be unlawful for a parent, person in loco parentis or legal guardian, having accompanied his or her child in a billiard room to leave the billiard room without the child. It shall be unlawful for any minor who is under the age of 16 years to enter a billiard room without one of his or her parents or the person in loco parentis of the minor or the minor's legal guardian. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, managing or operating a billiard room to knowingly permit any person to violate the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 26-16; Ord. No. O-89-289, § 1, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 6-49. - Minors under eighteen years of age. 
    Except as otherwise provided in section 6-48, it shall be unlawful for any person owning, managing or operating a billiard room to allow any minor under the age of 18 years to enter the billiard room except for the transaction of business other than playing pool or billiards. It shall be unlawful for any such minor who is in a billiard room for the transaction of business to remain therein after the business has been transacted; and it shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or operator of the billiard room to allow such minor to thereafter remain in the billiard room. 
(Code 1959, § 26-15) 
Sec. 6-50. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a billiard room without first obtaining a permit as required by section 6-71 of this chapter and shall comply with the provisions of sections 6-72 through 6-80 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-89-289, § 1, 10-24-89) 
Secs. 6-51-6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMMERCIAL RECREATION CENTERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Minor operating coin-operated machines, § 27-24. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-61. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, a "commercial recreation center" is defined as any establishment where foosball, table tennis, shuffleboard or any other game of recreation or amusement is displayed for public patronage, where the insertion of a coin, slug or token or the payment of a fee is required and where three or more such game machines are in use. There is excepted from this article and the regulations contained herein game machines operated as an incident to a club or business establishment duly licensed and regulated by the state alcoholic beverage control board; however, such club or business establishment shall obtain a permit as required by section 6-71 of this chapter and shall comply with the provisions of sections 6-72 through 6-80 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-17; Ord. No. O-89-289, § 1, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 6-62. - Penalty. 
    Any person owning, managing or operating a center who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-24) 
Sec. 6-63. - Operating requirements. 
    No center shall be operated except in compliance with the following operating requirements provided that requirements (6) and (7) shall not be required of any center operating lawfully prior to April 8, 1975: 
(1)  The center shall be illuminated throughout its interior at a level of at least 40 footcandles. 
(2)  The center shall provide separate rest room facilities for both sexes. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  The center shall at all times be under management and control by a person at least 18 years of age who shall be on the premises of the center at all times during the hours of operation. 
(5)  The center shall have no partitioned or closed off areas other than those for toilet facilities, office space and storerooms. 
(6)  The center shall be located on the ground level floor of the building in which it is situated; it shall also have a window or windows with a total of not less than 50 square feet of glass which shall not be covered or otherwise obstructed during hours of business. 
(7)  The center shall provide permanently maintained off-street parking for personnel and patrons at the rate of one and one-half parking spaces for each game table or machine displayed whether in use or not. 
(8)  The center shall be open for observation without warrant by any law enforcement official at any time during normal hours of operation. 
(9)  The center shall display in a conspicuous manner the permit issued and the license obtained for operation of the commercial recreation center. 
    Provided, however, that where the commercial recreation center is a part of, owned by and housed in a restaurant and utilizes no more than 25 percent of the floor space of the restaurant, the provisions of subsections (5) and (6) hereof may be waived to the extent deemed appropriate by the issuer of the permit, so long as visibility of the center is sufficient for police department observation. 
    For the purposes of this section, a "restaurant" shall be defined as an establishment that is open to the public and where the principal use is the preparation and serving of food and beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-22; Ord. No. O-81-033, § 1, 2-10-81; Ord. No. O-83-069, § 1, 4-26-83; Ord. No. O-99-252, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 6-64. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, managing or operating a commercial recreation center to keep open or operate a center on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for any person, except employees, to enter the center during the hours in which it is closed. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, §26-23; Ord. No. O-80-265, § 1 (26-23), 9-23-80; Ord. No. O-89-289, § 1, 10-24-89) 
Secs. 6-65-6-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 6-71. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a bowling alley, billiard room or commercial recreation center without first obtaining a permit from the city manager or his authorized designee. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-18; Ord. No. O-89-289, § 1, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 6-72. - Application. 
    The application for a permit required by this division shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, age, social security number, race, sex, date and place of birth and where pertinent the relationship of the applicant to any company, corporation or other entity which has interest in the ownership or management of the facility. 
(2)  Prior criminal convictions, excluding traffic offenses, of the applicant, if any. 
(3)  Prospective location of the facility. 
(4)  Maximum number of patrons the facility will accommodate. 
(5)  A list of all employees who are expected to serve in a managerial capacity in the facility. 
(6)  A certification by the applicant that all requirements of this article have been complied with. 
(7)  The permit shall be valid for one year from the date issued and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained; however, the applicant shall not have to pay an application fee for the renewal of the permit. The applicant shall update the city manager or his designee on any changes in those employees who are expected to serve in a managerial capacity. No permit shall be transferable. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-16; Ord. No. O-89-289, § 1, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 6-73. - Application fee. 
    At the time of filing his application, the applicant for a permit required by the provisions of this division shall pay a fee of $50.00 which shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-18) 
Sec. 6-74. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this division, the city manager or his authorized designee shall immediately cause an investigation to be made concerning the qualifications of the applicant and whether the proposed center is in compliance with all applicable law. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-19) 
Sec. 6-75. - Issuance or denial. 
    The city manager or his designee shall grant or deny any permit applied for under the provisions of this division and shall notify the applicant of his action within 30 days of the filing of the application. If the city manager denies such permit, he shall state in writing his reasons for such action. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-19) 
Sec. 6-76. - Grounds for denial. 
    The following factors shall constitute grounds for the denial of a permit required by the provisions of this division: 
(1)  A finding by the city manager or his authorized designee that the applicant has falsified his application in a material manner. 
(2)  A finding by the city manager or his authorized designee that the applicant or any of his designated managerial employees has a criminal record which reveals any convictions for violations of any drug control law or any other pattern of criminal misconduct involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  A finding by the city manager or his authorized designee that the applicant consistently fails to cooperate with law enforcement personnel in the exercise of their official duties. 
(4)  A finding by the city manager or his authorized designee that the application is not properly completed as required herein. 
(5)  A finding by the city manager or his authorized designee that the proposed center fails to comply with the provisions of this article. 
    No other factors shall be sufficient grounds for denial of an application for a permit. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-19) 
Sec. 6-77. - Assignment. 
    No permit issued under this division shall be assignable in any manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-21) 
Sec. 6-78. - Expiration. 
    When the holder of a permit issued under the provisions of this division shall cease to operate the center for a period of 60 days, the permit shall be void. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-21) 
Sec. 6-79. - Revocation or suspension. 
    The city manager may revoke or suspend for a period of 30 days the permit for the operation of a bowling alley, billiard room or commercial recreation center if he finds: 
(1)  That the premises have been declared a common nuisance by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  That the permittee has consistently failed to operate the center in an orderly manner. 
(3)  That the permittee has failed to take prompt and vigorous action to prevent violations of criminal statutes occurring on or about the premises which are known or should have been known to the permittee. 
(4)  That circumstances exist which would have justified a denial of such permit at the time of its issuance. 
(5)  That the permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-20; Ord. No. O-89-289, § 1, 10-24-89) 
Sec. 6-80. - Hearing. 
    A permittee under this division shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager before such permit is revoked or suspended. The city manager shall give the permittee five days' notice of his intention to revoke or suspend such permit, along with his grounds for revocation or suspension by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service by an appropriate law enforcement officer. The hearing shall be held not more than 20 days after giving of the notice. 
(Ord. of 4-8-75, § 26-20) 
Secs. 6-81-6-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BINGO AND RAFFLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Divisions 1 and 2 of Article V, which included §§ 6-91-6-119, were repealed by Ord. No. O-94-301, adopted Nov. 22, 1994, to become effective Jan. 1, 1995, were replaced by §§ 6-91.1-6-91.14. 

Sec. 6-91.1. - Application of state bingo and raffle laws. 
    The provisions of Sections 18.2-340.1 through 18.2-340.14, Article 1.1, Chapter 8, Title 18.2, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, ("Bingo and Raffles") as now in effect and with such future amendments as may from time to time be made by the General Assembly, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference and made applicable within the city upon their effective dates subject to the provisions of the Lynchburg City Code as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.2. - Annual permit required; application fee; form of application. 
    Prior to the commencement of any bingo game or raffle by an organization, as defined by the state bingo and raffle laws, the organization shall obtain an annual permit from the city attorney, who is designated as the local official for the issuance of permits as provided in Sections 18.2-340.2 and 18.2-340.3 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
    The application for the annual permit shall be accompanied by a check in the amount of $25.00 payable to the city. Application for an annual permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the state bingo and raffle laws, expanded to include any other information desired by the city attorney. The application shall be a matter of public record. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.3. - Limit on number of organizations for which a person may manage, operate, or conduct bingo games and raffles. 
    A person may not manage, operate and/or conduct bingo games and/or raffles for more than two organizations during any annual period. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.4. - Special requirements for issuance of permit; membership; duration of existence. 
(a)  Organizations defined by the state bingo and raffle laws shall have a membership consisting of at least 50 percent residents of the commonwealth and shall furnish a complete list of their membership to the city attorney in order to ascertain the percentage of Virginia residents. 
(b)  Except for booster clubs, which have been operating for less than five years, and which have been established solely to raise funds for school-sponsored activities in public schools that are less than five years old, organizations shall have been in existence and met on a regular basis in the city or in a county, city or town adjacent to Lynchburg for a period of at least five years immediately prior to applying for a permit. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.5. - Use of percentage of gross receipts. 
    As a condition of receiving a permit, the permittee organization shall during each annual period for which a permit is issued use a minimum of five percent of its gross receipts from all bingo games and raffles and no less than ten percent of gross receipts averaged for three consecutive annual periods for (i) those lawful religious, charitable, community or educational purposes for which the organization is specifically chartered or organized or (ii) those expenses relating to the acquisition, construction, maintenance or repair of any interest in the real property involving the operation of the organization and used for lawful religious, charitable, community or educational purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.6. - Reports of gross receipts and disbursements. 
    Complete records of all receipts and disbursements shall be kept on the forms provided or a reasonable facsimile and shall be filed under oath, as required by the state bingo and raffle laws, with the director of the finance department, who is hereby designated as the local official for the receipt of reports and for audits as provided under the state bingo and raffle laws. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.7. - Audit fee. 
    An audit fee of two percentum of the gross receipts which an organization reports pursuant to section 6-91.6 shall be paid to the City of Lynchburg by the organization filing such reports. For annual gross receipts of $3,000.00 or less, no audit fee shall be required. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.8. - Guests restricted. 
    A qualified organization may conduct bingo and instant bingo games and raffles solely for its members and their guests, but if such organization admits the public to its functions, it must do so without restrictions other than as provided in this article and the state bingo and raffle laws. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.9. - Limitation on number of games per day. 
    No building or other premises shall be utilized in whole or in part for the purpose of conducting bingo games more frequently than two calendar days in any one calendar week. No more than one organization (exclusive or associated organizations such as, but not limited to, auxiliaries) shall conduct bingo games at any one location during any one calendar day. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the playing of bingo pursuant to a special permit. One building or premises owned by the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
    For purposes of this article, calendar day shall mean the period of 24 consecutive hours commencing at 12:01 a.m. and concluding the following 12:01 a.m. Calendar week shall mean the period of seven consecutive calendar days commencing at 12:01 a.m. on Sunday and ending at 12:01 a.m. the following Sunday. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.10. - Hours of operations. 
    No bingo games shall be held and no bingo game shall be permitted in the city between the hours of 12 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.11. - Certificate of use required. 
    No place shall be used for a bingo game or raffle unless and until a written request from the sponsoring organization has been made to the city's division of inspections for an inspection thereof and a certificate of use has been issued by the director of community planning and development, or his designee, to the sponsoring organization certifying compliance with all codes and regulations. Such certificate shall be displayed on the premises of which a bingo game or raffle is conducted at all times during the course of such games or raffle. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.12. - Records. 
    An organization conducting bingo games shall maintain a record in writing for three years of the dates on which bingo was played, the number of people in attendance on each date, and the amount of the receipts and prizes paid on each such day. The organization shall also maintain a record of the names and addresses of each individual to whom a door prize, regular or special bingo game prize or jackpot for the playing of bingo is awarded, as well as the amount of such award. The organization playing bingo shall also maintain an itemized record of all receipts and disbursements; including operating costs and use of proceeds incurred in operating bingo games. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.13. - Denial, suspension, revocation of permit. 
    The city council may deny, suspend, or revoke the bingo/raffle permit of any organization not found to be in strict compliance with the provisions of this article or the state bingo and raffle laws. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 6-91.14. - Violation. 
    A violation of any provision of this article or of the state bingo and raffle laws shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-94-301, 11-22-94, eff. 1-1-95) 
Secs. 6-92-6-110. - Reserved. 
Chapter 7 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health department, § 2-349. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Animal warden. 
    The city council shall, upon nomination of the chief of police, appoint a special policeman to be known as the animal warden for the city, and deputy animal wardens whose terms of office shall be at the pleasure of the chief of police, and it shall be the special duty of the animal warden and deputy animal wardens, subject to the supervision and control of the chief of police, to enforce this chapter and the statutes of the commonwealth relating to animals, particularly the provisions with respect to dogs contained in Chapter 27.4, Title 3.1, Code of Virginia. To enable them to discharge their duties, the animal warden and deputy animal wardens shall have the power, perform the duties, and be subject to the penalties that are by law prescribed. When in uniform or upon displaying a badge or other credentials of office, the animal warden and the deputy animal wardens shall have the power to issue a summons or obtain a felony warrant as necessary, providing the execution of such warrant shall be carried out by any law enforcement officer as defined in Section 9.1-101 of the state code to any person found in the act of violating any animal protection and control laws of the commonwealth or any animal protection and control ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 25-4(b); Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01; Ord. No. O-03-192, 11-25-03) 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 31. 
Sec. 7-2. - Domestic animals generally at large. 
    No person shall permit a horse, mule or cow to go at large in the city. Anyone violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 4-3) 
Charter reference- Authority to prevent animals running at large, § 38(21). 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate destructive dogs, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.117 
Sec. 7-3. - Dangerous animals at large. 
    No person shall suffer any animal belonging to him, or under his control, and known to be dangerous or mischievous, to go at large in the city. Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. If the owner of such animal shall fail to take it into his custody, after being notified so to do, such animal may be killed by any policeman who may deem it necessary for the safety of persons in the street. 
(Code 1959, § 4-5) 
Sec. 7-4. - Certain domestic animals not to go upon park space or grassplot in or adjacent to streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any horse, mule or cow owned by him, in his custody, or under his control, to go or enter upon any park space or grassplot in any of the city's street right-of-way except areas paved for the purposes of vehicular travel. Anyone violating this section shall be punished by a fine of up to $250.00, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. of 5-27-75, § 4-6; Ord. No. O-10-025, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 7-5. - Fowl at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any fowl belonging to him to go at large in the city. Anyone violating this section shall be punished by a fine of up to $250.00, in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1959, § 4-7; Ord. No. O-10-025, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 7-6. - Excessive, continuous or untimely sounds from animals, livestock, poultry or fowl. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and shall be a nuisance for an owner or custodian of any animal, livestock, poultry or fowl to harbor or keep any animal, livestock, poultry or fowl within the city which frequently or for a continued duration makes excessive, continuous or untimely sounds which are audible on the property of a complainant in the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "excessive, continuous or untimely sounds" shall mean any animal, livestock, poultry or fowl sounds (with the exception of dogs and cats which are covered by sections 7-33 and 7-35 of the City Code) which: 
(1)  Can be heard inside the confines of a dwelling unit, house or apartment of another person between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; or 
(2)  Can be heard inside the confides of a dwelling unit, house or apartment of another person at least once a minute for ten consecutive minutes between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; or 
(3)  Can be heard at 50 feet or more feet from the animal, livestock, poultry or fowl between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; or 
(4)  Can be heard at 50 feet or from the animal, livestock, poultry or fowl at least once a minute for ten consecutive minutes between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(c)  Any person who is subjected to excessive, continuous or untimely sounds from any animal, livestock, poultry or fowl may appear before a magistrate and request that a summons to be issued summoning the person owning or having custody of any animal, livestock, poultry or fowl suspected of making excessive, continuous or untimely sounds before the general district court of the city to show cause why such animal, livestock, poultry or fowl should not be ordered to be removed beyond the city limits. Upon proof that such animal, livestock, poultry or fowl is making excessive, continuous or untimely sounds, such animal, livestock, poultry or fowl shall, upon order of the general district court, be removed beyond the city limits, as directed by the general district court. 
(d)  If the owner or custodian of any animal, livestock, poultry or fowl fails to comply with the general district court's removal order within two weeks, the animal control officer may impound the animal, livestock, poultry or fowl and offer the animal, livestock, poultry or fowl to an animal shelter for adoption in a home outside of the city or otherwise dispose of such animal, livestock, poultry or fowl if it cannot be adopted. 
(Ord. No. O-12-075, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 7-7. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Any person who (i) overrides, overdrives, overloads, ill-treats, or abandons any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; (ii) tortures any animal, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates, or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; or (iii) deprives any animal of necessary sustenance, food, drink or shelter or emergency veterinary treatment; or (iv) sores any equine for any purpose or administers drugs or medications to alter or mask such soring for the purpose of sale, show, or exhibition of any kind unless such administration of drugs or medications is within the context of a veterinary client-patient relationship and solely for therapeutic purposes; (v ) ropes, lassoes, or otherwise obstructs or interferes with one or more legs of an equine in order to intentionally cause it to trip or fall for the purpose of engagement in a rodeo, contest, exhibition, entertainment, or sport unless such actions are in the practice of accepted animal husbandry or for the purpose of allowing veterinary care; (vi) willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; or (vii) carries or causes to be carried in or upon any vehicle, vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal, or inhumane manner so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or (viii) causes any of the above things, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Prosecution for violations of this subsection shall commence within five years after commission of the offense. Prosecution of this subsection regarding agricultural animals, as defined in Section 3.2-5900 of the Code of Virginia, shall commence within one year after commission of the offense. 
(b)  Any person who abandons any dog, cat or other companion animal on public property, including the right-of-way of any public highway, right-of-way, property adjacent to such highway or right-of-way, or on the property of another without the written consent of the owner thereof or his agent shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00 or more than $2,500.00, either or both. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section the word animal shall be construed to include birds and fowl. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to kill a domestic dog or cat for the purpose of obtaining the hide, fur, or pelt of the dog or cat. A violation of this subsection shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(f)  This section shall not prohibit authorized wildlife management activities or hunting, fishing or trapping as regulated under the Code of Virginia or the City Code, or to farming activities. 
(g)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the court may, in its discretion, require any person convicted of violating paragraph (a) to attend an anger management or other appropriate treatment program or obtain psychiatric or psychological counseling. The court may impose the costs of such program or counseling upon the person convicted. 
(h)  For the purposes of this section the word person shall be held to include firms and corporations as well as individuals. 
(i)  Any person convicted of violating this section may be prohibited by the court from possession or ownership of companion animals. 
(j)  In addition to the penalties provided in this subsection, the court may, in its discretion, require any person convicted of a violation of subsection (a) to attend an anger management or other appropriate treatment program or obtain psychiatric or psychological counseling. The court may impose the costs of such a program or counseling upon the person convicted. 
(Code 1959, § 4-8, Ord. No. O-93-077, 3-23-93; Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01; Ord. No. O-03-192, 11-25-03; Ord. No. O-19-033 , § 1, 6-11-19) 
Charter reference- Abuse of animals, § 38(22). 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.122 et seq. 
Sec. 7-7.1. - Care of animals by owner; penalty. 
(a)  Each owner shall provide for each of his companion animals: 
(1)  Adequate feed; 
(2)  Adequate water; 
(3)  Adequate shelter that is properly cleaned; 
(4)  Adequate space in the primary enclosure for the particular type of animal depending upon its age, size, species, and weight; 
(5)  Adequate exercise; 
(6)  Adequate care, treatment, and transportation; and 
(7)  Veterinary care when needed or prevent suffering or disease transmission. 
    The provisions of this section shall also apply to every animal shelter, pound, dealer, pet shop, exhibitor, kennel, groomer, and boarding establishment. This section shall not require that animals used as food for other animals be euthanized. 
(b)  Game and wildlife species shall be cared for in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Board of Game and Inland Fisheries by January 1, 1994, and any subsequent amendments or revisions to such regulations. 
(c)  Violation of this section is a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-7.2. - Recovery of costs for impounded animals. 
    Whenever the animal warden or the deputy animal wardens seize and impound any animal that has been abandoned, has been cruelly treated, is suffering from an apparent violation of the Virginia Comprehensive Animal Care Act that has rendered the animal in such a condition as to constitute a direct and immediate threat to its life, safety or health, or is alleged to be a dangerous or vicious dog, the owner of the animal shall be responsible for paying the impoundment fees set forth in Article III, of Chapter 7 of the City Code. The animal shall not be released to the owner until the impoundment fees have been paid. If the animal is seized and impounded for a period of more than 30 days the owner of the animal shall post a bond in surety with the city for the cost of boarding the animal for a period of nine months. If the animal is not boarded for the entire nine months, the city will refund the unused portion of the bond to the owner. The failure of an owner to post the required bond shall be an unlawful act and punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. In any legal proceeding involving an animal that has been seized or impounded, the court may order the owner of such animal to reimburse the city for the cost of boarding the animal. The owner of any animal that is seized and impounded shall not be required to pay the cost of boarding the animal if no charges are brought against the owner, or the charges are subsequently dismissed, or upon trial the owner is found not guilty. 
(Ord. of 4-14-09, O-09-023) 
Sec. 7-8. - Disposal of animals dying from infectious, contagious diseases. 
    When any animal shall die of a contagious or infectious disease, the owner thereof shall forthwith notify the state department of agriculture and he shall dispose of such animal as directed by such department. 
(Code 1959, § 4-2) 
State Law reference- Leaving dead animals in streets or remaining unburied on property, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-323. 
Sec. 7-9. - Keeping hogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a live pig, hog or pot bellied pig within the corporate limits of the city, except for the purpose of immediate killing in slaughterhouses, unless kept in a pen at least 200 yards from the nearest dwelling other than that of the owner of the pig or hog. The pen must be maintained free from flies and in a sanitary condition. Whenever in the opinion of the animal warden the pen shall become a nuisance, he shall order it to be abolished at once. Instead of a pen, a pot bellied pig may be kept inside the owner's or custodian's home as long as the keeping of the pig does not cause any offensive odors or noises that disturb any citizen of the city in the reasonable use and enjoyment of their property. When outside its owner's or custodian's home or its pen, a pot bellied pig must be secured by a leash or lead. If a pot bellied pig is kept outside it will be considered to be livestock and not a pet. 
(Code 1959, § 4-9; Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Charter reference- Prevention of the keeping of animals, § 38(21). 
Sec. 7-10. - Prohibited methods of taking fish. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, capture or destroy any fish within the corporate limits of this city by means of fish traps, fish nets or seines of any kind, or by the use of dynamite or fish berries. 
(Code 1959, § 4-10) 
Sec. 7-11. - Killing birds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to kill any sparrow, martin, wren or other bird within the city. But this section shall not apply to English sparrows, starlings or to pigeons; provided, however, that all killing or other control of such birds shall be done in accordance with all guidelines, rules, regulations and laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Code 1959, § 4-11; Ord. No. O-84-192, § 7-10-84) 
Sec. 7-12. - Cleaning up after dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any dog to allow such dog to defecate on public property or on the private property of other persons without their consent or the consent of the owner's authorized agent. 
(b)  Provided however, defecation by a dog on public or private property shall not constitute a violation of this section if the owner or person in control of the dog immediately removes the defecated matter and disposes of it in a safe and sanitary manner. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of $50.00. 
(d)  To charge someone with a violation of this section the person observing the violation shall determine the identity of the person committing the violation and appear before the magistrate and provide the magistrate with the information necessary for the issuance of a summons or warrant. 
(Ord. of 01-10-2006, Ord. No. O-06-001) 
Secs. 7-13-7-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.84 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-33. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Cat: Every cat regardless of age. 
    Dog: Every dog regardless of age. 
    Destructive dog or cat: For the purpose of this article a destructive dog or cat shall be: 
(1)  Any dog or cat that frequently or habitually injures or destroys property of any person other than the owner or custodian thereof: or 
(2)  Any dog or cat that frequently or habitually turns over garbage cans, when constructed and covered in strict accordance with chapter 21.2, of any person other than the owner or custodian thereof. 
    Own and owner: Includes any person having a right of property in a dog or cat, and any person who keeps or harbors a dog or cat or has it in his care, or who acts as its custodian, and any person who permits a dog or cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
    Public nuisance: For the purposes of this article a public nuisance dog or cat shall be: 
(1)  Any dog that molests passersby or passing vehicles; 
(2)  Any dog that attacks other animals; 
(3)  Any dog that trespasses on school grounds; 
(4)  Any dog that is in violation of section 7-36 on three or more occasions; 
(5)  Any dog that damages private or public property; or 
(6)  Any dog or cat that barks or meows, whines, howls or cries, in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, that disturbs the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
(7)  Any cat that damages public or private property. 
    Run at large: A dog shall be deemed to run at large while roaming or running off the property of its owner or custodian and not under its owner's or custodian's immediate physical or voice control; physical control shall include confinement of the animal by a fence, chain, leash or some other means of physical restraint or the owner's or custodian's physical presence; provided, that this section shall not apply where the owner, custodian or trainer has put down a dog for the express purpose of hunting game in an area where it is lawful to hunt, compete in field trial or train, and such dog becomes temporarily out of control of such owner, custodian or trainer or is returning to the place of release after the hunt or chase. 
    Run at large in a pack: A dog shall be deemed to be running at large in a pack if it is running at large in the company of one or more other dogs that are also running at large. 
(Code 1959, § 4-36; Ord. of 8-14-79; O-01-171, 9-18-01; Ord. No. O-19-033 , § 1, 6-11-19) 
Sec. 7-34. - Penalties. 
    The following acts shall be unlawful acts and constitute class 4 misdemeanors: 
(a)  License application: For any person to make a false statement in order to secure a dog license to which he is not entitled. 
(b)  License tax: For any dog owner to fail to pay the license tax required by this chapter before February 1 for the year in which it is due. In addition, the court may order confiscation and the proper disposition of the dog. 
(c)  Leash ordinance: For any dog owner to allow a dog to run at large in violation of section 7-36. In addition to being guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, any dog owner that allows a dog to run at large in a pack, shall also be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $100.00 per dog so found and any civil penalty collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the same account in which the monies that are collected for dog licenses are deposited and used for the same purposes. 
(d)  Rabies regulations: For any person to fail to obey an ordinance passed pursuant to section 7-95; 
(e)  Dead dogs: For any owner to fail to dispose of the body of his dog in accordance with section 7-8. 
(f)  Diseased dogs: For the owner of any dog with a contagious or infectious disease to permit such dog to stray from its premises if such disease is known to the owner. 
(g)  Removing collar and tag: For any person except the owner or custodian to remove a legally-acquired license tag from a dog. 
(h)  Concealing a dog: For any person to conceal or harbor any dog on which the license tax has not been paid, or to conceal a rabid dog to keep the same from being killed. 
(i)  Any other violation of this article for which specific penalty is not provided. 
(Code 1959, § 4-60; Ord. of 8-14-79; Ord. No. O-19-033 , § 1, 6-11-19) 
Sec. 7-35. - Destructive or public nuisance dogs or cats. 
    Any person owning or having in his possession or under his control a dog or cat suspected of being a destructive dog or cat, or a public nuisance, shall be summoned before the general district court for the city to show cause why such dog or cat should not be confined or removed beyond the limits of the city, and upon proof that such animal is destructive or a public nuisance, such animal shall, upon order of the general district court, either be confined or removed beyond the limits of the city, as may be directed by the general district court. Any dog or cat considered to be a public nuisance shall be impounded in accordance with section 7-36. 
(Code 1959, 54-37; Ord. of 8-14-79; Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-35.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-06-104, adopted Aug. 26, 2006, repealed § 7-35.1. 
Sec. 7-35.2. - Hybrid canines. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
    Adequate confinement means that, while on the property of its owner and not under the direct supervision and control of the owner or custodian, a hybrid canine shall be confined in a humane manner in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to (i) prevent the animal's escape; or if the hybrid is determined to be a dangerous dog pursuant to section 7-35.1 of the City Code, the structure shall prevent direct contact with any person or animal not authorized by the owner to be in direct contact with the hybrid canine, and (ii) provide a minimum of 100 square feet of floor space for each adult animal. Tethering of a hybrid canine not under the direct supervision and control of the owner or custodian shall not be considered adequate confinement. 
    Hybrid canine means any animal which at any time has been or is permitted, registered, licensed, advertised or otherwise described or represented as a hybrid canine, wolf or coyote by its owner to a licensed veterinarian, law enforcement officer, animal control officer, humane investigator, official of the department of health, or state veterinarian's representative. 
    Responsible ownership means the ownership and humane care of a hybrid canine in such a manner as to comply with all laws and ordinances regarding hybrid canines and prevent endangerment by the animal to public health and safety. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or possess a hybrid canine four months or older in the city unless the hybrid canine is licensed as required by the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Any person owning or possessing a hybrid canine four months or older in the city shall obtain an annual permit from the animal warden no later than January 31 of each year. The permit shall not be transferable, shall expire on December 31 of each year and must be renewed by January 31 of each succeeding year. The cost of the permit shall be $50.00 per year and shall not be prorated. 
(2)  No person other than the operator of a pet store or dealer in companion animals shall own or possess more than two hybrid canines. 
(3)  Each hybrid canine shall be permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation. The animal warden shall provide the owner or custodian with a uniformly designed tag which identifies the animal as a hybrid canine and the owner or custodian shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. 
(4)  The application for a permit shall include the sex, color, height, vaccination records, length, identifying marks, the location where the hybrid canine will normally be kept and such additional information as the animal warden determines is necessary. 
(5)  A hybrid canine shall at all times be confined in a proper enclosure or structure of such sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults or other animals. The owner's or custodian's property shall be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a hybrid canine. 
(6)  When off of its owner's or custodian's property a hybrid canine shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(c)  A first violation of this ordinance shall be punished as a class 3 misdemeanor and any subsequent violation shall be punished as a class 1 misdemeanor. In addition any owner or custodian of a hybrid canine that fails or refuses to comply with the terms of this may be ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction to dispose of their animal. The court may order the owner or custodian of a hybrid canine to surrender the animal for euthanasia in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.1-796.119 of the Code of Virginia. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of every veterinarian that practices in the city to notify the animal warden of the existence of a hybrid canine within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-36. - Owners prohibited from allowing dog to run at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow such dog to run at large within the city even though the dog be both lawfully licensed and vaccinated. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any police officer to seize and impound any and every dog found running at large in violation of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 4-44; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-37. - Bitches in heat. 
(a)  No person shall permit any bitch while in heat to go at large in the city. The owner of any bitch going at large while in heat shall be punished as provided in section 1-13, and the bitch shall be impounded in accordance with section 7-36. Impoundment shall not exempt its owner from the penalty referred to herein. 
(b)  When a bitch is in heat the owner or custodian must confine the animal indoors or in a securely enclosed structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with other animals. 
(c)  When a bitch is in heat it must be kept on a leash at all times when off the property of the owner or custodian. 
(Code 1959, § 4-38; Ord. of 8-14-79; Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-38. - Rabies vaccination required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, hold or harbor any dog or cat, over the age of four months, within the boundaries of the city, unless such dog or cat shall have been vaccinated or inoculated against rabies with a species appropriate vaccine approved by the United States Department of Agriculture and administered by a licensed veterinarian or by a certified animal technician approved by the Virginia Board of Veterinary Medicine, and has received any required revaccination against rabies as specified in the certificate of vaccination. 
(b)  Any person transporting a dog or cat into the city from some other jurisdiction shall be required to conform with the above regulation within 14 days. 
(c)  Any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog or cat over four months old shall have the required vaccination performed within 30 days of the passage of this section, or within 14 days from the day on which the dog or cat is first owned, kept, harbored or moved into the city by the person, whichever is later. 
(d)  The owner of any dog or the owner's agent shall attach to the collar of such dog the current rabies tag supplied by the veterinarian or certified animal technician. Such collar and tag shall be worn by the dog at all times such dog is out of doors, whether on or off the premises of the owner. Cat owners are encouraged to tag their cats similarly but are not required to do so. 
(e)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to any dogs or cats temporarily brought into the city, for a period not to exceed 30 days, for showing or breeding purposes, if such dogs or cats remain confined at all times. 
(Code 1959, § 4-42; Ord. of 8-14-79; Ord. No. O-87-059, § 1, 3-24-87; Ord. No. O-88-304, § 1, 11-22-88) 
Sec. 7-39. - Vaccination certificate issued. 
(a)  At the time of vaccination, a certificate of inoculation setting forth the type of vaccine used shall be issued to the dog's or cat's owner. A copy of the vaccination certificate shall be retained by the vaccinating veterinarian or the certified animal technician, and a copy shall be sent at once to the department of public health of the city and kept on file, where duplicate copies may be obtained by the owner upon payment of a fee of $0.25. Such certificate of vaccination shall be properly executed and signed by the licensed veterinarian or certified animal technician performing the vaccination. 
(b)  The certificate issued pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section shall be NASPHV Form #50, or its equivalent, and shall certify that the dog or cat has been vaccinated in accordance with this article, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date of the vaccination; 
(2)  The date for required revaccination; 
(3)  The rabies tag number; 
(4)  A brief description of the dog or cat or its age, sex and breed; and 
(5)  The name and address of the animal's owner. 
(c)  The certificate issued pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section shall be preserved by the owner of the dog or cat and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by the animal protection officer or any law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1959, § 4-43; Ord. of 8-14-79; Ord. No. O-87-059, § 1, 3-24-87) 
Cross reference- Rabies control, § 7-95 et seq. 
Sec. 7-40. - Evidence of vaccination. 
    No license tag shall be issued for any dog or kennel unless there is presented to the city collector at the time application for license is made, evidence satisfactory to him showing that such dog or each dog to be maintained in such kennel has been inoculated or vaccinated against rabies by a currently licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1959, § 4-48; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-41. - Notification of presence of guard or attack dogs. 
    It shall be the duty of every dog trainer or breeder, veterinarian, owner or custodian to notify the animal warden of the presence of any trained attack, command or guard dog within the city. Any dog that has been trained or which is in the process of being trained as an attack, command or guard dog must be kept in a manner that will prevent it from getting loose while being trained or boarded. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs owned or controlled by government law enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-42. - Tethering restrictions. 
(a)  Definition: For the purposes of this section, "tethering" means the use of a rope, chain, or the like, by which an animal is fastened to a fixed object so as to limit its range of movement. Tethering includes the use of a "run-line" in which a wire, or the like, is placed above ground, is tied off between two fixed points, and a lead is suspended from the run-line to the collar or the harness of a dog which allows the dog to run from point to point. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly allow, condone, or participate in the tethering of a dog under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  If the dog is sick or injured. 
(3)  If the dog is "in heat." 
(4)  If the dog is under the age of four months. 
(5)  if the dog is tethered in a manner that is reasonably likely to cause the dog's injury, strangulation or entanglement on fences, trees, or other physical obstacles. 
(c)  The city's animal warden, deputy animal wardens, and police officers shall enforce this ordinance. 
(d)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Any person who subsequently violates the provisions of this section for the same animal shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor and the dog may be seized pursuant to Section 3.2-6569 of Code of Virginia as an animal that has been cruelly treated and the court may order the dog forfeited to the city to be disposed of by the city pursuant to subsection D of Section 3.2-6546 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. O-19-020 , § 1, 3-26-19) 
Sec. 7-43. - Leaving a dog outside during extreme weather conditions. 
(a)  Definition: For the purposes of this section, "outside" shall mean any unattended dog that is outside subject to the weather and elements, which includes, but not limited to, a dog in a securely fenced-in yard, a dog in a kennel or a dog tethered or tied out. A dog will be considered "outside" regardless of access to an outdoor dog house or similar structure unless the kennel is heated and/or air conditioned. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any dog outside and unattended for a period of one-half hour or longer, during such a period when either: 
(1)  The temperature is below 32 degrees Fahrenheit; or 
(2)  The temperature is above 95 degrees Fahrenheit. 
    Should any of the above defined weather conditions be met then the dog must be brought indoors. Indoors for the purposes of this ordinance shall be defined as any area of the residence which is temperature controlled including a garage or basement as long as the conditioned space is considered adequate according to the above temperature thresholds. 
    If a dog is left outside when the temperature is between 32 degrees and 40 degrees the dog must have access to a dog house or other type of shelter that has straw or like bedding of sufficient warmth for the conditions on the floor of such dog house or shelter. 
(c)  The city's animal warden, deputy animal wardens, and police officers shall enforce this ordinance. 
(d)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Any person who subsequently violates the provisions of this section for the same animal shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor and the dog may be seized pursuant to Section 3.2-6569 of Code of Virginia as an animal that has been cruelly treated and the court may order the dog forfeited to the city to be disposed of by the city pursuant to subsection D of Section 3.2-6546 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. O-19-020 , § 1, 3-26-19) 
Secs. 7-44, 7-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Department of finance, § 2-324 et seq. 

Sec. 7-46. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own or possess a dog four months old or older in the city unless such dog is licensed as required by the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1959, § 4-42; Ord. of 8-14-79; Ord. No. O-91-176, 8-13-91) 
Sec. 7-47. - Application. 
    Any person may obtain a dog license by making oral or written application to the city collector, accompanied by the amount of the required license tax and the required certificate of vaccination. 
(Code 1959, § 4-45; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-48. - Authority of collector. 
    The city collector shall have the authority to license dogs only of resident owners or custodians who reside within the boundary limits of the city, and may require information to this effect from any applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 4-46; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-49. - Amount of tax. 
    The following license tax shall be the only license tax on dogs in the city: 
(a)  Fertile females, one year old or older ..... $10.00 
Females less than one year old and infertile or spayed females ..... 5.00 
Fertile males, one year old or older ..... 10.00 
Males less than one year old and infertile or neutered males ..... 5.00 
Any person who applies for a license tag for a neutered or infertile dog shall present at the time of application certification from a licensed veterinarian attesting to the neutering or infertility of the dog. If such certification is not so presented, the dog shall be taxed the fee levied on fertile dogs. 
(b)  Kennel for 20 dogs or less ..... $25.00 
(c)  Kennel for 21 dogs or more ..... 35.00 
(d)  No license tax shall be levied on any dog that is trained and serves as a guide dog for a blind person or is trained and serves as a hearing dog for a deaf or hearing impaired person. 
(e)  All revenues collected by the city collector from the sale of license tags shall be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Code 1959, § 4-47; Ord. of 8-14-79; Ord. No. O-87-083, § 1, 5-12-87; Ord. No. O-13-092, 08-13-13) 
Sec. 7-50. - When tax payable. 
    The license tax on dogs required by this division shall be due and payable as follows: 
(a)  On or before January 1 and not later than January 31 of each year, the owner of any dog four months old or older shall pay the license tax prescribed by this division. 
(b)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between January 1 and November 1 of any year, the license tax for the current calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner. 
(c)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between October 31 and December 31 of any year, the license tax for the succeeding calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner, and such license shall protect such dog from the date of purchase. 
(d)  No license tax shall be due upon a dog that is brought into the city after January 1 of a year on which similar license taxes or fees have been paid to a county, city or town by the current owner and of which the current owner of such dog was previously a resident. 
(Code 1959, § 4-49; Ord. of 8-14-79; Ord. No. O-91-176, 8-13-91) 
Sec. 7-51. - Payment of tax after summons. 
    The payment of the license tax required by this division subsequent to a summons to appear before a court for failure to do so within the time required shall not operate to relieve such owner from the penalties provided for the violation of this division. 
(Code 1959, § 4-50; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-52. - Issuance of receipt; delivery of tag. 
    Upon receipt of any application for a dog license, the required tax and the certificate of vaccination for the dog to be licensed, the city collector shall issue a license receipt for the amount, on which he shall record the name and address of the owner or custodian, the date of the payment, the year for which issued, and the serial number of the tag, and deliver the license tag. 
(Code 1959, § 4-51; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-53. - Display of receipt upon request. 
    Dog license receipts hereunder shall be carefully preserved by the licensee and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by any animal warden or police officer. 
(Code 1959, § 4-52; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-54. - License and identification tags to be affixed to collar. 
    Dog license and identification tags shall be securely fastened by the owner or custodian of a dog to a substantial collar worn by such dog, and it shall be unlawful for the owner to permit any licensed dog four months old or over to roam at large at any time without a license tag and identification tag bearing the name and address of the owner, which identification tag shall be furnished by the owner. The owner of a dog may remove the collar and license required by this section when (i) the dog is engaged in lawful hunting, (ii) the dog is competing in a dog show, (iii) the dog has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar, (iv) the dog is confined, or (v) the dog is under the immediate control of its owner. 
(Code 1959, § 4-53; Ord. of 8-14-79; Ord. No. O-91-176, 8-13-91) 
Sec. 7-55. - Composition. 
    A dog license shall consist of a license receipt and a highly visible tag. The tag shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked to show the sex of the dog, the calendar year for which issued and bear a serial number. 
(Code 1959, § 4-54; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-56. - Term. 
    All dog licenses issued under this division shall run for the calendar year, beginning with January 1 of each year and ending with December 31 of the same year. 
(Code 1959, § 4-55; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-57. - Dog not wearing tag considered unlicensed; burden of proof. 
    Any dog not wearing a collar bearing a license tag of the proper calendar year shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed, and in any proceedings under this division the burden of proof of the fact that such dog has been licensed or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time shall be on the owner or custodian of the dog. 
(Code 1959, § 4-56; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-58. - Duplicate tag. 
    If a dog license shall become lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the city collector for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the city collector that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, he shall issue a duplicate license tag, which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog. The city collector shall endorse the number of such duplicate license tag and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for such duplicate license tag shall be $1.00, which shall be reported in the gross dog license collections. 
(Code 1959, § 4-57; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-59. - Kennel dogs. 
    The owner of a kennel shall securely fasten the license tag issued pursuant to this division to the kennel enclosure in full view and keep one of the identification plates provided therewith attached to the collar of each dog authorized to be kept enclosed in the kennel. Any identification plates not so in use must be kept by the owner or custodian and properly shown to any animal warden or other law enforcement officer upon request. A kennel dog shall not be permitted to stray beyond the limits of the enclosure, but this shall not prohibit removing dogs therefrom temporarily while under the control of the owner or custodian thereof for the purposes of exercising, hunting, breeding, trial or show. 
(Code 1959, § 4-58; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-60. - Records; reports; audit. 
    The city collector shall enter in a dog license sales record the date of the sale of dog tags, including kennels, the names and addresses of persons to whom sold and the serial number and shall keep an account of the amount of the license tax paid. The city collector shall keep a copy of such dog license sales record in numerical order and at the close of the calendar year shall file an annual report of such sales with the city manager and the director of fiscal management and information services. The director of fiscal management and information services shall audit such records, accounts and unsold dog license tags, and authorize the city collector to destroy unsold tags. 
(Code 1959, § 4-59; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Secs. 7-61-7-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 7-74. - Authority. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal warden to impound any dog four months old or over or unknown ownership found running at large on which there is no tag indicating that a license has been paid, and it shall also be his duty to impound any other animal where provisions for its keeping, custody or impounding by law enforcement officers is required under this chapter, state law or city ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 4-39; Ord. of 8-14-79; Ord. No. O-91-176, 8-13-91) 
Sec. 7-75. - Right of entry. 
    The animal warden is hereby authorized to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found thereon in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-76. - Register. 
    The animal warden, upon impounding or receiving any animal under the provisions of this article, shall make a complete registry of such animal, entering the breed, color and sex of the animal and whether the animal has been vaccinated, and the time and place of taking such animal into custody. 
Sec. 7-77. - Right to redeem. 
    The owner of any animal which has been impounded or quarantined under any of the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to redeem the same upon the payment of any and all fees set forth in section 7-79 of this chapter and any additional fees which may be due and payable for the impoundment or quarantine of such animal; provided, however, the payment of such impoundment or quarantine fees shall not bar the imposition of any fine which may be imposed for the violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, §§ 4-15, 4-18; Ord. No. O-91-176, 8-13-91) 
Sec. 7-78. - Time for redemption. 
    Each and every animal impounded by the animal warden shall be held in the city pound for a period of not less than five days, such period to commence on the day immediately following the day the animal is initially confined in the facility, unless sooner claimed by the owner thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 4-41; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-79. - Fees. 
    The following fees shall be charged for the impoundment of any animal under the provisions of this article: 
(a)  For the first day of impoundment, or fraction thereof ..... $17.50 
(b)  For each succeeding day of impoundment, or fraction thereof ..... 8.00 
    The above fees shall be in addition to any fine or other penalty for the violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 4-41; Ord. of 8-14-79; Ord. No. O-91-044, 3-12-91; Ord. No. O-04-106, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 7-80. - Redemption of unvaccinated animal. 
    The owner of any impounded domesticated animal which has not been vaccinated as required by this chapter, upon satisfactory proof of ownership, may redeem his animal by making a deposit of $10.00 with the animal warden and be allowed 24 hours to get such animal vaccinated. If such owner fails to procure a vaccination certificate within such 24 hours, the deposit shall be forfeited and the animal shall be impounded again. Upon presentation within such period of time of a certificate of vaccination issued under this chapter, the deposit shall be refunded. 
Sec. 7-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-04-106, adopted Aug. 10, 2004, repealed § 7-81. 
Sec. 7-82. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-04-106, adopted Aug. 10, 2004, repealed § 7-82. 
Sec. 7-83. - Disposition of unredeemed animals. 
    If any animal impounded under the provisions of this article is not redeemed by any person, it may be delivered to the Lynchburg Humane Society for disposition according to law. 
(Code 1959, § 4-41; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-84. - Humane destruction. 
    No provision of this article shall prohibit the destruction of a critically injured or critically ill animal for humane purposes. 
(Code 1959, § 4-41; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-85. - Reports. 
    The animal warden shall file such reports of his activities under the provisions of this article, under oath, as are required by the mayor and council. 
Secs. 7-86-7-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Health department, § 2-349 et seq.; rabies vaccination of dogs, § 7-37. 

Sec. 7-95. - Quarantine of suspected animal. 
    Any animal which bites or scratches a person or which otherwise gives symptoms of having rabies shall be immediately reported to the director of health and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the director of health, for a period of ten days, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the director of health or under his direction. At the discretion of the director of health, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter designated as the city pound, or at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his choice. In the case of stray animals, or in the cases of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated as the city pound. 
Sec. 7-96. - Duty of owner to surrender animal; redemption. 
    The owner, upon demand by the director of health, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner. Said animal may be reclaimed by the owner if it is adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees determined therefor by the council from time to time. 
Sec. 7-97. - Disposition of dead rabid animal. 
    When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or rabies suspected by a licensed veterinarian, and the animal dies while under such observation, the director of health shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination and shall notify the proper public health authorities of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis. 
Sec. 7-98. - Area-wide quarantine-When imposed. 
    Where there is sufficient reason to believe that a rabid animal is at large, the council shall have the power, pursuant to Section 29-213.21 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, to pass an emergency ordinance requiring owners of all animals within the city to keep the same confined on their premises unless leashed under restraint of the owner in such a manner that persons or animals will not be subject to the danger of being bitten thereby. 
(Code 1959, § 4-40; Ord. of 8-14-79) 
Sec. 7-99. - Same-Vaccination. 
    During the area-wide quarantine period and as long thereafter as he decides it is necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, the director of health may require that all animals, three months of age or older, shall be vaccinated against rabies. All vaccinated animals shall be restricted (leashing or confinement on enclosed premises) for 30 days after vaccination. During the quarantine period, the director of health is hereby empowered to provide for a program of mass immunization by the establishment of temporary emergency canine rabies vaccination clinics strategically located through the area of the health jurisdiction. 
(Code 1959, § 4-14) 
Sec. 7-100. - Same-Redemption of strays restricted. 
    No animal which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray, unclaimed by its owner, shall be allowed to be adopted from any animal shelter during the period of rabies emergency quarantine, except by special authorization of the director of health. 
Sec. 7-101. - Destruction, isolation of bitten animals. 
    Animals bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed, or if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in a kennel, designated by the director of health, at the expense of the owner, for six months shall be enforced. If the animal has been previously vaccinated, it shall be revaccinated immediately following the bite and shall be confined to the premises of the owner, or other site as may be approved by the health department for a period of 45 days. 
(Ord No. O-06-143, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 7-102. - Extension of quarantine. 
    In the event there are additional cases of rabies occurring during the period of area-wide quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional period of time. 
Sec. 7-103. - Destruction, removal of rabid animals. 
    No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a human, except as herein provided, nor remove such animal from the city limits without written permission from the director of health. 
Sec. 7-104. - Surrender of carcass. 
    The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the director of health. 
Sec. 7-105. - Report of bite cases. 
    It shall be the duty of every physician, or other medical practitioner, to report to the director of health the names and addresses of persons treated for bites, inflicted by animals together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. 
Sec. 7-106. - Failure to obey. 
    No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by the director of health. 
Sec. 7-107. - Report of suspected cases. 
    It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the director of health and animal considered by him to be a rabies suspect. 
Sec. 7-108. - Exemptions. 
    Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this article, except where expressly stated. 
Sec. 7-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PET SHOPS 

Sec. 7-110. - Permit to operate required. 
(a)  Beginning January 1, 2002, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pet shop or act as a dealer in companion animals in the city who does not possess a valid permit issued by the animal warden. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive or retain such permit. The fee for a permit shall not be prorated, and the permit shall not be transferable. Such a permit shall be posted in a conspicuous space on the premises. 
(b)  Any person operating a pet shop or operating as a dealer in companion animals, shall obtain the necessary permit from the animal warden no later than January 31 of each year. Such permit will be renewable each January 31 thereafter subject to the approval of the animal warden. The cost for each permit will be $50.00 dollars per year. 
(c)  Any person obtaining a permit pursuant to this section will be required to maintain records as specified by the city on the application form. The animal warden will be allowed to inspect any facility at which the permittee is maintaining animals without prior notice to the permittee. 
(d)  Applications and renewals for permits issued pursuant to this section may be denied by the animal warden if the applicant or permittee has demonstrated fraudulent practices, inhumane treatment of animals, or violation of local, state or federal laws applicable to animals. 
(e)  Any person operating a pet shop or as a dealer in companion animal who continues operation after suspension or revocation of their permit shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor for each day of operation after revocation. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-111. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Penalty. Except as otherwise provided, a first violation this article shall be punished as a class 3 misdemeanor and any subsequent violation shall be punished as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to violate any provisions of this article. 
(c)  It is further provided that nothing in this article shall excuse compliance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-112. - Suspension or revocation of permits. 
(a)  Suspension of permit. Whenever the animal warden finds a violation of this article, including but limited to unsanitary conditions, inhumane treatment of animals, or other conditions in the operation of a pet shop or the premises of a dealer which constitutes a substantial hazard to health, safety, or well-being of the animals or to the public health, the animal warden may, without warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator citing such conditions, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and qualifying the time period within which such action shall be taken. If deemed necessary, such order shall state that the permit is immediately suspended and the sale of animals is to be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately therewith, but upon written petition to the chief of police shall be afforded a hearing within five work days. 
(b)  Reinstatement of suspended permits. Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at any time, make application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the permit. Within five days following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in his opinion the conditions causing suspension of the permit have been corrected, the animal warden or designee shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is found to be complying with the requirements of this article, the permit shall be reinstated. 
(c)  Revocation of permits. A permit may be revoked after investigation and hearing by the animal warden. The animal warden will serve at least five days written notice of intent to revoke a permit, stating the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation on the permittee either in person or by posting of the notice to the front door of the facility where such animals are kept. A hearing will be held within ten days of service of the notice. Testimony by the serving officer that notice was served upon the permittee or posed at the facility where the animals are maintained will constitute prima facia evidence of proper service. A permit may be revoked for fraudulent practices, inhumane treatment of animals, or a violation of local, state or federal laws applicable to animals. The animal warden will provide written reasons for any determination of revocation within five day of hearing. Any person whose permit has been revoked shall immediately cease business, but upon written petition to the chief of police shall be offended a hearing within five workdays. An owner whose permit has been revoked may reapply for a permit two years or more after the date of revocation. 
(d)  Any person operating a pet shop or dealer in companion animals or who continues operation after revocation of their permit shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor for each day of operation after revocation. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-113. - Failure of pet shop operator or dealer to provide adequate care, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for persons who operate a pet shop or act as a dealer as defined in this article to fail to provide adequate care for animals in their possession or custody as provided for in this article. Dogs and cats must be exercised outside the primary cage at least once daily. Such animals shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment; and upon conviction of the person, the animals may be sold or humanely euthanized as provided by Section 3.1-796.96 of the Code of Virginia. Such failure shall also constitute grounds for revocation of the pet shop permit. Any funds that result from such sale shall be used first to pay the cost of the city for the impoundment and disposition of the animals, and any funds remaining shall be paid to the owner, if known. In the event that the owner is not found, the remaining funds shall remain with the city. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-114. - Access to establishments. 
    The animal warden, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter at any reasonable time or under emergency conditions any pet shop or premises of a dealer within the city for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this article. The animal warden shall be permitted to examine the records of the pet shop or dealer to obtain pertinent information pertaining to purchases, sales, name and address of persons employed. When permission is refused or cannot be obtained, inspections may be conducted upon obtaining a lawfully authorized warrant or compulsory process. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-115. - Housing facilities. 
(a)  Buildings shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair so as to ensure protection of animals from injury. 
(b)  The floors, walls and ceilings shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
(c)  Floor and wall areas which are continuously subjected to splash and moisture shall have washable surfaces and be easily cleanable. 
(d)  The building shall be provided with a safe heating apparatus capable of sufficiently heating the animal housing facilities when necessary to protect the animals from cold, and to provide for their health and comfort. The ambient temperature shall be consistent with the generally accepted requirements of the species. 
(e)  Housing for animals shall be adequately ventilated to provide for the health and comfort of animals at all times. The maximum ambient temperature for animals shall be 85° F (29.4° C). Ventilation shall be deemed adequate only if auxiliary ventilation, such as exhaust fans, vents, and air conditioning, is provided. Animals shall be provided with fresh air; and the animal housing facility shall be ventilated to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation. 
(f)  The pet shop facility or premises of a dealer shall be properly lighted. Such lighting shall provide uniformly distributed illumination of sufficient intensity to permit routine inspection and cleaning. Primary enclosures shall be so placed as to protect the animals from excessive illumination. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-116. - Food, bedding and refrigeration. 
    Food supplies and bedding materials shall be stored and adequately protected against infestation and contamination which would render the food unfit for consumption or bedding unclean. Refrigeration adequate to prevent spoilage shall be provided for perishable food and, when necessary, for medication. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-117. - Waste disposal. 
    Provisions shall be made for the removal and disposal of animal and food waste, bedding, dead animals and debris. All garbage and rubbish containing animals or food waste, bedding or dead animals shall, prior to disposal, be kept in leak-proof, nonabsorbent containers which shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids when not in continuous use. All other rubbish shall be disposed of in an approved manner. All garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of with sufficient frequency and in such manner as to prevent a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-118. - Drainage. 
    A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess water from the indoor housing facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-119. - Sewage disposal. 
    All sewage shall be disposed of in a public sewage system, or, in the absence thereof, in a manner approved by the animal warden. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-120. - Plumbing. 
    All plumbing fixtures and appurtenances must be maintained in good working condition. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-121. - Vermin control. 
    Effective measures shall be taken to protect against the entrance of vermin into the pet shop and their breeding or presence on the premises. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-122. - Washrooms, sinks, etc. 
    Facilities, such as toilet facilities and hand basins, including soap and disposable paper towels, shall be provided and be conveniently assessable to employees. An adequate sink supplied with hot and cold water for washing and sanitizing the equipment shall be provided. Such facilities shall be kept in a clean condition and in good repair. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-123. - Sanitation, etc. 
    Living and sleeping quarters and places where food and drink for human consumption are served or stored shall be completely separated from the physical facilities housing animals. Storage of animal food shall be separated from the animal bathing and grooming area. 
    Birds shall not be housed in the same area where food for humans is handled, stored, processed or served, unless such birds are kept in a separate enclosure which is vented to outside air; screening shall not be considered a complete enclosure. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-124. - Grooming facilities. 
    Facilities used in connection with the grooming and/or bathing of animals, such as grooming tables, bathing tubs, and grooming tools, etc., shall be kept clean. Grooming tables shall be cleaned and sanitized between use. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-125. - Primary enclosure. 
(a)  A primary enclosure shall be provided for each animal; and two or more animals of the same species may be housed together if the enclosure meets the criteria set forth herein for that animal. 
(b)  Primary enclosures shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect animals. They shall be constructed and maintained so as to enable the animals to remain dry and clean when appropriate for the species. Walls and floors shall be impervious to urine and other moisture. 
(c)  The floors of the primary enclosure shall be constructed so as to protect the animals' feet and legs from injury. Primary enclosure for animals, except cats, may have wire or gird flooring, provided that the gauge of the wire or grid material is of adequate size to support the animal and to prevent sagging under the weight of the animal and provided that the mesh openings are of a suitable size for the age and species of the animal. Wire or grid flooring for animals (quadrupeds), except cats, shall have mesh openings of such size as to prevent the animals' feet from passing through the openings. Cages for dogs with wire flooring shall have at least 25 percent of the floor area covered with solid, impervious material. Primary enclosures for cats shall have solid floors. 
(d)  Each primary enclosure shall be constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow each animal to turn about freely and to easily stand, sit or lie in a comfortable position. The minimum height of an enclosure for a dog shall be the height of the dog at the top of the head plus six inches, and the minimum length of the dog from the tip of the nose to base of the tail plus at least six inches. Containing a dog by means of tying or chaining shall not be permitted, except that dog may be restrained when grooming if the chain is placed or attached to a well-fitted collar. 
(e)  A primary enclosure for a cat shall have a liner pan, made from nonabsorbent material, or disposable pans containing sufficient clean litter to contain the excreta. Primary enclosures housing more than one cat shall provide an elevated solid resting surface or surfaces, which shall be of adequate size to comfortably hold the occupants. 
(f)  All cages and enclosures used for holding birds shall be of metal or nonabsorbent construction, readily cleanable, and elevated at a distance of not less than 12 inches from the floor; except that full flight cages may be less than 12 inches from the floor, if the cage or enclosure is located so it is not subject to drafts or sudden changes in ambient temperature. Excreta shall be removed from the cages daily and disinfected at least weekly. Each bird cage shall contain an adequate number of perches for every bird confined therein; except that perches will not be required in cages housing species of ground-dwelling birds, or other species where the use of perches would be detrimental to the birds' well-being. 
(g)  Housing facilities and primary enclosures for fish, reptiles, amphibians, small rodents and insects shall be kept clean so as to reduce disease hazards and odors. Housing facilities and primary enclosures for all other animals, including, but not limited to, dogs and cats, shall be cleaned a minimum of once each 12-hour period and more frequently as may be necessary to reduce disease hazards, odors and discomfort of the animals. 
(h)  Primary enclosures for dogs and cats shall be sanitized at intervals not to exceed 48 hours or as often as necessary to prevent contamination of animals contained therein, or spread of disease. 
    Sanitizing shall be by washing the surfaces with a detergent solution followed by the application of a safe and effective disinfectant. 
(i)  For purposes of health and sanitation, fish tanks or aquariums shall be equipped with an efficient filtration system. The water temperature in a fish tank or aquarium shall be maintained at a constant level appropriate for the fish contained therein, except that certain species of pond-swelling fish may be kept in fish bowls which do not have filtration systems, provided that the water is changed with such frequency that it does not become deleterious to the well-being of the fish. Each fish tank containing warm-water fish shall be maintained at a temperature appropriate for the species. 
(j)  Cages or tanks in which turtles of the amphibious type are confined must contain an amount of water sufficient for each turtle to drink and moisten itself. The floor area of tanks in which turtles are confined must contain a dry area sufficient for each turtle therein; except that certain species of turtle, such as marine species, which normally would not require a dry area for their well-being will not be required to have a dry area provided for them. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-126. - Nutrition. 
    All animals shall be supplied with sufficient, wholesome food and water, free from contamination, and which food and water shall be of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of each animal and to assure the proper health of each animal. 
(a)  Water. Fresh, potable water shall be available at all times unless veterinary orders indicate to the contrary. 
(b)  Food. Animals other than certain reptiles shall be fed at least once each 12 hours, including Sunday and holidays, except as otherwise might be prescribed by a licensed veterinarian. Reptiles shall be fed in accordance with the customary feeding habits of the species. Puppies and kittens under four months of age shall have food continuously available or be fed at least three times in each 24-hour period. An adequate supply of fresh food shall be available to birds and small rodents at all times, unless veterinarian instruments are to the contrary. 
(c)  Food and water receptacles. Each feeding pan shall be durable and shall be sanitized daily. Self-feeders may be used for the feeding of dry food provided that they are durable and are cleaned and sanitized regularly to prevent molding or caking of food. If disposable food receptacles are used, they must be discarded after each feeding. Water vessels shall be designed to provide and dispense adequate quantities of water for the particular species, shall be placed in such a way to prevent spillage, and shall be cleaned and sanitized at least once each day, except that sipper-tube type water bottles, if used, shall be kept clean and sanitized regularly, kept free of dirt, debris and algae, and shall be cleaned and sanitized prior to an animal's being placed in a primary enclosure. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-127. - Health of animals. 
(a)  It shall be the obligation of every operator or dealer to assure that the health condition of each animal shall be observed daily by a person competent to recognize and evaluate general symptoms of sick or diseased animals, including but not limited to listlessness, unthriftiness, loss of condition, rough hair coat, loss of weight, failure to eat or decreased appetite, diarrhea, eye or nasal discharge, labored or distressed breathing, conjunctivitis, prostration, skin lesions or loss of hair, elevated body temperature, pulse rate and respiration rate. 
    Any animal that is suspected, believed or known to be sick, diseased, injured, lame or blind shall be provided with immediate and adequate veterinary care; or such animal may be disposed of by humane euthanasia as performed, or instructed by an individual licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    The method of humane euthanasia must be approved by the Virginia State Veterinarian except that small rodents, birds, reptiles, fish and amphibians may be euthanized by a method recommended by the Humane Society of the United States. 
(b)  Dogs shall be properly immunized for distemper, hepatitis and leptospirosis as is appropriate with the age of the animal. Cats shall be immunized for feline distemper (panleukopenia, pneumonitis and rhinotracheitis) as is appropriate with the age of the animal. A written record of such immunizations shall be provided to the purchaser at the time of sale. 
(c)  The pet shop shall provide the purchaser of an animal with written instructions on the care and feeding of the animal purchased. 
(d)  Any animal that is suspected, believed or known to have, or to exhibit symptoms of having, an infection, disease or illness, or exhibit symptoms of clinical illness due to malnutrition of parasitism, shall not be sold or transferred unless the purchaser is provided written information stating when the animal had the illness, nature of treatment and by whom. 
(e)  Any animal which is capable of transmitting an infectious agent shall be isolated at all times in a manner to prevent spread of the disease to healthy animals. 
(f)  Dogs and cats under eight weeks of age shall not be displayed by pet shops or sold by pet shops or dealers. 
(g)  Any animal which is under quarantine or treatment for a communicable disease shall be separated from other animals susceptible to such disease in such a manner as to minimize dissemination of such disease. 
(h)  Birds which appear to manifest clinical evidence of disease, including, but not limited to, diarrhea, nasal discharge, depression, dry or brittle feathers, shall be immediately separated from healthy birds by means of separate cages. Whenever the animal warden determines that psittacosis exists in any bird housing facility or establishment handling such birds, the animal warden is empowered to proceed to abate, correct and end such public health menaces. 
(i)  The animal warden or designee may order quarantine on the premises or housing facilities in which animals are known to be exposed or exhibit symptoms of having infectious and contagious diseases. 
    Quarantine shall be removed when, at the discretion of the animal warden, the disease conditions for which quarantined are no longer evident and the apparent health of the animals indicate absence of contagious disease. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Sec. 7-128. - Pest control program. 
    An effective program for the control of insects, ectoparasites, and avian and mammalian pests shall be established and maintained whenever necessary to maintain adequate health standards. 
(Ord. No. O-01-171, 9-18-01) 
Chapter 8 - ARMORY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Department of control services, § 2-203. 

Sec. 8-1. - Definition. 
    The Lynchburg Armory shall be defined as consisting of the Church Street floor designated as the auditorium and the floor above the auditorium designated as the barracks of the building owned by the city at the corner of Church and Thirteenth Streets. 
(Code 1959, § 5-1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Care, management and control. 
    The custody, care, management and control of the armory shall be as provided in agreements thereto as may be made between the city and the National Guard. 
(Code 1959, § 5-2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Use. 
(a)  The barracks area of the armory shall be allocated to the exclusive use of the National Guard. 
(b)  The auditorium area of the armory shall be made available to the National Guard two weekends per month. At other times the city shall control the use of the auditorium area. 
(c)  No permit shall be granted for the use of the auditorium unless the occasion is one of general public interest involving larger attendance than can be reasonably accommodated elsewhere in the city. When the auditorium is so used under a permit, the custody, control and care of the same for the occasion of such use shall be under the direction of the city manager, and shall be in compliance with such terms and conditions set forth in the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 5-3) 
Chapter 9 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to establish and regulate airports, § 35(5). 
Cross reference- Department of Public Works, § 2-225 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to acquire, construct, operate and maintain airports, Code of Virginia, § 5.1-31 et seq.; police jurisdiction of local authorities, Code of Virginia, § 5.1-23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Aircraft: Any airplane, hydroairplane, seaplane, dirigible, balloon or other apparatus carrying one or more persons into or through the air, whether propelled and sustained by air currents or by power or motors contained in such aircraft. 
    Known, established, recognized field or place of landing: A public or private field or place of landing where the landing of airplanes is permitted by the owners thereof and such fact is publicly known. 
    Limits of the city: All territory within the city limits and all space thereover. 
(Code 1959, § 3-1; Ord. No. O-04-149, 11-23-04) 
Sec. 9-2. - Name of airport, field. 
    The name of the airport owned by the city in Campbell County shall be the Lynchburg Regional Airport and the name of the field at said airport shall be the Preston Glenn Field. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2; Ord. No. O-90-321, 10-23-90, eff. 1-1-91) 
Sec. 9-3. - Airport director-Position authorized, term. 
    There shall be an airport director whose term of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2; Ord. No. O-04-149, 11-23-04) 
Sec. 9-4. - Same-Duties general. 
    The airport director shall have general control and management of the Lynchburg Regional Airport under the direction of the city manager. It shall be the duty of the airport director to see that the grounds, buildings and other city property at said airport are maintained in proper condition. He shall be responsible for planning, organizing, directing and administering all functions and activities of said airport. He shall represent the city in dealing with the Federal Aviation Administration, Virginia Department of Aviation, airlines, fixed base operators, concessionaires and other users of the airport. He shall be responsible for negotiating and administering all airport leases. He shall conduct research and operational planning as required to make recommendations for the development and expansion of the airport to meet aviation growth and community needs. He shall be responsible for maintaining liaison with federal, state and local agencies. He shall supervise the enforcement of all laws and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, Virginia Department of Aviation and city pertaining to said airport. 
(Code 1959, § 3-3; Ord. No O-91-224, 9-10-91, eff. 10-1-91; Ord. No. O-04-149, 11-23-04) 
Sec. 9-5. - Airport employees. 
    The airport director shall hire such employees for the Lynchburg Regional Airport as are necessary to maintain and operate such airport. 
(Code 1959, § 3-4; Ord. No. O-91-224, 9-10-91, eff. 10-1-91; Ord. No. O-04-149, 11-23-04) 
Sec. 9-6. - Rules and regulations generally. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to make and promulgate general rules and regulations dealing with the use and operation of the airport; provided, however, that no such rule or regulation shall be valid when in conflict with applicable laws of the United States, this state or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 3-5; Ord. No. O-04-149, 11-23-04) 
Sec. 9-6.1. - City ordinances. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 15.2-1725 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, all of the ordinances of the Code of the City of Lynchburg (1981), as amended, shall be applicable to the property owned by the City in Campbell County and operated as the Lynchburg Regional Airport. The members of the Lynchburg Police Department, having powers of arrest in the city, may go or may be sent to the Lynchburg Regional Airport for the purpose of protecting the airport property, keeping order therein, and otherwise enforcing the city's ordinances and laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia on the airport property. In addition to exercising full police powers at the Lynchburg Regional Airport such police officers shall also have the power to make arrests for the violation of any ordinances or laws occurring on the airport property. In the event any ordinance of the City of Lynchburg conflict with the provisions of any ordinance duly adopted by Campbell County, the Campbell County ordinance shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. O-92-220, 7-14-92; Ord. No. O-04-149, 11-23-04) 
Sec. 9-6.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-06-157, adopted Dec. 12, 2006, repealed § 9-6.2. 
Secs. 9-7-9-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No O-04-149, adopted Nov. 23, 2004, repealed §§ 9-7-9-11. 
ARTICLE II. - FIXED BASE OPERATORS 

Secs. 9-23-9-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No O-04-149, adopted Nov. 23, 2004, repealed §§ 9-23-9-38. 
Sec. 9-39. - Minimum standards for aeronautical services or activities. 
    In order to ensure that the flying public and general aviation community are afforded an adequate level of aviation services when using the Lynchburg Regional Airport the Lynchburg City Council does hereby adopt the airport minimum standards for aeronautical services or activities that were approved by the regional airport commission on May 10, 2004, as fully as if the minimum standards were set out in full herein, and the minimum standards shall be controlling within the boundaries of the Lynchburg Regional Airport. Any person or entity providing aeronautical services to the public at the Lynchburg Regional Airport must comply with the airport minimum standards for aeronautical services or activities. A copy of the minimum standards for aeronautical services or activities shall be kept in the office of the airport director and shall be available for review upon request. It shall be the responsibility of any person or entity providing aeronautical services or activities at the Lynchburg Regional Airport to review the minimum standards and become familiar with its requirements before providing any aeronautical services or activities at the airport. Any subsequent amendments or revisions to the airport minimum standards by the city manager pursuant to section 9-6 of the City Code are hereby automatically incorporated into the City Code. 
(Ord. No. O-04-149, 11-23-04) 
Secs. 9-40-9-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGIONAL AIRPORT COMMISSION 

Sec. 9-50. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a Regional Airport Commission to assist the city in planning, organization, direction and administration of the Lynchburg Regional Airport. 
(Ord. No. O-90-321, 10-23-90, eff. 1-1-91) 
Sec. 9-51. - Appointment. 
    The commission shall consist of nine members, all of whom shall be appointed by the Lynchburg City Council and none of whom may be elected representatives of the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof. Three commission members shall be appointed to represent the Central Virginia region, including the City of Bedford as well as the counties of Amherst, Bedford, Campbell and Appomattox and shall be either private citizens or business persons who have an aviation background or who represent businesses that rely heavily on the airport. Five commission members shall be residents of the City of Lynchburg who are representatives of aviation interests or major users of the airport or the citizenry in general. The final or ninth commission member shall be the Lynchburg City Manager or his designated representative. The city's airport director shall attend all commission meetings in order to keep the commission advised of the status of day-to-day operations at the airport as well as future airport planning and service-related issues; however, the airport director shall not be empowered to act or vote as a member of the commission. In addition, the Campbell County Administrator, or his designee, may serve on the commission as an ex officio member and may be one of the three commission members appointed to represent the Central Virginia region. 
(Ord. No. O-90-321, 10-23-90, eff. 1-1-91; Ord. No. O-11-009, 01-25-11) 
Sec. 9-52. - Term of office. 
    Appointments shall be made for terms of three years. The city manager and the Campbell County Administrator, or their designees, shall serve for an indefinite term. 
    If any commission member is absent without cause for three consecutive meetings or is absent for four meetings in any 12-month period, that member's position shall be deemed vacant. 
    Vacancies occurring in the membership of the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner in which original appointments are made. 
    Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. O-90-321, 10-23-90, eff. 1-1-91; Ord. No. O-11-009, 1-25-11) 
Sec. 9-53. - Responsibilities. 
    The commission shall have the responsibilities as follows: 
(a)  Assist the city in marketing the airport through airport marketing programs. 
(b)  Work with air carriers to provide additional air service or to improve existing air service. 
(c)  Consider the introduction of new technology to the airport such as automated weather-reporting systems or radar. 
(d)  Assist the city generally in determining the future needs of the airport for the purpose of recommending the consideration of improvements. 
(e)  Make recommendations on such matters as lease fees, selling and/or leasing surplus airport property and airport maintenance operations. 
(f)  Conduct research and operational planning to assist the city in planning for the expansion of the airport and to meet aviation needs. 
(g)  Endeavor to raise the consciousness of area citizens, businesses and elected officials in Central Virginia regarding the airport and its role as an important regional resource. 
(h)  Make recommendations to the city manager for his consideration in adopting rules and regulations pursuant to section 9-6 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-90-321, 10-23-90, eff. 1-1-91) 
Sec. 9-54. - Procedure. 
    The commission shall adopt rules and bylaws for conducting its affairs, consistent with ordinances of the City of Lynchburg and general laws of the commonwealth, and shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the bylaws. 
(Ord. No. O-90-321, 10-23-90, eff. 1-1-91) 
Sec. 9-55. - Quorum. 
    For the conduct of any meeting and the taking of any action, a quorum shall not be less than a majority of all members of the commission. 
(Ord. No. O-90-321, 10-23-90, eff. 1-1-91) 
Sec. 9-56. - Records and reports. 
    The airport manager shall act as secretary for the commission and shall make a detailed record of all of its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
    The commission shall render to the city council, in writing, an annual report on the affairs and transactions of the commission during the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. O-90-321, 10-23-90, eff. 1-1-91) 
Chapter 10 - BICYCLES AND MOPEDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 25; police, Ch. 31. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definition, age of operation. 
    The term "bicycle" as used in this chapter, shall be deemed to mean any device propelled solely by human power, upon which a person may ride either on or astride a regular seat attached thereto, having two or more wheels in tandem, including children's bicycles, except a toy vehicle intended for use by young children. For purposes of the City Code, a bicycle shall be a vehicle when operated on a highway, street or alley. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the term "bicycle" shall also include mopeds as defined in Section 46.2-100, of the Code of Virginia, and all sections in this chapter shall apply to both bicycles and mopeds unless otherwise specifically stated. Mopeds are defined as any vehicle that travels on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground that has (i) a seat that is no less than 24 inches in height, measured from the middle of the seat perpendicular to the ground and (ii) a gasoline, electric, or hybrid motor that displaces less than 50 cubic centimeters. For purposes of the City Code, a moped shall be a vehicle when operated on a highway, street or alley. 
    No person under the age of 16 years shall operate a moped as defined in this chapter or a bicycle with a helper motor that is classified as a moped on any highway or public vehicular area of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-1; Ord. of 4-12-77; Ord. No. O-95-088, 4-25-95; Ord. No. O-99-225, 10-12-99, eff. 1-1-00; Ord. No. O-07-013, 1-23-07) 
Sec. 10-2. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall remove, change, alter or mutilate any bicycle or moped frame number in violation of section 10-23 shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor; and except as otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate any other provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a traffic infraction which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-11; Ord. No. O-99-225, 10-12-99, eff. 1-1-00; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00)) 
Sec. 10-3. - Sale, rental of bicyclesand mopeds-Information required. 
    Information regarding the sale or rental of bicycles and mopeds shall be available to the chief of police upon his request. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-10; Ord. No. O-00-008, 1-11-00, eff. 1-1-00) 
Cross reference- License fee for bicycle rental business, § 36-50. 
Sec. 10-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-00-008, adopted Jan. 11, 2000, eff. Jan. 1, 2000, repealed § 10-4. 
Sec. 10-5. - Summons. 
    Whenever any police or other officer charged with the duty of enforcing the ordinances of the city shall discover any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, he shall take the name and address of such person and issue a summons to or otherwise notify such person in writing, if he be under 18 years of age, to appear before the judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court of the city and if he be 18 years of age or over, to appear before the general district court of the city, at a time to be specified in such summons or notice, to be there dealt with according to the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state applicable thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-23) 
Secs. 10-6-10-16. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 10-17. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who resides in the city to operate or use a moped upon any of the streets, alleys, lanes or highways of the city or for any parent or guardian to allow any person under the age of 18 years, who resides in the city to operate or use a moped upon any of the streets, alleys, lanes or highways of the city unless such moped has been properly registered as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-2; Ord. No. O-99-225, 10-12-99, eff. 1-1-00; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-18. - When due. 
    Any person acquiring a moped shall have the same registered, or if registered, have the registration thereof transferred to him, within 15 days after the acquisition thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-6; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-19. - Application. 
    The registration of mopeds shall be upon written application therefor made to the chief of police or his designee on forms prescribed by the chief of police or his designee, and shall be made by the owner thereof, or, if owner is under 18 years of age, the same may be made for him by his parents or guardian. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-3; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-20. - Fees. 
    When a moped is registered, there shall be paid the sum of $5.00. When the registration is changed from one person to another or from one moped to another, there shall be paid the sum of $5.00. When a number plate or tag is issued to replace one that has been mutilated, lost, stolen or misplaced, there shall be paid the sum of $1.00. Said sums shall be paid to the collections division, and shall be used for the purpose of defraying the costs and expenses incident to the registration of such mopeds and carrying out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-8; Ord. No. O-99-225, 10-12-99, eff. 1-1-00; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-21. - Issuance of card, tag. 
    Upon proper application for registration of a moped, and the payment of the registration fee required by this article, the chief of police or his designee shall issue to the applicant a registration card and a number plate or tag, in such form as shall be prescribed by the chief of police or his designee. The number plate or tag shall be provided by the city at no cost to the applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-3; Ord. No. O-99-225, 10-12-99, eff. 1-1-00; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-22. - Display of tag. 
    The number plate or tag issued under the provisions of this article shall be kept securely fixed in a conspicious place on the rear of the frame of the moped for which the same was issued. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-3; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-23. - Change in frame number. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, change, alter or mutilate any bicycle or moped frame number; provided, however, that when any moped is registered hereunder and it appears that the frame number has become obliterated or is illegible, or that the same has no frame number, the chief of police or his designee may place or cause to be placed a frame number thereon for registration purposes. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-9; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-24. - Records. 
    The chief of police or his designee shall keep a complete record of all mopeds registered pursuant to this article, showing the name and address of the owner thereof, the make, class and frame number of such moped, the number of the registration plate or tag issued therefor, and such other information as the chief of police or his designee may prescribe. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-4; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-25. - Lost or mutilated number plates or tags. 
    When any number plate or tag is badly mutilated, lost, stolen or misplaced and cannot be found, upon satisfactory evidence of such fact being presented to the chief of police or his designee, he shall issue another number plate or tag, and shall change the registration of said moped accordingly. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-7; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-26. - Transfer generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any number plate or tag issued under the provisions of this article to any moped other than the one for which the same was issued. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-3; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-27. - Transfer of ownership. 
    When any moped registered under the provisions of this article shall be transferred to another, the same shall be reported to the chief of police or his designee, together with the name and address of the person to whom transferred and the registration thereof shall be changed accordingly. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-5; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-28. - Impoundment of abandoned or unregistered bicycles and mopeds. 
(a)  Any moped found without a number plate or tag issued pursuant to section 10-17 of this chapter and unattended shall be deemed abandoned. If a reasonable attempt to locate the owner or user in the immediate vicinity of the moped fails to produce such owner or user, any moped so abandoned shall be taken into custody and impounded by the chief of police or any officer of the police department. 
(b)  Any unattended bicycle found under such times and circumstances that indicate it has been lost or stolen shall be deemed abandoned. If a reasonable attempt to locate the owner or user in the immediate vicinity of the bicycle fails to produce the owner or user, any bicycle so abandoned shall be taken into custody and impounded by the chief or police or any officer of the police department. 
(c)  No abandoned bicycle or moped shall be released or removed from impoundment except upon satisfactory showing of ownership and in the case of mopeds, display of a city registration certificate and proper display of a tag or number plate by the owner or an agent of the owner. 
(d)  If an abandoned bicycle or moped is not reclaimed, within 30 days from the date of impounding, the chief of police or his agent shall provide for the public sale or donation to a charitable organization of such bicycle or moped. 
(e)  Any bicycle or moped found and delivered to the police department by a private person which thereafter remains unclaimed for 30 days after the final date of publication as required herein may be given to the finder; however, the location and description of the bicycle or moped shall be published at least once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. In addition, if there is a license tag affixed to the bicycle or moped, the record owner shall be notified directly. 
(Ord. No. O-99-225, 10-12-99, eff. 1-1-00; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1720. 
Sec. 10-29. - Impoundment of unregistered mopeds. 
(a)  When any police officer or other officer charged with the duty of enforcing the ordinances of the city shall discover any unregistered moped in any public place in the possession or control of any person, the officer may take custody of such moped and impound the same. Any moped so impounded shall be released only upon a satisfactory showing of ownership, payment of $5.00 for storage charges, and proper registration and display of a tag or number plate by the owner or an agent of the owner. 
(b)  Any juvenile whose moped is impounded pursuant to this section shall be escorted forthwith to their place of residence or other appropriate place. 
(c)  An officer impounding a moped under this section shall inform the person from whom possession or control of the moped was removed of the provisions of this section. Upon the taking of the moped into the officers' possession, the officer shall mail or hand deliver a notice containing the provisions of this section. In the case of a juvenile, such notice shall be mailed or hand delivered to the juvenile's parent or guardian. 
(d)  If any moped impounded under this section is not reclaimed within 30 days from the date of impounding, the chief of police or an agent of the chief of police shall cause the bicycle to be sold and the fund therefrom disposed of in accordance with section 10-28 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-99-225, 10-12-99, eff. 1-1-00; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1720. 
Secs. 10-30-10-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION 

Sec. 10-39. - Compliance with traffic signals. 
    Every person riding a bicycle or moped over any public street shall comply with all traffic signs, signals and lights and with all directions by voice, hand or otherwise, given by any member of the division of police of the city and shall have all of the rights and duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle, unless the context of the City Code clearly indicates otherwise. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-12; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-40. - Hand on handlebars. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle or moped on any street without having at least one of his hands upon the handlebars and no person operating a bicycle or moped on a street shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand on the handlebars. 
(Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-41. - Riding on sidewalks. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle or moped upon any sidewalk or cross a roadway on a crosswalk, whether paved or unpaved, in any district. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-14; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-42. - Reckless riding. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle or moped recklessly or at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of the rider or of any other person. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-15; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-43. - Carrying other persons. 
    No person riding a one-seated bicycle shall carry any additional person on the same. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-16) 
Sec. 10-44. - Holding to moving vehicle. 
    No person riding a bicycle or moped shall take or catch hold of or attach the same or himself to any moving automobile, bus or other vehicle of any kind upon any street, for the purpose of being drawn or propelled by the same. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-17; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-00-008, adopted Jan. 11, 2000, effective Jan. 1, 2000, repealed § 10-45. 
Sec. 10-46. - Hand signals. 
    Before turning or altering the course of operation of any bicycle, the operator thereof shall give signals by extension of the hand to indicate the direction in which it is intended to proceed. 
    Operators of mopeds shall use the electronic signaling devices that the moped is equipped with before turning or altering course of operation. If operating a moped with malfunctioning signal devices, or no signaling devices, the operator shall use hand signals. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-19; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-47. - Method of riding. 
    Every person riding a bicycle or moped on any street shall keep as close as practicable to the right-hand side of the roadway, except under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction; 
(2)  When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway; and 
(3)  When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right curb or edge. 
    For purposes of this section, a "substandard width lane" is a lane too narrow for a bicycle or moped and another vehicle to pass safely side by side within the lane. 
    Persons riding bicycles on a street shall not ride two or more abreast except on paths or parts of streets set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. Mopeds shall not ride on paths or parts of streets set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. Persons riding mopeds on a street shall not ride two or more abreast. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-20; Ord. No. O-95-088, 4-25-95; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-48. - Brakes. 
    Every bicycle operated on any street shall be equipped with adequate brakes. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-21) 
Sec. 10-49. - Lamps. 
    Every bicycle or mopeds when in use between sunset and sunrise shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the chief of police or his designee which shall be visible from all distances in clear weather from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible in clear weather from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in lieu of or in addition to the red reflector. Such lights and reflector shall be of types approved by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-21; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-50. - Riding out of lanes, alleys and driveways. 
    Every person riding a bicycle or moped out of a lane, alley or private driveway across a sidewalk or sidewalk area shall first bring such bicycle or moped to a stop before crossing said sidewalk or sidewalk area. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1-22; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-50.1. - Law enforcement officers. 
(a)  Any law-enforcement officer of the city, operating a bicycle or moped during the course of his or her duties, shall be exempt from the provisions of chapter 10, article III, operation. 
(b)  Any bicycle or moped being operated by a law enforcement officer of the city, during the course of his or her duties, shall be deemed to be a law enforcement vehicle and shall have the same rights and privileges as any other law enforcement vehicle when the bicycle or moped is being operated in response to an emergency call, while engaged in rescue operations or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law. 
(Ord. No. O-95-088, 4-25-95; Ord. No. O-00-008, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00, eff. 01-01-00) 
Sec. 10-51. - Requirement of safety equipment for mopeds. 
(a)  Any person who operates a moped as defined in this chapter on a public street or highway shall wear a face shield, safety glasses, or goggles of a type approved by the superintendent of the Virginia State Police, or have the moped equipped with safety glass or a windshield at all times while operating such moped, and operators and passengers thereon, if any, shall wear a protective helmet of a type approved by the superintendent of the Virginia State Police. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly violates this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and be subject to a fine of not more than $50.00. For any violation of this section a court hearing is not required and the person charged with such violation may enter a written appearance, waiver of court hearing, plea of guilty and pay the fines and costs. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall not constitute negligence, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation, ownership, or maintenance of a moped, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any civil action. 
(Ord. No. O-99-225, 10-12-99, eff. 1-1-00; Ord. No. O-04-022, 2-24-04) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 46.2-915.2. 
Sec. 10-52. - Persons riding upon mopeds. 
    No person other than the operator thereof shall ride upon a moped unless such moped is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon a separate and permanent seat attached thereto; provided, however, that such moped is also equipped with a footrest for said passenger. A violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. For any violation of this section a court hearing is not required and the person charged with such violation may enter a written appearance, waiver of court hearing, plea of guilty and pay the fines and costs. 
(Ord. No. O-99-225, 10-12-99, eff. 1-1-00; Ord. No. O-04-022, 2-24-04) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-909, 46.2-800 and 46.2-113. 
Chapter 11 - BUILDING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 11, Building, containing §§ 11-1-11-294, was repealed by Ord. No. O-03-177, adopted Oct. 28, 2003, replaced by a new Ch. 11, Building, which became effective Oct. 1, 2003. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 11-2 was amended by city council (Ord. No. O-11-030, adopted Mar. 22, 2011) which amendment dealt with the construction, rehabilitation and maintenance regulations adopted and enforced by the city. Under the "latest in time" rule of statutory construction, the current amendment supercedes section 11-1, therefore, this section has been removed from this Code. 
Sec. 11-2. - Construction, rehabilitation and maintenance of structures regulations adopted. 
    For the purpose of ensuring public safety, health and welfare, insofar as they are affected by building construction, to ensure public safety, health and welfare through proper building maintenance, repair, use and continued compliance with minimum standards of building construction, energy conservation, water conservation, and physically handicapped and aged accessibility, that certain regulations known as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, 2015 edition, Part I, the Virginia Construction Code; Part II, the Virginia Rehabilitation Code; Part III, and the Virginia Maintenance Code and all of the codes and standards referenced therein, copies of which are on file in the inspections division of the department of community development, are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1-220 of the Code of Virginia, future amendments to the sections of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, the International Building Code, The International Property Maintenance Code and the codes and standards referenced therein are also incorporated by reference herein. All future editions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all amendments thereto are hereby automatically adopted and incorporated into the City Code. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-152, 11-22-05; Ord. No. O-08-100, 7-8-08; Ord. No. O-11-030, 3-22-11; Ord. No. O-14-097 , § 1, 8-12-14; Ord. No. O-18-093 , § 1, 10-23-18) 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-225 et seq.; electricity, Ch. 15; erosion and sediment control, Ch. 16.1; fences and walls, Ch. 17; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 19; housing and hygiene, Ch. 22; planning, Ch. 30; sewers, Ch. 34; water, Ch. 39; zoning, Ch. 35.1. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate building of houses, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-15. 
Sec. 11-3. - Code remedial. 
    The code adopted by this chapter is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-4. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of the code adopted by this article shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(b)  No provision of the code adopted by this article shall be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any municipal authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the act from which this article is derived or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-5. - Administrative regulations. 
    The building commissioner is authorized to establish regulations and procedures as required to aid in the implementation and enforcement of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-6. - Retaliation against tenants prohibited. 
    Any owner or any other person, firm or corporation, or agent who shall retaliate against a tenant by increasing rent or decreasing services or by terminating a rental agreement because the tenant reported a violation of the provisions of this chapter to the building maintenance official or because the tenant cooperated with the building maintenance official in an investigation shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be punished as provided in section 11-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-7. - Requirements not covered by code. 
    Any requirement necessary for the strength or stability of an existing or proposed building or structure, or for the safety of the occupants thereof, not specifically covered by the code, adopted by this chapter shall be determined by the building commissioner subject to appeal to the board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-8. - Liability. 
    Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the code adopted by this chapter acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the city attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-9. - Violation penalties. 
(a)  Violations of the provisions of Part I, the Virginia Construction Code and Part II, the Virginia Rehabilitation Code, 2006 Edition, of the Uniform Statewide Building Code, shall be prosecuted as violations of the state code and the penalties, upon conviction, for violations of Part I, the Virginia Construction Code and Part II, the Virginia Rehabilitation Code, of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, shall be as set out in Section 36-106 of the Code of Virginia. All fines imposed for violations of the provisions of Part I, the Virginia Construction Code and Part II, the Virginia Rehabilitation Code of the Uniform Statewide Building Code, shall be payable to the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of Part III, the Virginia Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, of the Uniform Statewide Building Code, shall be prosecuted as violations of the City Code and the penalties, upon conviction, for violations of Part III, of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the maintenance code. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six months of the date of conviction. Each day during which the violation continues after the court-ordered abatement period has ended shall constitute a separate offense. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five to ten years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than two thousand $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter after having been at least twice previously convicted shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten days and a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $5,000.00, either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. All fines imposed for violations of the provisions of Part III, the Virginia Maintenance Code, of the Uniform Statewide Building Code, shall be payable to the city. 
(c)  Any owner or any other person, firm or corporation violating any code provisions relating to lead hazard controls that poses a hazard to the health of pregnant women and children under the age of six years who occupy the premises shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $2,500.00 as provided by Section 36-106 of the Code of Virginia. If the court convicts pursuant to this subsection and sets a time by which such hazard must be controlled, each day the hazard remains uncontrolled after the time set for the lead hazard control has expired shall constitute a separate violation of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
    The landlord shall maintain the painted surfaces of the dwelling unit in compliance with the Maintenance Code of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. The landlord's failure to do so shall be enforceable in accordance with the Uniform Statewide Building Code and shall entitle the tenant to terminate the rental agreement. 
    Termination of the rental agreement or any other action in retaliation against the tenant after written notification of (i) a lead hazard in the dwelling unit or (ii) that a child of the tenant, who is an authorized occupant in the dwelling unit, has an elevated blood lead level, shall constitute retaliatory conduct in violation of Section 55-248.39 of the Code of Virginia. 
(d)  Any prosecution under this section shall be commenced within the time period provided in Section 19.2-8 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-08-144, 11-25-08) 
Sec. 11-10. - Conflicts. 
    In the event that any conflict arises between the provisions of these codes with amendments thereto, adopted by this section, and any other state law or city ordinance, rules or regulations, the most restrictive provisions shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Secs. 11-11-11-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - DIVISION OF INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 11-31. - Building commissioner. 
    There is hereby continued in the department of community planning and development a division of inspections. The executive in charge of this division shall be referred to as the building commissioner, who shall serve as the building official and building maintenance official for the city. Whenever the words "building department" or "department" are used in the codes adopted by this chapter, they shall mean the division of inspections, and all other agencies to which the division of inspections delegates enforcement powers, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The building commissioner is to be appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-32. - Delegation of duties and powers. 
    The building commissioner shall have the authority to delegate duties and powers to proper technical assistants, the city fire marshal's office, the Lynchburg Health Department and other appropriate agencies to assist the division of inspections in the enforcement of this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-33. - Deputy. 
    The building commissioner may designate as deputy for the building official and building maintenance official an employee of the division who shall, during the absence or disability of the building official or building maintenance official, exercise all the powers of the building official. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-34. - Restrictions on employees. 
    No official or employee connected with the inspections division, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this chapter, shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or in the making of plans or specifications therefore, unless he is the sole owner of such building. No such official or employee shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the best interest of the inspections division. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-35. - Reports. 
    The building commissioner shall annually submit a report to the director of community planning and development covering the work of the department during the preceding year. He shall incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Secs. 11-36-11-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 11-51. - Notice of violation-failure to comply. 
    If any person fails to comply with a properly issued notice of violations, the building commissioner is authorized by the city to obtain a summons or warrant for failure to correct the violation(s) as allowed by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-52. - Refusal to issue certificate of occupancy. 
    The building commissioner shall have the authority to refuse a certificate of occupancy to any person who fails to correct any violation of this chapter within the time prescribed in a written notice from the building official. If such violation shall continue beyond the time specified in said notice, the building official shall have authority to revoke all licenses and permits of such person. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-53. - Revocation of certificate of occupancy. 
    The building commissioner shall have the authority to revoke a permanent or temporary certificate of occupancy for the repeated failure to correct property maintenance violations. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-54. - Suspension or revocation of business license. 
    The building commissioner shall have the authority to revoke or suspend the city business license of any person for any failure to comply with the provisions of this Code or with the rules and regulations of the building commissioner insofar as the same may apply to the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code in the city. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-55. - Emergency repairs. 
    The building maintenance official shall have the authority to make emergency repairs to existing structures as expeditiously as possible, and bring an action against the responsible party to recover the necessary costs incurred for the provision of public emergency services reasonably required to abate any such unsafe structure. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-56. - Public removal. 
    Whenever the owner of a structure fails to comply with the requirements of the notice of unsafe structure, the building maintenance official may cause the structure to be razed or removed. If the unsafe structure presents an imminent and immediate threat to life or property, then the building maintenance official may abate, raze, or remove such unsafe structure, and bring an action against the responsible party to recover the necessary costs incurred for the provision of public emergency services reasonably required to abate any such unsafe structure. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Secs. 11-57-11-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONTRACTOR AND BONDING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 11-71. - Applicability of chapter provisions to homeowners. 
    Nothing contained within this chapter shall prevent any homeowner from construction, repair, improvements, or re-improvements on his own residence or a residence of his immediate family, provided the owner does the work himself or with his own employees and the homeowner complies with the requirements of Section 54.1-1100 and 54.1-1101 of the Code of Virginia and signs an owner/builder affidavit as provided by the division of inspections when obtaining a permit. This provision does not covey the right to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, neither is it to be construed as exempting any property owner from obtaining a permit and having the work inspected nor from paying the required fees. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-72. - Contractor's license required. 
    It shall be the duty of every contractor or builder or demolition contractor, who shall make contracts for the erection or construction or repair or demolition of buildings or structures for which a permit is required, in the city, and every contractor or builder or demolition contractor making such contracts and/or subletting the same, or any part thereof, to comply with licensing requirements as specified in the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-73. - Business license required. 
    It shall be the duty of all contractors doing work in the city to apply for and obtain a business license as required by chapter 36 of the City Code. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-74. - Surety bond required. 
    It shall be the further duty of every such person holding a Class "C" or Class "B" contractors license to give good and sufficient bond in the sum of $5,000.00 to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned to conform to the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code regulations, the regulations of this section, and other ordinances of the city in reference to buildings. Class "A" contractors are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-75. - Bond renewal. 
    The city attorney, through the inspections division, shall require that all bonds as required by section 11-74 shall be renewed upon the expiration of the term for which they may be given and the failure on the part of any person to renew such bond immediately upon the expiration of such term shall have the same effect as if no bond had been given. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-76. - Limit of liability. 
    Nothing contained in section 11-74 shall be construed to limit the liability of the principal obligor in any bond as referred to in such section to the amount named as the penalty therein, either to any person injured or to the city. Nothing contained in such sections shall be construed as recognizing on the part of the city any claim or right of action against the city growing out of this section in favor of any person. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-77. - Use of name or license by other persons prohibited. 
    No licensed contractor shall allow the use of his name or license by any person, directly or indirectly, either for the purpose of obtaining a permit, or to do any work under his license, unless the person is regularly employed by the licensed contractor. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-78. - Master tradesman in control of work. 
    Where any electrical, plumbing, mechanical, gas or other trades work requiring a permit is being done, a master tradesman in the appropriate trade who holds a valid and current trades card recognized by the Commonwealth of Virginia, shall at all times be in control of the work being performed. Homeowners are exempt if they comply with section 11-71 of the City Code and demonstrate a working knowledge of the trade being performed. The building commissioner may require a homeowner to obtain the services of a master tradesman where work has been repeatedly rejected for non-compliance. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-79. - Building official may refuse permits for non-compliance. 
    If any contractor fails to comply with the rules and regulations of this article or any other rules and regulations governing the work which from time to time may be enacted by the council, then he shall be notified in writing by the building official wherein the rules and regulations are not being observed, and if after the notice has been sent to the contractor, a reoccurrence of noncompliance to the rules and regulations exists, the building official shall have the authority to refuse any permits for future work to be done by the contractor. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-80. - When issuance prohibited. 
    No permit shall be issued to any person while he refuses to comply with any lawful requirements of the inspections division nor while he refuses to pay any fees or charges lawfully assessed against him by the inspections division. During the time that any revocation or suspension of a city business license by the building commissioner under section 11-54 shall be in effect, no permit shall be issued to any person affected by such suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-81. - Permits not transferable; responsibility for work. 
    No work authorized by a permit shall be undertaken except by the person to whom such permit is issued or by authorized persons in his employ. The person in whose name the permit is issued shall assume complete responsibility for the work. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Secs. 11-82-11-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TECHNICAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 11-101. - Suitable zone on each pole to be reserved for city. 
    On any pole of any electric light, power, street, railway, telephone, or telegraph company used jointly by two or more companies, each company shall be allotted a special zone, and shall confine its wires to that zone. Spaces shall be measured from the tops of poles downward, and a suitable zone on every pole shall at all times be reserved for the free use of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-102. - Construction in streets and public places. 
    No electrical devices or fixtures shall be constructed, erected, strung, laid, maintained, changed or altered above, below or in any street, avenue, park or public place in any part of the city, nor shall any extension of the electrical conductors, either overhead or underground, be made without the written consent of the director of public works or the director of engineering prior to making application for the issuance of a permit for the installation. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-103. - Repair of existing buildings. 
(a)  If, within any period of 12 months, alterations or repairs costing in excess of 50 percent of the then physical value of the building are made to an existing building, such building shall be made to conform to the requirements of the building code for new buildings or where applicable, the requirements of the Virginia Rehabilitation Code. 
(b)  If an existing building is damaged by fire or otherwise in excess of 50 percent of its then physical value before such damage is repaired, it shall be made to conform to the requirements of the building code for new buildings or where applicable, the requirements of the Virginia Rehabilitation Code. 
(c)  If the cost of such alterations or repairs, or the amount of such damage, is more than 25 percent but not more than 50 percent of the then physical value of the building, the portions to be altered or repaired shall be made to conform to the requirements of the building code for new buildings to such extent as the building official may determine or where applicable, the requirements of the Virginia Rehabilitation Code. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section physical value of the building shall be determined by the building official. 
(e)  Repairs and alterations, not covered by the preceding paragraphs of this section, restoring a building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration, or altering it in conformity with the provisions of the building code or in such manner as will not extend or increase an existing nonconformity or hazard, may be made with the same kind of materials as those of which the building is constructed; but not more than 25 percent of the roof covering of a building shall be replaced in any period of 12 months unless the entire roof covering is made to conform with the requirements of the building code for new buildings or where applicable, the requirements of the Virginia Rehabilitation Code. 
(f)  When in the opinion of the building official it is impractical to achieve compliance with the requirements of the building code for new buildings, the building official may approve modifications provided the spirit and functional intent of the building code are observed and the public health, welfare and safety are assured. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-10-139, 11-23-10) 
Sec. 11-104. - Termination of service for dangerous conditions. 
    The building commissioner shall also make a like examination whenever so requested in writing by any citizen, or when he may deem it in the public interest. If building commissioner shall find after examination that such condition as to endanger life or property, he shall forthwith cause the electrical, gas or other utility service to be disconnected from the building, unless such defective conditions are immediately remedied. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Secs. 11-105-11-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PERMITS 

Sec. 11-121. - Failure to obtain. 
    If any person commences any work on a building or structure before obtaining the necessary permit from the city, he shall be subject to the penalty prescribed herein. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-122. - Building valuations. 
(a)  The owner or his duly authorized agent shall, upon making application for a building permit, furnish the building official with his best estimate of the total cost of the construction. Upon the completion of the work, he, or his duly authorized agent, shall report to the building official on a form furnished by the inspection division the final cost, including heating, plumbing and lighting of said structure, alteration, addition, improvement or repair. This final cost to be submitted prior to receiving the certificate of occupancy for the structure. 
(b)  Total cost of construction is defined as the actual cost incurred by the owner, all contractors, subcontractors and other parties for labor, material, equipment, profit, and incidental expenses for the entire project. This does not include the cost of design services unless those services are included in a construction contract. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-123. - Demolition permits. 
    A demolition permit shall carry with it the following requirements: 
(1)  Demolition projects shall be commenced without undue delay and shall be diligently carried on to satisfactory completion and, in any event, shall be completed within 90 days from the date the permit is issued. 
(2)  When a building has been demolished and no building operation has been projected or approved, the vacant lot shall be cleared of all rubbish and materials, and all excavations shall be filled to existing grade at the original building site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. The lot shall be maintained free from the accumulation of rubbish and all other unsafe or hazardous conditions which endanger the life or health of the public; and provision shall be made to prevent the accumulation of water or damage to any foundation on the premises or the adjoining property. 
(3)  All sewer lines or connections must be permanently sealed by plugging them with concrete or concrete mortar, and all gas, water and electric services shall be disconnected at the property lines. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of every person who shall make contracts for the demolition of buildings for which a permit is required to give good and sufficient bond as required by section 11-74. 
(5)  It is required that the division of inspections be notified upon completion of the demolition project in order that the premises be inspected for compliance with the above requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Secs. 11-124-11-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - BOARD OF BUILDING CODE APPEALS 

Sec. 11-141. - Composition. 
    There is hereby continued in the city a board to be called the board of building code appeals, which shall hear appeals concerning the application of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and appeals concerning the application of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code. The board of building code appeals shall consist of seven members. If qualified volunteers are available the members of the board shall include one member who is a licensed architect, one member who is a licensed engineer, one member who is a licensed class a building contractor, one member who is a licensed class a electrical contractor, one member who is a licensed class a plumbing or mechanical contractor, one member who is an experienced property manager and one citizen member from the city at-large. In the event qualified volunteers for one or more of the designated categories of members are not available, city council shall select at-large members on the basis of their ability to render fair and competent decisions regarding the application of the building and fire codes. At least one member of the board should be an experienced builder and one member a licensed professional engineer or architect and one member an experienced property manager. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-04-122, 9-14-04) 
Sec. 11-142. - Appointment. 
    The members of the board of building code appeals shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-143. - Term of office. 
    The present membership of the board of building code appeals, heretofore appointed by the city manager, are hereby re-appointed and continued in office for the duration of their present terms, and thereafter they shall be appointed for terms of four years. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-144. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies occurring in the membership of the board of building code appeals shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-145. - Chairman. 
    The board of building code appeals shall elect its own chairman from its membership. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-146. - Quorum. 
(a)  Four members of the board of building code appeals shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any provisions of the building code or the fire prevention code or in modifying an order of the building official or of the fire code official, affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three affirmative votes shall be required. No board member shall act in a case in which he has a personal interest. 
(b)  When five members of the board of building code appeals are not present to hear an appeal, either the applicant or the applicant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing. The board shall reschedule the appeal within 30 calendar days of the postponement, or a longer period of time if agreed to by all parties to the appeal. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-04-122, 9-14-04) 
Sec. 11-147. - Records. 
    The building commissioner shall act as secretary of the board of building code appeals and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-148. - Procedure. 
    The board of building code appeals shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of the building code and the fire prevention code. The board shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman, or in any event, the board shall meet within 30 calendar days after a notice of appeal has been received. Notice indicating the time and place of the hearing shall be sent to the parties in writing to the addresses listed on the application at least 14 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Less notice may be given if agreed upon by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-04-122, 9-14-04) 
Sec. 11-149. - Appeals. 
(a)  Whenever the building commissioner shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed, or materials to be used in the erection or alteration of a building or structure, or the fire code official shall reject or refuse to approve a requested modification of the fire prevention code or when it is claimed that the provisions of the building code or the fire prevention code do not apply, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the building code or the fire prevention code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal from the decision of the building official or the fire code official to the board of building code appeals. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 21 days after the decision is rendered by the building official or the fire code official. Failure to submit an application for appeal within 21 days shall constitute acceptance of the building official's or the fire code official's decision. 
(b)  In case of a building or structure which, in the opinion of the building commissioner or the fire code official, is unsafe or dangerous, the building commissioner or the fire code official may, in his order, limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period. Appeals hereunder shall be on forms provided by the building commissioner and the fire code official. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-04-122, 9-14-04) 
Sec. 11-150. - Variations and modifications. 
(a)  The board of building code appeals, when appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the building code or the fire prevention code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the building code or the fire prevention code or public interest, or when, in its opinion, the interpretation of the building official or the fire code official should be modified or reversed. 
(b)  A decision of the board of building code appeals to vary the application of any provision of the building code or the fire code official or to modify an order of the building official or the fire code official shall specify in what manner such variation or modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made and the reasons therefore. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-04-122, 9-14-04) 
Sec. 11-151. - Decisions. 
(a)  Every decision of the board of building code appeals shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. It shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in the office of the building commissioner or the office of the fire code official, and shall be open to public inspection; a certified copy shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official or the office of the fire code official for two weeks after filing. 
(b)  The board of building code appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. 
(c)  If a decision of the board of building code appeals reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the building commissioner or the fire code official, or varies the application of any provision of the building code or the fire code official, the building official or the fire code official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. 
(d)  The board of building code appeals shall recommend to council, through the city manager, from time to time, such amendments to the building code and the fire prevention code as in their opinion and from their experience are necessary and advisable. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-04-122, 9-14-04) 
Secs. 11-152-11-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 11-161. - Purpose and intent. 
    The city council finds that residential rental dwelling units, when not the subject of regular inspections to ensure compliance with applicable occupancy, building maintenance, and property maintenance regulations, may become unsafe, a public nuisance, and unfit for human habitation. Residential rental dwelling units are subject to overcrowding, structural deterioration, and an overall neglected appearance. These conditions can lead to a decline in neighborhood quality of life, neighborhood appearance, and the value of real estate. This article is adopted to protect the public health, safety and welfare in residential rental dwelling units located within those areas of the city determined by city council herein to be in need of a special program of inspections of residential rental dwelling units. This program is designed and intended to prevent property deterioration and neighborhood blight in designated rental inspection districts and to promote safe, decent and sanitary residential rental dwelling units for citizens by requiring proper building maintenance and continued compliance with applicable building regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-032, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 11-162. - Definitions. 
(a)  Generally. Certain words and phrases used in this division shall have the meanings prescribed to them by this section, except in the instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(b)  Building maintenance official. The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this ordinance and the uniform statewide building code or a duly authorized representative. 
(c)  Certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance is a written document issued by the inspections division confirming that a residential rental dwelling unit has been inspected. A certificate of compliance will be issued after a residential rental dwelling unit has been inspected by the inspections division and has no violations outstanding. Once a certificate of compliance has been issued the residential rental unit may be rented. 
(d)  Dwelling unit. A building or structure or part thereof that is used for a home or residence by one or more persons who maintain a household. 
(e)  Inspections division. The section of the department of community planning and development responsible for enforcement of the uniform statewide building code. 
(f)  Minimum habitable standards. The requirements for compliance as outlined in Part III, USBC, maintenance of existing structures, Part IV, USBC, technical amendments, and chapters 3 through 7 of the international property maintenance code, as adopted by the Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development. 
(g)  Owner. Shall mean the person or persons shown on the current real estate assessment books or current real estate assessment records. An owner shall include the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee or lessee in control of a building or structure. 
(h)  Property. The word "property" shall mean dwelling units which are leased or rented in whole or in part, to tenants for valuable consideration. The word "property" shall include residential rental dwelling units occupied under a lease/purchase agreement. 
(i)  Residential rental dwelling unit. A dwelling unit that is leased or rented to one or more tenants. However, a dwelling unit occupied in part by the owner thereof, shall not be construed to be a residential rental dwelling unit unless a tenant occupies a part of the residential rental dwelling unit which has its own cooking and sleeping areas, and a bathroom. 
(j)  USBC. Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-032, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 11-163. - Designation of rental inspection districts. 
    The city council finds that (i) there is a need to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the occupants of residential rental dwelling units inside the rental inspection districts that are designated below; and (ii) the residential rental dwelling units within the rental inspection districts that are designated below are either (a) blighted or in the process of deteriorating, or (b) the residential rental dwelling units are in need of inspection by the inspections division to prevent deterioration, taking into account the number, age and condition of the residential rental dwelling units inside the rental inspection districts designated below, and (iii) the inspection of residential rental dwelling units inside the rental inspection districts designated below is necessary to maintain safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants and other residents living in the rental inspections districts designated below. Therefore, the areas described in this section are hereby designated as rental inspection districts as provided by Section 36-105.1:1 of the Code of Virginia for the purpose of conducting periodic inspections at specific time intervals in order to determine that the buildings are in compliance with current building code regulations. The provisions of this division shall be applicable to all residential rental dwelling units, whether occupied or not, that are located in the following areas of the city: 
(a)  That area of the city designated as census tract #4 by the 2010 Census Data. 
(b)  That area of the city designated as census tract #5.00 by the 2010 Census Data. 
(c)  That area of the city designated as census tract #6 by the 2010 Census Data. 
(d)  That area of the city designated as census tract #7 by the 2010 Census Data. 
(e)  That area of the city designated as census tract #11 by the 2010 Census Data. 
(f)  That area of the city designated as census tract #19 by the 2010 Census Data. 
    The census tracts identified above encompass that area of the city beginning at the eastern corporate limit of the city, thence northwest along the James River and the corporate limits of the city to the Norfolk Southern Railway tracks near Riverside Park, thence south along said tracks to Blackwater Creek, northwest along Blackwater Creek to an unnamed tributary creek, along said tributary southwest to the intersection of Page Street and Hillcrest Avenue, northwest on Page Street to Tate Springs Road following said road southeast to Langhorne Road; continuing on Langhorne Road southeast to Memorial Avenue, southwest on Memorial Avenue to Fort Avenue continuing northeast on said road to its intersection with Rutherford Street, continuing on Rutherford Street southeast to its intersection with Craighill Street, thence southeast on Craighill Street to its intersection with Edley Place, continuing southeast on Edley Place to its intersection with the Norfolk Southern Railway tracks, south along the said tracks to a railroad intersection, continuing southeast along Norfolk Southern Railway tracks to their intersection with the southeastern corporate limits of the city; thence northeast along the corporate limits of the city to the point of beginning. 
    An individual residential rental dwelling unit outside of the above designated rental inspection districts will be subject to the rental property inspection ordinance based upon a separate finding for each individual dwelling unit by city council that (i) there is a need to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the occupants of that individual residential rental dwelling unit; (ii) the individual residential rental dwelling unit is either (a) blighted or (b) in the process of deteriorating; or (iii) there is evidence of violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants living in such individual residential rental dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-032, 3-08-05; Ord. No. O-13-026, 02-12-13) 
Sec. 11-164. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-05-032, adopted Mar. 8, 2005, repealed former § 11-164. 
Sec. 11-165. - Notification by owners of dwelling units to locality. 
(a)  On or before January 1 of each year, and within 60 days of the transfer of ownership or a change in the managing agent of any residential rental dwelling unit, the owner or managing agent of any residential rental dwelling unit, or a duly authorized representative acting on behalf of the owner or managing agent, shall notify the inspections division in writing, of any residential dwelling units that they own or manage in any of the city's designated rental inspection districts. The inspections division is authorized to develop a form for such purposes. No fee shall be charged for the notification required pursuant to this section. 
(b)  No owner, managing agent, or other person in control of any residential rental dwelling unit located in the areas covered by this division shall continue to make such property available after January 1 of each year as a residential rental dwelling unit until they have notified the inspections division in writing of their ownership or management of such residential rental dwelling unit. The owner or managing agent, or a duly authorized representative acting on behalf of the owner or managing agent, shall certify on a renewal form provided by the building maintenance official that he/she has been made aware of the minimum habitable standards as outlined in part III of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, maintenance of existing structures and that the residential rental dwelling unit to be rented meets these standards and is in compliance with these provisions and all other applicable codes, standards and ordinances. 
(c)  The inspections division shall furnish the owner or managing agent, or a duly authorized representative acting on behalf of the owner or managing agent, with information forms requesting certain information regarding residential rental dwelling units. The owner or managing agent, or a duly authorized representative acting on behalf of the owner or managing agent, shall complete such forms and return them to the inspections division within the designated time period. 
(d)  Any owner or managing agent of a residential rental dwelling unit or duly authorized representative acting on behalf of the owner or managing agent who fails to comply with the notice requirements of this section or who provides false or misleading information after having been provided with personal or written notice of the notification requirements shall be liable for a civil penalty of up to $50.00. For purposes of this section, notice sent by the inspections division, by regular first class mail to the last known address of the current owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall be deemed compliance with this requirement. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-032, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 11-166. - Inspection of residential rental dwelling units. 
(a)  The building maintenance official shall cause periodic inspections to be made of residential rental dwelling units located in those areas of the city covered by this article to determine if the residential rental dwelling units are being used as residential rental dwelling units and to ensure compliance with the provisions of the uniform statewide building code. After such inspection, the owner and the managing agent, if any, will be provided with a list of any violations found and the date by which such violations must be corrected. The failure to correct such violations within the designated time period shall constitute a violation of this article and also may result in revocation of the certificate of compliance. 
(b)  Upon determination that the residential rental dwelling unit is in compliance with part III of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, maintenance of existing structures and all other applicable codes, standards and ordinances, a certificate of compliance will be issued to the owner or managing agent. 
(c)  Periodic inspections for a specific property under this section shall not occur more than once each calendar year. 
(d)  Nothing in this division shall prohibit an inspection of any residential rental dwelling unit for a possible violation of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code pursuant to a complaint. 
(e)  If a multifamily development has more than ten residential rental dwelling units, in the initial and periodic inspections, the inspections division shall inspect only a sampling of the residential rental dwelling units, of not less than two and not more than ten percent of the residential rental dwelling units, of a multifamily development, which includes all of the multifamily buildings which are part of that multifamily development. If upon inspection of the sampling of residential rental dwelling units violations of the building code are found that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions of tenants, the inspections division may inspect as many residential rental dwelling units as necessary to enforce the building code. 
(f)  After the initial or periodic inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit, the inspections division has the authority under the building code to require the owner of the residential rental dwelling unit to submit to such follow-up inspections of the residential rental dwelling unit as the inspections division deems necessary, until such time as the residential rental dwelling unit is brought into compliance with the provisions of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants. 
(g)  After the initial or periodic inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit for compliance with the building code, provided that there are no violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such residential rental dwelling unit, the inspections division shall provide, to the owner of such residential rental dwelling unit, an exemption from the rental property inspection ordinance for four years. Upon the sale of a residential rental dwelling unit, the inspections division may perform a periodic inspection, subsequent to such sale. If a residential rental dwelling unit has been issued a certificate of occupancy within the last four years, an exemption shall be granted for a minimum period of four years from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy by the inspections division. If the residential rental dwelling unit becomes in violation of the building code during the exemption period, the inspections division may revoke the exemption previously granted under this section. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-032, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 11-167. - Inspection fees. 
    There shall be an inspection fee paid to cover the cost of the initial, follow-up, and periodic inspection's of each residential rental dwelling unit located in those areas of the city covered by this article. For multi-family developments the inspections division shall not charge a fee for more than ten residential rental dwelling units, unless violations of the building code are found affecting the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants of such multi-family development, the inspections division may inspect as many residential rental dwelling units as necessary to enforce the building code, in which case, the fee shall be based upon a charge per residential rental dwelling unit inspected. The inspection fees will be as established by city council from time to time by resolution and a copy of the schedule of fees will be kept in the office of the inspections division and shall be available for review upon request. No certificate of compliance shall be issued until all inspection fees have been paid and all violations have been corrected. Once a residential rental unit has been inspected it shall be a violation of this article for a property owner or managing agent to rent such residential rental unit without paying the inspection fees and obtaining a certificate of compliance. If the inspection fees are paid by check or draft which is subsequently returned for insufficient funds or because there is no account or the account has been closed, the certificate of compliance shall be revoked and it shall be a violation of this article for a property owner or managing agent to continue to rent the residential rental unit without paying the inspection fees and obtaining a new certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-032, 3-8-05; Ord. No. O-08-007, 1-22-08) 
Sec. 11-168. - Entry. 
    As provided by Section 36-105.1:1 of the Code of Virginia, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division, the building maintenance official, or his duly authorized agent, shall have the right to inspect any residential rental dwelling unit within the designated areas identified in section 11-163 of this division at any reasonable time. No inspection shall be conducted without the consent of the tenant, occupant, property owner or managing agent (if the property owner or managing agent have reserved a right of re-entry in order to inspect the premise) or pursuant to a duly issued administrative inspection warrant or as authorized by other lawful means. In the event the building maintenance official, or his duly authorized agents shall be denied access to a residential rental dwelling unit, by a tenant, occupant, property owner or managing agent of a residential dwelling unit, the building maintenance official, or his duly authorized agents may apply for and obtain an administrative inspection warrant from a magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction in order to gain access to the premises. It shall be a violation of this division for any owner, managing agent, tenant, occupant or other person, to deny the building maintenance official, or his duly authorized agent, access to any residential rental dwelling unit within the areas covered by this article after the building maintenance official, or his duly authorized agent have obtained an administrative inspection warrant from a magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction for the inspection of such residential rental dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-032, 3-8-05; Ord. No. O-08-007, 1-22-08) 
Sec. 11-169. - Permits. 
    The owner is responsible for complying with all permit and licensing requirements required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and other ordinances in effect for the City of Lynchburg. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-170. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or managing agent to fail to comply with the requirements contained in this article and to fail to comply with the provisions of the uniform statewide building code. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided herein, the penalties imposed for a violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five to ten years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter after having been at least twice previously convicted shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten days and a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $5,000.00, either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. All fines imposed for violations of the provisions of this article shall be payable to the city. 
(c)  If any violation remains uncorrected at the time of conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation and to bring the property into compliance with the uniform statewide building code. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six months of the date of conviction. Each day during which the violation continues after the court-ordered abatement period has ended shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-032, 3-8-05; Ord. No. O-08-144, 11-25-08) 
Sec. 11-171. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building maintenance official and his authorized agents are hereby empowered to enforce all of the provisions of this division, to act pursuant to the authority contained herein and to perform all the duties required thereby. The building maintenance official may establish such administrative procedures as may be necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not, in any way, alter the rights and obligations of landlords and tenants pursuant to the applicable provisions of Chapter 13 (Sections 55-217 et seq.) or Chapter 13.2 (Sections 55-248.2 et seq.) of Title 55 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not alter the duties or responsibilities of the inspections division to enforce the provisions of the uniform statewide building code. 
(d)  Appeals concerning the application of the rental property inspection program shall be heard by the board of building code appeals as provided in sections 11-141 through 11-151 of the City Code. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-032, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 11-172. - Temporary waiver. 
    Any owner or managing agent whose residential rental dwelling unit is inspected and found not to be in compliance with the code may petition the building maintenance official, in writing, for a temporary waiver of compliance. The petition shall be on a form provided by the building maintenance official and shall contain the information therein requested and which may be reasonably necessary to its decision, and shall include a written statement signed by the applicant, acknowledging the actions needed, specifying the anticipated date of beginning and completion of the work, and if known, the name of the person or company that will perform the work. If the building maintenance official finds that: 
(a)  The delay in the correction of the violation is reasonable, taking into the consideration the availability of qualified persons to do the work and the current work load; and 
(b)  The work can be reasonably undertaken and completed while the premises are occupied or that appropriate provision has been made for housing the tenant elsewhere while the residential rental dwelling unit will not be habitable because of the work of correcting violations; the building official may issue a temporary waiver of compliance which will allow a reasonable period of time to achieve compliance. This period shall not be less that 30 days nor more than 60 days. The applicant shall, on or before such date, request an inspection and pay any inspection fee that may be required by section 11-167 of this article. 
(c)  No waiver granted under this section shall be valid unless in writing and signed both by the building maintenance official or his designee and the applicant. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03; O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-032, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 11-173. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this division are intended to be severable, and if any such provision be deemed or adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining portions of this division shall remain in full force and effect with their validity unimpaired. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Secs. 11-174-11-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 11-191. - Vacant building registration. 
    On or before July 1 of each year, the owner or managing agent, or a duly authorized representative acting on behalf of the owner or managing agent, shall register with the property maintenance official on forms developed by the inspections division, the address of any buildings they own or manage which have been vacant for a continuous period of 12 months or more and which meet the definition of derelict building. For purposes of this section, derelict building shall mean a residential or nonresidential building or structure, whether or not construction has been completed, that might endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare and for a continuous period in excess of six months, it has been (i) vacant, (ii) boarded up or secured in accordance with the building code, and (iii) not lawfully connected to electric service from a utility service provider or not lawfully connected to any required water or sewer service from a utility service provider. Every person filing registration forms with the property maintenance official shall pay an annual registration fee of $100.00 to defray the cost of processing the registration. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-16-134 , 12-13-16) 
Sec. 11-192. - Failure to register. 
    Any person who fails to register a vacant building by the July 1 deadline shall be subject to a $200.00 civil penalty. Any person who fails to register any vacant building that is located in a conservation and rehabilitation district or any building that has been designated as blighted pursuant to the provisions of Section 36-49.1:1 of the Code of Virginia, shall be punished by a civil penalty not exceeding $400.00 for each building that is not registered. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03; O-16-134 , 12-13-16) 
Sec. 11-193. - Notice of assessment of penalty. 
    At least 30 days prior to the assessment of any civil penalty, the inspections division shall mail the owner, or managing agent, or the duly authorized representative acting on behalf of the owner or managing agent, at the address to which property tax notices are sent notice of the failure to comply with the registration requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Secs. 11-194-11-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FEES 

Sec. 11-211. - Code enforcement fees. 
    No permit shall be issued until the required fees shall have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the dimensions or size of the building or structure, shall have been paid. The fees for building permits will be as determined by city council from time to time and a copy of the schedule of fees will be kept in the office of the inspections division of community planning and development and shall be available for review upon request. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Sec. 11-212. - Waiver of code enforcement fees. 
    Any of the code enforcement fees required by section 11-211 of this article may be waived for a business which is designated as a technology business and which business locates in either of the city's technology zones on or after July 1, 2002. The city's director of economic development, after consultation with the Lynchburg Industrial Development Authority, will determine which, if any, code enforcement fees will be waived. 
(Ord. of 10-28-03, O-03-177, eff. 10-1-03) 
Secs. 11-213-11-220. - Reserved. 
Chapter 12 - BUSES, MOTOR FREIGHT CARRIERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License taxes, § 36-16 et seq.; taxicabs, rental cars, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle carriers generally, Code of Virginia, § 56-273 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTRAURBAN BUSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-04-128, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, repealed § 12-16. 
Sec. 12-17. - Scope of article. 
    This article is adopted under the general police power granted to the city by its Charter. It is not intended hereby to grant or offer any franchise; but, as denoted by the title of this article, it is intended to regulate motorbus passenger transportation for hire in the city. 
    The public transportation system established by the city pursuant to section 38-g of the city charter shall operate under the name of the Greater Lynchburg Transit Company. The city regulates this transportation service through the transit company board. The board formulates policies and operating procedures for and offers general supervision of a professional transit management company providing bus service in the city. The transit company board sets the fares, service standards, general policies and executes all major contracts. 
(Code 1959, § 7-28; Ord. No. O-04-128, 9-28-04) 
Secs. 12-18-12-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-04-128, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, repealed §§ 12-18-12-29. 
Sec. 12-30. - Accounting procedures and reports. 
(a)  A standard form of accounts and system of bookkeeping, in accordance with general accepted bookkeeping practice, shall be kept and observed by the company or individual operating under the provisions of this article insofar as the system of accounts and bookkeeping applies to such motorbus transportation. 
(b)  Complete monthly reports in form approved by the transit company board shall be made to the board, and by request shall be made to the city manager by any company or person operating under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 7-13; Ord. No. O-04-128, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 12-31. - Additional regulations. 
    The city expressly reserves the right to pass at any time, in addition to the provisions of this article, any amendments thereto and any and all ordinances deemed necessary by it in the reasonable exercise of its police power, for the safety, welfare and convenience of the public, and for the regulation and control of motorbus transportation within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 7-14; Ord. No. O-04-128, 9-28-04) 
Secs. 12-32-12-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-04-128, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, repealed §§ 12-32-12-36. 
Sec. 12-37. - Compliance with traffic laws, etc. 
    All vehicles operated under this article shall be made to observe and comply with all orders given by word or sign by the police officers of the city and with all signs and directions placed in the streets for the regulation of traffic, and shall conform to all traffic laws of the city, state, and federal governments. 
(Code 1959, § 7-22; Ord. No. O-04-128, 9-28-04) 
Cross reference- Traffic regulations, Ch. 25. 
Secs. 12-38-12-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-04-128, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, repealed §§ 12-38-12-40. 
Sec. 12-41. - Police powers of certain transit company employees. 
    All bus company operating under this article, for the purpose of enforcing order, peace and good behavior upon its buses, may elect to have certain designated employees appointed as special conservators of the peace in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia State Code. 
(Code 1959, § 7-29; Ord. No. O-04-128, 9-28-04) 
Secs. 12-42-12-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 

Sec. 12-51. - Required. 
    Before any person shall operate any motorbus or buses on routes within this city under the provisions of this article, he shall first obtain from the city manager a certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
(Code 1959, § 7-2(a)) 
Sec. 12-52. - Application, agreement. 
    Any person desiring a certificate of public convenience and necessity required by the provisions of this division shall file with the city manager an application therefor, together with a written agreement, in form approved by the city attorney, that he will conform to, and comply with, all the provisions of this article and no certificate shall be granted to any person to operate hereunder, unless such applicant shall undertake to operate on all of the routes, operations on any one of such routes to begin at such time as may be agreed upon between the city and the applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 7-2(a)) 
Sec. 12-53. - Hearing. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a certificate required by the provisions of this division, the city council shall, within a reasonable time, fix a time and place of hearing on such application. Notice of the time and place of hearing on such application shall be given to the public by publication in a newspaper published in the city once a week for two successive weeks, the last publication to appear at least three days before the day of such hearing. Notice shall also be given to any and all existing certificate holders, which notice may be served on, or acknowledged by, any resident official or attorney of any such certificate holders. The notice required in this section shall not be necessary in granting a certificate to a person operating a street railway under an unexpired franchise with the city and who agrees to the cancellation of such franchise and the operation of motorbuses under the terms of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 7-2 (b)) 
Sec. 12-54. - Issuance; bond. 
    Upon receipt of the application for a certificate required by this division and agreement mentioned in section 12-52, after hearing, and upon a showing that the public convenience and necessity require and justify the operation applied for, the city manager may, with the approval of the city council, issue a certificate, in form approved by the city attorney, authorizing the applicant to operate buses as herein provided for, upon the filing with the city manager of a bond, with surety approved by the city attorney, in the sum of $5,000.00 conditioned that the applicant will conform to and comply with each and every one of the conditions and provisions of this article, and will indemnify and save harmless the city or any person from any and all claims, demands or judgments on account of injuries or damages occasioned by the negligence of such applicant. Upon the filing and approval of such bond, the same shall at all times be kept in force and effect for the full amount of $5,000.00. In the event that suit shall be brought against the city, either independently or jointly with the operator hereunder, such operator, upon notice to such operator by the city, will defend the city in such suit at the cost of such operator, and in event of a final judgment being obtained against the city, either independently or jointly with such operator, then such operator shall pay such judgment with all costs and hold the city harmless therefrom. The company shall also carry adequate public liability insurance. 
(Code 1959, § 7-2(c)) 
Sec. 12-55. - Duration. 
    Certificates issued under the provisions of this article shall be effective from the date specified therein and shall remain in effect until terminated. 
(Code 1959, § 7-2(d)) 
Sec. 12-56. - Termination. 
    The city council at any time by its order entered after hearing had upon 30 days' notice to the holder of any certificate and an opportunity to such holder to be heard, at which it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the council that such holder has willfully made any misrepresentation of material facts in obtaining such certificate or has repeatedly violated or refused to observe the provisions of this article or any terms of the certificate granted under this division or any of the council's proper orders, rules or regulations imposed under authority of this article, may suspend, revoke, alter or amend any such certificate for any violation above set forth. 
(Code 1959, § 7-2 (d)) 
Sec. 12-57. - Notice, hearing before changes. 
(a)  Whenever the city council, on complaint of any person or on its own motion, proposes to consider the question of changing any route, schedule, fare or service of a certificate holder, at least 30 days' notice of the time and place when such change of regulation will be considered shall be given to such certificate holder and an opportunity to be heard at such hearing shall be granted such certificate holder. The notice of hearing, which shall set forth the changes to be considered at such hearing, may be served on, or acknowledged by, any resident official or attorney of the certificate holder. 
(b)  Whenever any certificate holder wishes to appear before the council to obtain permission to make any change in his routes, fares or service, he shall so notify the city manager of the changes he seeks at least ten days prior to the time when application will be made to the city council for such changes. A like notice shall also be served upon any and all other certificate holders operating under the terms of this article. 
(c)  The notice required in subsections (a) and (b) may be waived by mutual consent of the council and certificate holders. 
(Code 1959, § 7-16 (b-d)) 
Sec. 12-58. - Indemnity for city. 
    Any person operating under the provisions of this article shall, by acceptance in writing of the terms and conditions of this article, agree and bind himself to keep and hold the city free and harmless from liability for any and all damages that may accrue to himself or to any person on account of injury or damage to person or property directly or indirectly growing out of the construction of the operator's works or out of the operation of his vehicles under this article, wherever the city may be also liable therefor; and, in case suit shall be brought against the city, either independently or jointly with such person on account thereof, such person, upon notice to him by the city, shall defend the city in such suit, and in the event of a judgment being obtained against the city, either independently or jointly with such person on account of the acts or omissions of such persons, such person shall pay the judgment, with all costs, and hold the city harmless therefrom. 
(Code 1959, § 7-20) 
Secs. 12-59-12-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Article III, Interurban Buses and Motor Freight Carriers, Division 1. Generally and Division 2. Off Street Bus Facilities, containing §§ 12-71-12-92 was repealed by Ord. No. O-04-035, adopted Mar. 23, 2004. 
Chapter 13 - CITY MARKET[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to establish, regulate markets, § 38(3). 
Cross reference- Department of central services, § 2-203 et seq.; food and food products, Ch. 20; garbage and refuse, Ch. 21 
State Law reference- Authority to prescribe the time for holding markets and regulating the same, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Location. 
    The city market shall be held in the buildings and upon the premises provided for the purpose by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 8-9) 
Sec. 13-2. - Supervision generally. 
    The building and maintenance superintendent shall open and close the market, preserve the peace and keep order within the city market area, and endeavor to preserve all public and private property therein from loss or injury by fire or otherwise. 
(Code 1959, § 8-4) 
Sec. 13-3. - Preparation, posting of regulations. 
    For the detailed operation and maintenance of the city market, there shall be prepared and posted suitable regulations approved by the city council. The building and maintenance superintendent shall have the power to enforce such regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 8-10) 
Sec. 13-4. - Rates for space. 
    The rates to be charged for stores, stalls and benches in the city market shall be incorporated in the regulations of the city market and before coming effective shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 8-14) 
Sec. 13-5. - Collection and disposition of rents and fees. 
    The building and maintenance superintendent shall collect all rents and fees due in connection with the city market, and shall, at least once each month, render to the director of finance, under oath, an account of all moneys received by him in his official capacity, and pay the same over to the city collector. 
(Code 1959, §§ 8-5, 8-12) 
Sec. 13-6. - Inspection and arrangement of articles for sale. 
    The building and maintenance superintendent shall order the arrangement and position of all articles brought to market and inspect the quality of the same. 
(Code 1959, § 8-7) 
Sec. 13-7. - Sanitation. 
    Sanitation in the city market shall conform to the laws of the state and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. The director of health shall inspect the city market upon request by the building and maintenance superintendent. He shall advise the superintendent as to applicable sanitary provisions, which shall be enforced by the superintendent. 
(Code 1959, § 8-15) 
Sec. 13-8. - Keeping market clean. 
    The building and maintenance superintendent shall see that the market house and area are kept clean. 
(Code 1959, § 8-8) 
Sec. 13-9. - Spitting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit anywhere within the city market, except in proper receptacles provided therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 8-18) 
Secs. 13-10-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking generally, § 25-247 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-21. - Assignment of positions; exclusion of certain vehicles. 
    The building and maintenance superintendent shall assign positions to all vehicles within the market area, and may exclude therefrom any vehicle not in the service of a vendor. 
(Code 1959, § 8-19) 
Secs. 13-22-13-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS 

Sec. 13-31. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 8-24) 
Sec. 13-32. - Establishment of zone. 
    The area included within the city market is hereby established as a one-hour, two-hour or three-hour parking meter zone and, insofar as applicable and except as hereinafter modified, sections 25-290 through 25-305, are made applicable to the parking meter zone hereby established. 
(Code 1959, § 8-20) 
Sec. 13-33. - Parking when market is not in full operation. 
    Parking in the city market area during the times the market is not in full operation as a market shall be in the designated parking meter spaces and only during such hours as may be designated by the city manager and indicated on appropriate signs in the area. At the expiration of the designated hours, all vehicles shall be removed from such market area whether or not there is any unexpired or unused time remaining on the individual parking meters. 
(Code 1959, § 8-21) 
Sec. 13-34. - Parking when market is in operation. 
(a)  Parking in the city market area during the time the city market is in full operation as a market by any person other than bona fide purchasers and sellers or intending purchasers or sellers who remain in the market during the time their respective vehicles are parked therein is prohibited. Parking by such bona fide purchasers and sellers or intending purchasers or sellers during the time when the market is in full operation as a market shall be in designated parking spaces only and shall be limited to such period of time, not exceeding one hour, as may be fixed by the city manager. This provision shall not apply to sellers who have rented stalls in the market and who park their vehicles in the stalls rented by them. 
(b)  During such times as the city market is in full operation as a market, the parking meters installed in the market area shall be hooded and not used and parking during such times in the market area shall be in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (a). 
(Code 1959, § 8-22) 
Sec. 13-35. - Moving vehicles parked in violation. 
    The building and maintenance superintendent, his duly authorized representative, or any police officer charged with the enforcement of traffic regulations in the city, may move or cause to be moved any vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this division, at the expense of the owner of such vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 8-23) 
Chapter 13.1 - ARTS AND CULTURAL DISTRICT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13.1-1. - Purpose. 
    The Lynchburg City Council finds that the continued development and success of its arts and cultural venues requires incentives, and determines that the most appropriate method of offering incentives for the area described below is to create an Arts and Cultural District in that area, as authorized by Section 15.21129.1 of the Code of Virginia. City council believes the establishment of an Arts and Cultural District will improve the economic conditions of this geographic area located in the central portion of the city which could, in turn, benefit the welfare of the citizens of Lynchburg. 
(Ord. of 4-27-10, No. O-10-041) 
Sec. 13.1-2. - Administration. 
    The administrator of the city's Arts and Cultural District shall be the city manager or his designee. The administrator shall determine the procedures for obtaining the benefits created by this chapter and for the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-27-10, No. O-10-041) 
Sec. 13.1-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following phrases shall have the following meanings, unless clearly indicated to the contrary: 
    Qualified arts organization. The term qualified arts organization shall mean a business or not-for-profit organization physically located within the Arts and Cultural District which, by the determination of the administrator, positively contributes to the spectrum of arts and cultural activities and venues available to the public. Examples may include, but are not limited to, theatres, art galleries, museums, dance studios, music venues, performance spaces, and artists and artisans creating art within the district. 
    Qualified artist. The term qualified artist shall mean an individual who within the Arts and Cultural District creates visual or performing art such as but not limited painting, sculpture, textiles, dance, or music and derives 50 percent or more of his or her income from such creative activities. 
(Ord. of 4-27-10, No. O-10-041) 
Sec. 13.1-4. - Name and boundaries. 
    The Arts and Cultural district shall be named the "James River Arts and Cultural District" and shall consist of all the land and buildings in the Central Business District extending up Fifth Street to Taylor Street to include the old City Cemetery and Legacy Museum and up Rivermont Avenue to Bedford Avenue. 
(Ord. of 4-27-10, No. O-10-041; Ord. No. O-10-134, 11-9-10) 
Sec. 13.1-5. - Regulatory flexibility. 
    The administrator may provide for regulatory flexibility in the district which may include, but not be limited to: (i) special zoning for the district; (ii) permit process reform; (iii) exemption from ordinances; and (iv) any other incentive adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-27-10, No. O-10-041) 
Sec. 13.1-6. - Promotion. 
    The administrator is authorized to promote the development of and visitation to the Arts and Cultural District and their benefits through use of appropriate funds, grants and revenues. 
(Ord. of 4-27-10, No. O-10-041) 
Secs. 13.1-7-13.1-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 13.1-10. - Taxes eligible for exemption. 
(a)  Business, professional and occupational license taxes and fees. Qualified arts organizations and artists shall be exempted from the payment of the business, professional and occupational license (BPOL) taxes and fees for three full years following the actual occupation and/or certification of the qualified arts organization within the Arts and Cultural District. To secure the above exemption, the arts organization or artist shall file all necessary tax applications and apply to the administrator for certification as a qualified arts organization. Upon certification by the administrator and proof that no taxes are outstanding at the time of the application, the arts organization shall be entitled to the exemption created by this section. 
(b)  Admissions taxes. The fees for admission taxes imposed by the City Code and collected by qualified arts organizations in the district shall be redistributed to promote and market the district and to improve aesthetic or other infrastructure in the district. This distribution is subject to annual appropriation by city council. 
(Ord. of 4-27-10, No. O-10-041) 
Secs. 13.1-11-13.1-19. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 13.2 - TOURISM ZONE 

Sec. 13.2-1. - Purpose. 
    The Lynchburg City Council finds that in order to promote the continued development and success of the city it is appropriate to designate the city as Tourism Zone as authorized by Section 58.1-3851 of the Code of Virginia. City council believes the establishment of a Tourism Zone will improve the economic conditions within the city and benefit the welfare of the citizens of Lynchburg, by providing a gap financing mechanism as authorized by Section 58.2-385.1 of the Code of Virginia for those qualifying tourism development projects identified as critical and which address specific critical tourism infrastructure deficiencies under criteria to be established by the city council in conjunction with satisfying all other requirements of Section 58.1-385.1 of the Virginia Code. 
( Ord. No. O-15-072, § 1, 9-8-15 ) 
Sec. 13.2-2. - Administration. 
    The administrator of the city's Tourism Zone shall be the city manager or the city manager's designee. The administrator shall determine the procedures for obtaining the benefits created by this chapter and for the administration of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. O-15-072, § 1, 9-8-15 ) 
Sec. 13.2-3 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following phrases shall have the following meanings, unless clearly indicated to the contrary: 
    Economic development authority means the Lynchburg Development Authority, the public purpose of which is to assist in economic development. 
    Gap financing means debt financing to compensate for a shortfall in project funding between the expected development costs of an authorized tourism project and the debt and equity capital provided by the developer of the project. 
( Ord. No. O-15-072, § 1, 9-8-15 ) 
Sec. 13.2-4. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the Tourism Zone established by this chapter shall include the entire city. 
( Ord. No. O-15-072, § 1, 9-8-15 ) 
Sec. 13.2-5. - Incentives. 
    Qualified tourism projects may be eligible for incentives as determined by the Lynchburg City Council and the Lynchburg Economic Development Authority and for gap financing as provided in Section 58.1-3851.1 of the state code. 
( Ord. No. O-15-072, § 1, 9-8-15 ) 
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Elections generally, § 17 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2 
State Law reference- Elections, Code of Virginia, Title 24.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Electoral board. 
    There shall be an electoral board of the city, whose duties, functions and compensation shall be those provided by state law. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1) 
State Law reference- Electoral boards, Code of Virginia, § 24.1-29 et seq. 
Sec. 14-2. - Judges, clerks and commissioners of election. 
    The judges, clerks and commissioners of election for each precinct in the city shall be as provided by state law, and they shall receive such compensation as provided by state law. 
(Code 1959, § 9-3) 
Sec. 14-3. - General registrar. 
    There shall be the office of general registrar, who shall be appointed in the manner, and have such duties and responsibilities, as is provided by state law. 
(Code 1959, § 9-2) 
Secs. 14-4-14-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to change boundaries of wards and increase the numbers thereof, § 38 (29). 

Sec. 14-16. - Division. 
    The city is hereby divided into four separate and distinct wards. 
(Ord. of 2-17-76) 
Sec. 14-17. - First ward. 
    The first ward of the city shall include all that portion of the city bounded as follows: 
Beginning at a point of the intersection of the centerline of Graves Mill Road and the 1976 Corporate Limits Line, said point being the southwestern most point in the First Ward; and running in a northerly direction following the city's corporate limits to the point where the city's corporate limits and the Norfolk Southern Railroad intersect; thence proceeding in a southerly direction following the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railroad to the point that the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railroad and the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Bikeway intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Bikeway to the point that the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Bikeway and the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railroad meet; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railroad to the point that the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railroad and the centerline of Ivy Creek intersect; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the meandering of the centerline of Ivy Creek to the point that an extension of the centerline of Club Drive and the centerline of Ivy Creek intersect; thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction following the centerline of Club Drive to the point that the centerline of Club Drive and the centerline of Landon Street meet; thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction following the centerline of Landon Street to the point that the centerline of Landon Street and the centerline of Langhorne Road intersect; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the centerline of Langhorne Road to the point that the centerline of Langhorne Road and the centerline of Rivermont Terrace meet; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the centerline of Rivermont Terrace to the point that the centerline of Rivermont Terrace and the centerline of Rivermont Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of Rivermont Avenue to the point that the centerline of Rivermont Avenue and the centerline of Link Road intersect; thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction following the centerline of Link Road to the point that the centerline of Link Road and the centerline of Ivy Creek intersect; thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction following the meandering of the centerline of Ivy Creek to the point that the centerline of an unnamed branch of Ivy Creek intersect; thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction following the meandering of the creek to the point that the centerline of the unnamed branch of Ivy Creek and the centerline of a westerly extension of Devonshire Road intersect; thence proceeding in a southerly direction following the centerline of Devonshire Road to the point that the centerline of Devonshire Road and the centerline of Old Forest Road intersect; thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction following the centerline of Old Forest Road to the point that the centerline of Old Forest Road and the centerline of Forest Brook Road intersect; thence proceeding in a southerly direction following the centerline of Forest Brook Road to the point that the centerline of Forest Brook Road and the centerline of Lakeside Drive intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of Lakeside Drive to the point that the centerline of Lakeside Drive and the centerline of Wyndale Drive intersect; thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction following the centerline of Wyndale Drive to the point that the centerline of Wyndale Drive and the centerline of Fleetwood Drive intersect; thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction following the centerline of Fleetwood Drive to the point that an extension of the centerline of Fleetwood Drive and the centerline of Blackwater Creek intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the meandering of the centerline of Blackwater Creek to the point of confluence between Blackwater Creek and Tomahawk Creek; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the meandering of the centerline of Tomahawk Creek to the point that the centerline of Tomahawk Creek and the centerline of McConville Road intersect; thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction following the centerline of McConville Road to the point that the centerline of McConville Road and the centerline of Graves Mill Road intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of Graves Mill Road to the point that the centerline of Graves Mill Road and the 1976 Corporate Limits intersect, said point being the beginning and ending point of the First Ward. 
(Code 1959, § 9-14; Ord. of 2-17-76, § 1; Ord. of 1-24-78; Ord. No. O-81-285, § 1, 12-29-81; Ord. No. O-91-299, 12-10-91; Ord. No. O-02-075, 4-09-02; Ord. No. O-11-120, 10-25-11) 
Sec. 14-18. - Second ward. 
    The second ward of the city shall include all that portion of the city bounded as follows: 
Beginning at the point of the intersection of the city's corporate limits and the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railroad, said point being the northern most point in the second ward; thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction following the city's corporate limits to the point that the city's corporate limits and the centerline of Martin Street intersect; thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction following the centerline of Martin Street to the point that the centerline of Martin Street and the centerline of U.S. 460 Richmond Highway intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of U.S. 460 Richmond Highway to the point that the centerline of the US460 Richmond Highway and the centerline of Campbell Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction following the centerline of Campbell Avenue to the point that the centerline of Campbell Avenue and the centerline of Florida Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the centerline of Florida Avenue to the point that the centerline of Florida Avenue and the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to the point that the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad and the centerline of the north/south line of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad intersect; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to the point that the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railroad and the centerline of the Lynchburg Expressway intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of the Lynchburg Expressway to the point that the centerline of the Lynchburg Expressway and an extension of the centerline of Cliff Street intersect; thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction following the centerline of Cliff Street to the point that the centerline of Cliff Street and the centerline of Stephenson Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the centerline of Stephenson Avenue to the point that the centerline of Stephenson Avenue and the centerline of Twelfth Street intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of Twelfth Street to the point that the centerline of Twelfth Street and the centerline of Campbell Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction following the centerline of Langhorne Road to the point that the centerline of Langhorne Road and the centerline of Memorial Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of Memorial Avenue to the point that the centerline of Memorial Avenue and the centerline of Lakeside Drive intersect; thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction following the centerline of Lakeside Drive to the point that the centerline of Lakeside Drive and an extension of the centerline of an unnamed branch of Blackwater Creek intersect, said point being in the vicinity of the intersection of the centerline of Lakeside Drive and the centerline of Alleghany Avenue; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the meandering of the centerline of the unnamed branch of Blackwater Creek to the confluence of the unnamed branch of Blackwater Creek and Blackwater Creek; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the meandering of the centerline of Blackwater Creek to the point that the centerline of Blackwater Creek and the centerline of Langhorne Road intersect; thence proceeding in northerly direction following the centerline of Langhorne Road to the point that the centerline of Langhorne Road and the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railroad intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to the point that the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad and the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Bikeway meet; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Bikeway to the point that the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Bikeway and the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railroad intersect; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to the point that the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad and the City's Corporate Limits intersect, said point being the beginning and ending point of the Second Ward. 
(Code 1959, § 9-14; Ord. of 2-17-76, § 2; Ord. of 1-24-78; Ord. No. O-81-285, § 1, 12-29-81; Ord. No. O-82-141, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. O-91-299, 12-10-91; Ord. No. O-02-075, 4-09-02; Ord. No. O-11-120, 10-25-11) 
Sec. 14-19. - Third ward. 
    The third ward of the city shall include all that portion of the city bounded as follows: 
Beginning at a point of the intersection of the centerline of Langhorne Road and the centerline of Memorial Avenue, said point being the northern most point in the Third Ward; and running in a southeasterly direction following the centerline of Langhorne Road to the point that the centerline of Langhorne Road and the centerline of Twelfth Street intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of Twelfth Street to the point that the centerline of Twelfth Street and the centerline of Stephenson Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction following the centerline of Stephenson Avenue to the point that the centerline of Stephenson Avenue and the centerline of Cliff Street intersect; thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction following the centerline of Cliff Street to the point that the centerline of Cliff Street and the centerline of the Lynchburg Expressway intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of the Lynchburg Expressway to the point that the centerline of the Lynchburg Expressway and the centerline of the north/south line of the Norfolk Southern Railroad intersect; thence proceeding in a southerly direction following the centerline of the north/south line of the Norfolk Southern Railroad to the point that the centerline of the north/south line of the Norfolk Southern Railroad and the centerline of the east/west line of the Norfolk Southern Railroad intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of the east/west line of the Norfolk Southern Railroad to the point that the centerline of the east/west line of the Norfolk Southern Railroad and the centerline of Florida Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction following the centerline of Florida Avenue to the point that the centerline of Florida Avenue and the centerline of Campbell Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction following the centerline of Campbell Avenue to the point that the centerline of Campbell Avenue and the centerline of US460 Richmond Highway intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of U.S. 460 Richmond Highway to the point that the centerline of U.S. 460 Richmond Highway and the centerline of Martin Street intersect; thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction following the centerline of Martin Street to the point that the centerline of Martin Street and the city's corporate limits intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the city's corporate limits to the point that the city's corporate limits and the centerline of Timberlake Road intersect; thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction following the centerline of Timberlake Road to the point that the centerline of Timberlake Road and the centerline of Fort Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction following the centerline of Fort Avenue to the point that the centerline of Fort Avenue and the centerline of Oakridge Boulevard intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of Oakridge Boulevard to the point that the centerline of Oakridge Boulevard and the centerline of Sussex Street intersect; thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction following the centerline of Sussex Street to the point that the centerline of Sussex Street and the centerline of Richmond Street intersect; thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction following the centerline of Richmond Street to the point that the centerline of Richmond Street and the centerline of Rockbridge Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction following the centerline of Rockbridge Avenue to the point that the centerline of Rockbridge Avenue and the centerline of Lakeside Drive intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of Lakeside Drive to the point that the centerline of Lakeside Drive and the centerline of Memorial Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction following the centerline of Memorial Avenue to the point that the centerline of Memorial Avenue and the centerline of Langhorne Road intersect, said point being the beginning and ending point of the Third Ward. 
(Code 1959, § 9-14; Ord. of 2-17-76, § 3; Ord. of 1-24-78; Ord. No. O-81-285, § 1, 12-21-79; Ord. No. O-82-141, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. O-91-299, 12-10-91; Ord. No. O-02-075, 4-09-02; Ord. No. O-11-120, 10-25-11) 
Sec. 14-20. - Fourth ward. 
    The fourth ward of the city shall include all that portion of the city bounded as follows: 
Beginning at the point of the intersection of the 1976 Corporate Limits and the centerline of Timberlake Road, said point being the southern most point in the Fourth Ward; and running in a westerly direction following the 1976 corporate limits line to the point that the 1976 corporate limits and the centerline of Graves Mill Road intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of Graves Mill Road to the point that the centerline of Graves Mill Road and the centerline of McConville Road intersect; thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction following the centerline of McConville Road to the point that the centerline of McConville Road and the centerline of Tomahawk Creek intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the meandering of the centerline of Tomahawk Creek to the point of confluence between Tomahawk Creek and Blackwater Creek; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the meandering of the centerline of Blackwater Creek to the point that an extension of Fleetwood Drive and the centerline of Blackwater Creek intersect; thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction following the centerline of Fleetwood Drive to the point that the centerline of Fleetwood Drive and the centerline of Wyndale Drive intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of Wyndale Drive to the point that the centerline of Wyndale Drive and the centerline of Lakeside Drive intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of Lakeside Drive to the point that the centerline of Lakeside Drive and the centerline of Forest Brook Road intersect; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the centerline of Forest Brook Road to the point that the centerline of Forest Brook Road and the centerline of Old Forest Road intersect; thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction following the centerline of Old Forest Road to the point that the centerline of Old Forest Road and the centerline of Devonshire Road intersect; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the centerline of Devonshire Road to the point of that a westerly extension of Devonshire Road and the centerline of a unnamed branch of Ivy Creek intersect; thence proceeding in a northerly direction following the meandering of the creek to the point that the centerline of the unnamed branch of Ivy Creek and the centerline of Ivy Creek intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the meandering of the centerline of Ivy Creek to the point that the centerline of Ivy Creek and Link Road intersect; thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction following the centerline of Link Road to the point that the centerline of Link Road and the centerline of Rivermont Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of Rivermont Avenue to the point that the centerline of Rivermont Avenue and the centerline of Rivermont Terrace intersect; thence proceeding in a southerly direction following the centerline of Rivermont Terrace to the point that the centerline of Rivermont Terrace and the centerline of Langhorne Road intersect; thence proceeding in a southerly direction following the centerline of Langhorne Road to the point that the centerline of Langhorne Road and the centerline of Landon Street intersect; thence proceeding in a westerly direction following the centerline of Landon Street to the point that the centerline of Landon Street and the centerline of Club Drive intersect; thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction following the centerline of Club Drive to the point that an extension of the centerline of Club Drive and the centerline of Ivy Creek intersect; thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction following the meandering of the centerline of Ivy Creek to the point that the centerline of Ivy Creek and the centerline of Langhorne Road intersect; thence proceeding in a southerly direction following the centerline of Langhorne Road to the point that the centerline of Langhorne Road and the centerline of Blackwater Creek intersect; thence proceeding in a southerly direction following the meandering of the centerline of Blackwater Creek to the point that the centerline of Blackwater Creek and the centerline of a unnamed branch of Blackwater Creek intersect; thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction following the meandering of the centerline of a unnamed branch of Blackwater Creek to the point that an extension of the unnamed Branch of Blackwater Creek and the centerline of Lakeside Drive intersect, said point being in the vicinity of the intersection of the centerline of Lakeside Drive and the centerline of Alleghany Avenue; thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction following the centerline of Lakeside Drive to the point that the centerline of Lakeside Drive and the centerline of Rockbridge Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction following the centerline of Rockbridge Avenue to the point that the centerline of Rockbridge Avenue and the centerline of Richmond Street intersect; thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction following the centerline of Richmond Street to the point that the centerline of Richmond Street and the centerline of Sussex Street intersect; thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction following the centerline of Sussex street to the point that the centerline of Sussex Street and the centerline of Oakridge Boulevard intersect; thence proceeding in an easterly direction following the centerline of Oakridge Boulevard to the point that the centerline of Oakridge Boulevard and the centerline of Fort Avenue intersect; thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction following the centerline of Fort Avenue to the point that the centerline of Fort Avenue and the centerline of Timberlake Road intersect; thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction following the centerline of Timberlake Road to the point that the centerline of Timberlake Road and the 1976 Corporate Limits intersect, said point being the beginning and ending point of the Fourth Ward. 
(Code 1959, § 9-14; Ord. of 2-17-76, § 4; Ord. of 1-24-78; Ord. No. O-81-285, § 1, 12-29-81; Ord. No. O-91-299, 12-10-91; Ord. No. O-02-075, 4-09-02; Ord. No. O-11-120, 10-25-11) 
Secs. 14-21-14-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTION PRECINCTS 

Sec. 14-32. - First ward. 
    The first ward shall be divided into five election precincts, the boundaries of which shall be as follows: 
(1)  First precinct. All that portion of the first ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg and the centerline of Graves Mill Road, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Graves Mill Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of McConville Road, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of McConville Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Tomahawk Creek, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Tomahawk Creek to its point of intersection with the centerline of Blackwater Creek, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Blackwater Creek to its point of intersection with the centerline of Fleetwood Drive extended, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Fleetwood Drive extended 395 feet to the terminus of the centerline of Fleetwood Drive, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Fleetwood Drive to its point of intersection with the centerline of Wyndale Drive, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Wyndale Drive to its point of intersection with the centerline of Lakeside Drive, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Lakeside Drive to its point of intersection with the centerline of Forest Brook Road, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Forest Brook Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Old Forest Road, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Old Forest Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Devonshire Road, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Devonshire Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Kettering Lane, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction 1,815 feet along the centerline of Devonshire Road extended to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Ivy Creek Tributary, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the Ivy Creek Tributary to its point of intersection with the centerline of Ivy Creek, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Ivy Creek, to its point of intersection with the centerline of an unnamed trail located within Peaksview Park, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of the unnamed trail in Peaksview Park to its point of intersection with the centerline of Ivy Creek Lane, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Ivy Creek Lane to its point of intersection with the centerline of Wiggington Road, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Wiggington Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Burnham Lane, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Burnham Lane to its point of intersection with the centerline of Mercury Street, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Mercury Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Saturn Street, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Saturn Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Wiggington Road, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Wiggington Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Chadwick Drive, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Chadwick Drive to its point of intersection with the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg to the point of beginning. The voting place in said first precinct of the first ward shall be located at Heritage Baptist Church, 219 Breezewood Drive. 
(2)  Second precinct. All that portion of the first ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg and the centerline of Chadwick Drive, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg to its point of intersection with the centerline of Boonsboro Road, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Boonsboro Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Link Road, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Link Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Ivy Creek, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Ivy Creek to its point of intersection with the centerline of an unnamed trail located within Peaksview Park, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of the unnamed trail in Peaksview Park to its point of intersection with the centerline of Ivy Creek Lane, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Ivy Creek Lane to its point of intersection with the centerline of Wiggington Road, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Wiggington Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Burnham Lane, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Burnham Lane to its point of intersection with the centerline of Mercury Street, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Mercury Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Saturn Street, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Saturn Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Wiggington Road, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Wiggington Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Chadwick Drive, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Chadwick Drive to the point of beginning. The voting place in said second precinct of the first ward shall be located at Bedford Hills School, Morningside Drive and Indian Hill Road. 
(3)  Third precinct. All that portion of the first ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg and the centerline of Boonsboro Road, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Boonsboro Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rivermont Avenue, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Rivermont Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of VES Road, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of VES Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Hydro Street, thence proceeding in a Northerly Direction along the centerline of Hydro Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Sugar Tree Branch, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Sugar Tree Brach to its point of intersection with the western bank of the James River, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Sugar Tree Branch extended 306 feet to its point of intersection with the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg, thence proceeding in a Northerly direction along the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg to the point of beginning. The voting place in said third precinct of the first ward shall be located at First Presbyterian Church, 1215 Virginia Episcopal School Road. 
(4)  Fourth precinct. All that portion of the first ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline of Rivermont Avenue and the centerline of VES Road, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of VES Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Hydro Street, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Hydro Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Sugar Tree Brach, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Sugar Tree Branch to its point of intersection with the western bank of the James River, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Sugar Tree Branch extended 306 feet to its point of intersection with the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rivermont Avenue, thence proceeding in an westerly direction along the centerline of Rivermont Avenue to the point of beginning. The voting place in said fourth precinct of the first ward shall be located at Rivermont Presbyterian Church, 2424 Rivermont Avenue. 
(5)  Fifth precinct. All that portion of the first ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline of Ivy Creek and the centerline of the abandoned Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of the abandoned Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Bikeway, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Bikeway to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rivermont Avenue, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Rivermont Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rivermont Terrace, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Rivermont Terrace to its point of intersection with the centerline of Langhorne Road, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Langhorne Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Landon Street, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Landon Street to its point of intersection with Club Drive, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Club Drive to its terminus, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction 93 feet along the centerline of Club Drive extended to its point of intersection with the centerline of Ivy Creek, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Ivy Creek to its point of beginning. The voting place in said fifth precinct of the first ward shall be located at First Christian Church, 3109 Rivermont Avenue. 
(Code 1959, § 9-15; Ord. of 2-17-76; Ord. of 5-22-79; Ord. No. O-82-140, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. O-91-298, 12-10-91; Ord. No. O-92-164, 5-26-92; Ord. No. O-02-075, 4-09-02; Ord. No. O-11-120, 10-25-11; Ord. No. O-19-018 , § 1, 3-12-19) 
Sec. 14-33. - Second ward. 
    The second ward shall be divided into four election precincts, the boundaries of which shall be as follows: 
(1)  First precinct. All that portion of the second ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline of Langhorne Road and the centerline of the abandoned Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of the abandoned Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Bikeway, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Bikeway to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg to its point of intersection with the centerline of eighth street extended, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction 645 feet along the centerline of Eighth street extended to the terminus of the centerline of Eighth street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Eighth street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Park Avenue, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Park Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Floyd Street, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Floyd Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Eighth Street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Eighth Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Buchannan Street, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Buchannan Street, to its point of intersection with the centerline of Kemper Street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Kemper Street 204 feet to a point, said point being the 90 degree turn in Kemper Street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction 618 feet to a point, said point being the terminus of the centerline of Eighth Street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Eighth Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Orchard Street, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Orchard Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Kingston Avenue, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Kingston Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Langhorne Road, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Langhorne Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Memorial Avenue, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Memorial Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Lakeside Drive, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Lakeside Drive to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Tributary, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Tributary to its point of intersection with the centerline of Blackwater Creek, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Blackwater Creek, to its point of intersection with the centerline of Langhorne Road, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Langhorne Road to the point of beginning. The voting place in said first precinct of the second ward shall be located at St. Paul's Episcopal Church, 605 Clay Street. 
(2)  Second precinct. All that portion of the second ward beginning at a point said point being the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg to its point of intersection with the centerline of eighth street extended, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction 645 feet along the centerline of Eighth street extended to the terminus of the centerline of Eighth street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Eighth street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Park Avenue, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Park Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Floyd Street, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Floyd Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Eighth Street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Eighth Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Buchannan Street, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Buchannan Street, to its point of intersection with the centerline of Kemper Street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Kemper Street 204 feet to a point, said point being the 90 degree turn in Kemper Street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction 618 feet to a point, said point being the terminus of the centerline of Eighth Street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Eighth Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Orchard Street, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Orchard Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Kingston Avenue, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Kingston Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Langhorne Road, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Langhorne Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Memorial Avenue, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Memorial Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Wadsworth Street, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Wadsworth Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Fort Avenue, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Fort Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Lancaster Street, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Lancaster Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rives Street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Rives Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Gordon Street, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Gordon Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Stadium Road, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Stadium Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of the southbound lane of the Lynchburg Expressway, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of the southbound lane of the Lynchburg Expressway to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of the eastern most track of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of the eastern most track of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of Fishing Creek, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction 734 feet to the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg to the point of beginning. The voting place in said second precinct of the second ward shall be located at Robert S. Payne Elementary School Gymnasium, 1201 Floyd Street. 
(3)  Third precinct. All that portion of the second ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad (east/west line) and the centerline of the eastern most track of the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad (north/south line) thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of the eastern most track of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of Fishing Creek, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction 734 feet to the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg to its point of intersection with the centerline of Martin Street, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Martin Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of the eastbound lane of Richmond Highway, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of the eastbound lane of Richmond Highway to its point of intersection with the centerline of the northbound lane of Campbell Avenue, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the northbound lane of Campbell Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Florida Avenue, thence proceeding in an northeasterly direction along the centerline of Florida Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to the point of beginning. The voting place in said third precinct of the second ward shall be located at the Jubilee Family Development Center, 1512 Florida Avenue. 
(4)  Fourth precinct. All that portion of the second ward beginning at a point, said point being the point of intersection between the centerline of the eastbound lane of Richmond Highway and the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of the eastbound lane of Richmond Highway to its point of intersection with the centerline of the northbound lane of Campbell Avenue, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the northbound lane of Campbell Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Florida Avenue, thence proceeding in an northeasterly direction along the centerline of Florida Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rutherford Street extended 75 feet, thence proceeding in a southerly direction 55 feet along the centerline of Rutherford Street extended to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of Carroll Avenue, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Carroll Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Albert Lankford Drive, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Albert Lankford Drive to its point of intersection with the centerline of Odd Fellows Road, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Odd Fellows Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Perkins Street, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Perkins Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Mayflower Drive, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Mayflower Drive to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to the point of beginning. The voting place in said fourth precinct of the second ward shall be located at Fairview Christian Church, 2107 Campbell Avenue. 
(Code 1959, § 9-16; Ord. of 2-17-76; Ord. of 2-28-78; Ord. No. O-80-231, § 1, 8-12-80; Ord. No. O-82-140, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. O-84-044, § 1, 2-28-84; Ord. No. O-87-267, § 1, 11-24-87; Ord. No. O-91-298, 12-10-91; Ord. No. O-02-075, 4-09-02; Ord. No. O-11-120, 10-25-11) 
Sec. 14-34. - Third ward. 
    The third ward shall be divided into five election precincts, the boundaries of which shall be as follows. 
(1)  First precinct. All that portion of the third ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline of Rockbridge Avenue and the centerline of Lakeside Drive, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Lakeside Drive to its point of intersection with the centerline of Memorial Avenue, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Memorial Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Wadsworth Street, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Wadsworth Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Fort Avenue, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Fort Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Lancaster Street, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Lancaster Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rives Street, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Rives Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Gordon Street, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Gordon Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Stadium Road, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Stadium Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of the southbound lane of the Lynchburg Expressway, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of the southbound lane of the Lynchburg Expressway to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of Edley Place extended, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction 97 feet to the terminus of the centerline of Edley Place, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Edley Place to its point of intersection with Fort Avenue, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Fort Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Oakridge Boulevard, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Oakridge Boulevard to its point of intersection with the centerline of Sussex Street, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Sussex Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Richmond Street, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Richmond Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rockbridge Avenue, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Rockbridge Avenue to the point of beginning. The voting place in said first precinct of the third ward shall be located at the Lynchburg Public Library, 2315 Memorial Avenue. 
(2)  Second precinct. All that portion of the third ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the Corporate Limits of the City of Lynchburg and the centerline of Candlers Mountain Road, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Candlers Mountain Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the Corporate Limits of the City of Lynchburg, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the Corporate Limits of the City of Lynchburg to the point of beginning. The voting place of said second precinct of the third ward shall be located at the Vines Center 2001 University Boulevard. 
(3)  Third precinct. All that portion of the third ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg and the centerline of Candlers Mountain Road, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Candlers Mountain Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction 2,055 feet along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to a point, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction 425 feet to a point, said point being on the centerline of the perimeter road of River Ridge Mall, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the perimeter road of River Ridge Mall to its point of intersection with the centerline of Glass Avenue, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Glass Avenue to its terminus, thence proceeding 223 feet along the centerline of Glass Avenue extended to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rock Castle Creek, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Rock Castle Creek to its point of intersection with the centerline of Burton Creek, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Burton Creek to its point of intersection with the centerline of the westbound lane of Fort Avenue, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the westbound lane of Fort Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Edley Place, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Edley Place to its terminus, thence proceeding 97 feet along the centerline of Edley Place extended to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rutherford Street extended, thence proceeding in a southerly direction 55 feet along the centerline of Rutherford Street extended to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of Carroll Avenue, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Carroll Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Albert Lankford Drive, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Albert Lankford Drive to its point of intersection with the centerline of Odd Fellows Road, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Odd Fellows Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Perkins Street, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Perkins Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Mayflower Drive, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Mayflower Drive to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of the eastbound lane of Richmond Highway, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of the eastbound lane of Richmond Highway to its point of intersection with the centerline of Martin Street, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Martin Street to its point of intersection with the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg, thence proceeding in an southwesterly direction along the Corporate Limits of the City of Lynchburg to the point of beginning. The voting place in said third precinct of the third ward shall be located at Sheffield School, 115 Kenwood Place. 
(4)  Fourth precinct. All that portion of the third ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg and the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a northerly direction 8,084 feet along the centerline of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad to a point, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction 425 feet to a point, said point being on the centerline of the perimeter road of River Ridge Mall, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the perimeter road of River Ridge Mall to its point of intersection with the centerline of Glass Avenue, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Glass Avenue to its terminus, thence proceeding 223 feet along the centerline of Glass Avenue extended to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rock Castle Creek, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Rock Castle Creek to its point of intersection with the centerline of Burton Creek, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Burton Creek to its point of intersection with the centerline of the westbound lane of Fort Avenue/Timberlake Road, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of the westbound lane of Timberlake Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Leesville Road, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Leesville Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Del Ray Circle, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Del Ray Circle to its point of intersection with the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the Corporate Limits of the City of Lynchburg to the point of beginning. The voting place in said fourth precinct of the third ward shall be located at the First Church of the Nazarene, 1737 Wards Ferry Road. 
(5)  Fifth precinct. All that portion of the third ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline of the westbound lane of Timberlake Road and Leesville Road thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Leesville Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Del Ray Circle, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Del Ray Circle to its point of intersection with the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg to its point of intersection with the centerline of the westbound lane of Timberlake Road, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of the westbound Lane of Timberlake Road to the point of beginning. The voting place of said fifth precinct of the third ward shall be located at Heritage United Methodist Church, 582 Leesville Road. 
(Code 1959, § 9-17; Ord. of 2-17-76; Ord. of 1-24-78; Ord. No. O-82-140, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. O-85-056, § 1, 3-26-85; Ord. No. O-91-298, 12-10-91; Ord. No. O-02-075, 4-09-02; Ord. No. O-11-120, 10-25-11; Ord. No. O-14-092, § 1, 8-12-14 ) 
Sec. 14-35. - Fourth ward. 
    The fourth ward shall be divided into four election precincts, the boundaries of which shall be as follows: 
(1)  First precinct. All that portion of the fourth ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the Corporate Limits of the City of Lynchburg and the centerline of Graves Mill Road, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Graves Mill Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of McConville Road, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of McConville Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Tomahawk Creek, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Tomahawk Creek to its point of intersection with the centerline of Burton Creek, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Burton Creek to its point of intersection with the centerline of the westbound lane of Timberlake Road, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of the westbound lane of Timberlake Road to its point of intersection with the Corporate Limits of the City of Lynchburg, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the Corporate Limits of the City of Lynchburg to the point of beginning. Through the November 2019 election the voting place of said first precinct of the fourth ward shall be located at Crosspoint Church, 7619 Timberlake Road. After the November 2019 election City Council will reconsider the location of the voting place of the first precinct of the fourth ward. 
(2)  Second precinct. All that portion of the fourth ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline of Tomahawk Creek, Burton Creek and the centerline of Blackwater Creek, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of Blackwater Creek to its point of intersection with the Blackwater Creek Tributary, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Tributary to its point of intersection with the centerline of Heath Avenue extended, thence proceeding in a southerly direction 234 feet along the centerline of Heath Avenue extended to the terminus of the centerline of Heath Avenue, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Heath Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Fort Avenue, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Fort Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Burton Creek, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Burton Creek, to the point of beginning. The voting place in said second precinct of the fourth ward shall be located at Sandusky Middle School, 805 Chinook Place. 
(3)  Third precinct. All the portion of the fourth ward lying at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline of Wyndale Drive and the centerline of Fleetwood Avenue, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Fleetwood Avenue to its terminus, thence proceeding in a southerly direction 395 feet along the centerline of Fleetwood Drive extended to its point of intersection with the centerline of Blackwater Creek, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Blackwater Creek to its point of intersection with the Blackwater Creek Tributary, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Tributary to its point of intersection with the centerline of Heath Avenue extended, thence proceeding in a southerly direction 234 feet along the centerline of Heath Avenue extended to the terminus of the centerline of Heath Avenue, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Heath Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Fort Avenue, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Fort Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Oakridge Boulevard, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Oakridge Boulevard to its point of intersection with the centerline of Sussex Street, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Sussex Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Richmond Street, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Richmond Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of Rockbridge Avenue, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Rockbridge Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of Lakeside Drive, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Lakeside Drive to its point of intersection with the centerline of Wyndale Drive, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Wyndale Drive to the point of beginning. The voting place in said third precinct of the fourth ward shall be located at the Perrymont Fellowship Hall, 114 Perrymont Avenue. 
(4)  Fourth precinct. All that portion of the fourth ward beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the centerline of Rivermont Avenue and the centerline of Rivermont Terrace, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Rivermont Terrace to its point of intersection with the centerline of Langhorne Road, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Langhorne Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Landon Street, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Landon Street to its point of intersection with Club Drive, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Club Drive to its terminus, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction 93 feet along the centerline of Club Drive extended to its point of intersection with the centerline of Ivy Creek, thence proceeding in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Ivy Creek to its point of intersection with the centerline of the abandoned Norfolk and Southern Railroad, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of the abandoned Norfolk and Southern Railroad to its point of intersection with the centerline of Langhorne Road, thence proceeding in a southerly direction along the centerline of Langhorne Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Blackwater Creek, thence proceeding in a westerly direction along the centerline of Blackwater Creek to its point of intersection with the Blackwater Creek Tributary, thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the centerline of the Blackwater Creek Tributary to its point of intersection with the centerline of Lakeside Drive, thence proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Lakeside Drive to its point of intersection with the centerline of Forest Brook Road, thence proceeding in a northerly direction along the centerline of Forest Brook Road to its point of intersection with the centerline of Old Forest Road, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Old Forest Road to its point of intersection with Devonshire Road, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Devonshire Road to its point of intersection with Kettering Lane, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction 1,815 feet along the centerline of Devonshire Road extended to its point of intersection with the centerline of the Ivy Creek Tributary, thence proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the Ivy Creek Tributary to its point of intersection with the centerline of Ivy Creek, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Ivy Creek to its point of intersection with the centerline of Link Road, thence proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Link Road to its point of intersection with Rivermont Avenue, thence proceeding in an easterly direction to the point of beginning. The voting place in said fourth precinct of the fourth ward shall be located at Linkhorne Middle School, 2525 Linkhorne Drive. 
(Code 1959, § 9-18; Ord. of 2-17-76, § 2; Ord. of 1-28-78; Ord. No. O-80-045, § 1, 2-26-80; Ord. No. O-82-140, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. O-85-056, § 1, 3-26-85; Ord. No. O-02-075, Ord. No. O-02-075, 4-09-02; Ord. No. O-05-100, 8-9-05; Ord. No. O-11-120, 10-25-11; Ord. No. O-13-027, 02-26-13; Ord. No. O-17-021 , § 1, 3-14-17; Ord. No. O-19-019 , § 1, 3-12-19) 
Sec. 14-36. - Central absentee voter election precinct. 
    There is hereby established for the city pursuant to section 24.2-712 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, a central absentee voter election precinct for the purpose of receiving, counting and recording absentee ballots in all elections. The voting place for such precinct shall be the office of the general registrar, at 825 Kemper Street, Suite A, Lynchburg, Virginia. 
(Code 1959, § 9-19; Ord. of 1-23-79; Ord. No. O-82-140, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. O-00-200, 9-26-00; Ord. No. O-18-095 , § 1, 11-13-18) 
Chapter 15 - ELECTRICITY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Department of community services, § 2-225 et seq.; building, Ch. 11; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 19. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - City wires. 
    The uppermost zone on every pole of a telephone and telegraph company and the lowermost zone on every electric light and power pole shall at all times be reserved for the free use of the city in stringing its fire alarm signal or police signal and telegraph wires; and no person shall run any wire, within less than 26 inches of them; but, whenever it becomes necessary to move the city wires for any reason, the person for whose benefit they are moved shall, at the expense of such person, provide for them a place at least 26 inches from them, and shall notify the building and maintenance superintendent who shall supervise and direct the moving of such wires, so that they shall at all times occupy a safe location. Any person running or placing their wires within less than 26 inches of the city wires, or moving the city wires except under the supervision and direction of the building and maintenance superintendent, or refusing or failing, to move its own wires when placed or strung in violation of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 10-1) 
Sec. 15-2. - Telephone poles, etc. 
    All poles erected in the city shall be neatly painted by the owners thereof at their expense, and shall be stencilled, painted or branded with the owner's name or initials, some six feet from the ground. It shall be the duty of the building and maintenance superintendent to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 10-2) 
Sec. 15-3. - Dead wires, unsafe poles, etc. 
    No person shall maintain or permit "dead wires" to remain on their poles or in or over the streets, nor shall they erect or maintain any unsafe, unsuitable or improperly located poles that are not in accordance with the provisions of the city ordinances, nor shall they construct or maintain in or over the streets of the city any unsafe, unsuitable or improperly located crossbars or any defective or improperly installed or located wires or electrical apparatus. For every violation of this section the offender shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 10-3) 
Secs. 15-4-15-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-98-173, adopted July 14, 1998, effective Sept. 1, 1998, repealed Art. II. See Chapter 11, Article VII Electrical Code. 
Chapter 16.1 - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ch. 16, Erosion and Sediment Control, was repealed by Ord. No. O-93-039, adopted 2-9-93, and was replaced by Ch. 16.1. 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 11; nuisances, Ch. 26; planning, Ch. 30; zoning, Ch. 35.1. 

Sec. 16.1-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to conserve the land, water, air and other natural resources of the City of Lynchburg and promote the public health and welfare of the people in the city by establishing requirements for the control of erosion and sedimentation, and by establishing procedures whereby these requirements shall be administered and enforced. These procedures will apply to any land disturbing activity as done by government and private entities in the City of Lynchburg. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93) 
Sec. 16.1-2. - Authority for chapter. 
    This chapter is authorized by the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, Title 10.1, Chapter 5, Article 4, (10.1-560 et seg.), known as the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93) 
Sec. 16.1-3. - Terms beginning with "A" through "C". 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(a)  Agreement in lieu of a plan: Means a contract between the plan approving authority and the owner which specifies conservation measures which must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence; this contract may be executed by the plan-approving authority in lieu of a formal site plan. 
(b)  Applicant: Any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan for approval or requesting the issuance of a permit, when required, authorizing land disturbing activities to commence. 
(c)  Board: The Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board, created under Sec. 10.1-502, Code of Virginia. 
(d)  Certified inspector: Means an employee or agent of a program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of project inspection or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
(e)  Certified plan reviewer: Means an employee or agent of a program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of plan review, (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for plan review and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment, or (iii) is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or landscape surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et. seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(f)  Certified program administrator: Means an employee or agent of a program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of program administration or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for program administration and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
(g)  Channel: A natural stream or manmade waterway. 
(h)  City: The City of Lynchburg. 
(i)  Clearing: Any activity which removes the vegetative ground cover including, but not limited to, root mat removal and/or topsoil removal. 
(j)  Conservation plan, erosion and sediment control plan , or plan : A document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water control plan inventory, and management information with needed interpretations, and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major conservation decisions to assure that the entire unit or units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives. It shall also address the stormwater management criteria as specified by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-01-080, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-09-121, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 16.1-4. - Terms beginning with "D" through "F". 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(a)  Denuded: A term applied to land that has been physically disturbed and presently does not supports vegetative cover. 
(b)  Development: A tract of land developed or to be developed as a single unit under single ownership or unified control which is to be used for any business or industrial purpose or contained within a subdivision for residential dwelling units. 
(c)  District or soil and water conservation district: A political subdivision of the commonwealth organized in accordance with the provisions of Article 3, Sec. 10.1-506 et seq., Chapter 5, of the Code of Virginia. 
(d)  Dormant: Denuded land not actively being brought to a desired grade or condition. 
(e)  Erosion impact area: An area of land not associated with current land disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of 1,000 square feet or less used for residential purposes or to shorelines where the erosion results from wave action or other coastal processes. 
(f)  Excavating: Any digging, scooping or other methods of removing earth materials. 
(g)  Filling: Any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
(h)  Floodplain: Those areas adjoining a river, stream, channel, ocean, bay or lake which are likely to be covered by flooding. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-01-080, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01) 
Sec. 16.1-5. - Terms beginning with "G" through "K". 
(a)  Governing body: The council of the City of Lynchburg. 
(b)  Grading: Any excavating or filling with earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
(c)  Inspection: An on-site review of compliance with the approved plan, and any applicable design criteria. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-01-080, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01) 
Sec. 16.1-6. - Terms beginning with "L" through "O". 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(a)  Land disturbing activity: Any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, except that the term shall not include: 
(1)  Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repair and maintenance work; 
(2)  Individual service connections; 
(3)  Installation, maintenance or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard surfaced road, street, or sidewalk provided such land disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard surfaced; 
(4)  Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system; 
(5)  Surface or deep mining; 
(6)  Exploration or drilling for oil and gas including the well site, roads, feeder lines and off-site disposal areas; 
(7)  Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or forest crops, or livestock feedlot operations; including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Dam Safety Act Article 2, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et. seq.) of this title or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in subsection B of § 10.1-1163; 
(8)  Agricultural engineering operations including, but not limited to, the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Dam Safety Act, Chapter 8.1 (Sec. 62.1-115.1 et. seq.), ditches, strip cropping lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; 
(9)  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company; 
(10)  Installation of fence and sign posts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; 
(11)  Shore erosion control projects or projects on tidal waters when the projects are approved by local wetlands boards, the Marine Resources Commission or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
(12)  Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property, and emergency repairs; provided that if the land disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(13)  Disturbed land areas of less than 1,000 square feet in size. 
Best management practices will be encouraged to all exceptions to land disturbing activity. 
(b)  Land disturbing permit: A permit issued by the city for the clearing, filling, excavating, grading, or transferring, or any combination thereof, or for any purpose set forth herein. 
(c)  Licensed design professional: A professional engineer, land surveyor III B, or landscape architect certified and licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(d)  Local erosion and sediment control program or local control program: An outline or explanation of the various elements or methods employed by the city to regulate land disturbing activities and thereby minimize erosion and sedimentation in compliance with the state program and may include such items as local ordinance, policies and guidelines, technical materials, inspection, enforcement and evaluation. 
(e)  Locality: The City of Lynchburg. 
(f)  Owner: The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-01-080, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-09-121, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 16.1-7. - Terms beginning with "P" through "R". 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(a)  Peak flow rate: The maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a particular location. 
(b)  Permittee: The person to whom the permit authorizing land disturbing activities is issued or the person who certifies that the approved erosion and sediment control plan will be followed. 
(c)  Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town, or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
(d)  Plan approving authority: The city's certified plan reviewer is responsible for determining the adequacy of a conservation plan submitted for land disturbing activities on a unit or units of land and for approving plans. 
(e)  Post-development: Conditions that may be reasonably expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity on a specific site or tract of land. 
(f)  Pre-development: Conditions existing at the time the erosion and sediment control plan is submitted to the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time the erosion and sediment control plan for the initial phase is submitted for approval shall establish pre-development conditions. 
(g)  Program authority: Means a district, county, city or town which has adopted a soil erosion and sediment control program which has been approved by the board. The City of Lynchburg is the designated program authority through the department of community development. 
(h)  Responsible land disturber: An individual from the project or development team, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out a land disturbing activity covered by an approved plan or agreement in lieu of a plan, who (i) holds a responsible land disturber certificate of competence, (ii) hold a current certificate of competence from the board in the areas of combined administration, program administration, inspection or plan review, (iii) holds a current contractor certificate of competence for erosion and sediment control or (iv) is licensed in Virginia as a professional engineer, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (Section 54.1-1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(i)  Runoff: That portion of precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways. 
(j)  Runoff volume: The volume of water that runs off the land development project from a prescribed storm event. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-01-080, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-09-121, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 16.1-8. - Terms beginning with "S" through "Z". 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(a)  Single-family residence: A noncommercial dwelling that is occupied exclusively by one family and not part of a residential subdivision development. 
(b)  Stabilized: An area expected to withstand normal exposure to atmospheric conditions without incurring erosion damage. 
(c)  State erosion and sediment control program or state program : The program administered by the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board pursuant to the state code including regulations designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
(d)  State waters: All waters on the surface and under the ground wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdictions. 
(e)  Subdivision: Division of any tract, parcel or lot of land into two or more parts at one time or any extended period of time; except, however: 
(1)  The term "subdivision" shall not include the division of land into ten acres or more for agricultural purposes, provided no new streets are required; 
(2)  The agent may, however, permit the separation of one parcel from a tract of land without complying with all requirements of this chapter if it is (a) not in conflict with the general meaning and purpose of the chapter, and (b) no new streets are required to serve the parcel; and 
(3)  The word "subdivide" and any derivative thereof shall have reference to the term "subdivision" as defined in section 24.1-5(26) of the subdivision ordinance. 
(f)  Transporting: Any moving of earth materials from one place to another place, other than such movement incidental to grading, when such movement results in destroying the vegetative ground cover either by tracking or the buildup of earth materials to the extent that erosion and sedimentation will result from the soil or earth materials over which such transporting occurs. 
(g)  Water quality volume: The volume equal to the first one-half inch of runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-01-080, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-09-121, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 16.1-9. - Local erosion and sediment control program. 
(a)  The City of Lynchburg adopts the regulations promulgated by the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board pursuant to section 10.1-562 of the Code of Virginia for the effective control of soil erosion, sediment deposition and nonagricultural runoff to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources. The Virginia Erosion and Control Regulations, The Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended, and the Lynchburg Erosion and Sediment Handbook, are adopted as the standards, reference and guidelines for the local program. The standards and amendments contained within these publications are to be used by the applicant when making a submittal under the provisions of this chapter and in the preparation of an erosion and sediment control plan. The plan approving authority, in considering the adequacy of a submitted plan, shall be guided by the same standards, regulations and guidelines. When the standards vary between the publications, the state regulations shall take precedence. 
(b)  Any erosion and sediment plan submitted for review must address stormwater management in accordance with the Lynchburg Stormwater Ordinance, Chapter 16.2. 
(c)  Violators of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor for each violation. In addition to any criminal penalties provided under this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be liable to the City of Lynchburg in a civil action for damages. The civil penalty for any one violation shall be not less than $100.00, nor more than $1,000.00, except that the civil penalty for commencement of land disturbing activities without an approved plan as provided in subsection 16.1-10(a) shall be $1,000.00. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $10,000.00 and a series of violations arising from the commencement of land disturbing activities without an approved plan for any site shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $10,000.00. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-01-080, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-09-121, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 16.1-10. - Regulated land disturbing activities. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no person shall engage in any land disturbing activity until he has submitted to the department of community development an erosion and sediment plan for land disturbing activity and such plan has been approved by the plan approving authority. Where land disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one local control program an erosion and sediment control plan may, at the option of the applicant, be submitted to the board for review and approval rather than each jurisdiction concerned. Where land disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence, an agreement in lieu of a plan may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan if executed by the plan approving authority. 
(b)  As a prerequisite to engaging in land disturbing activities shown on an approved plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence to the program administrator and/or designee, as provided in § 10.1-561 of the Code of Virginia, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land disturbing activity. However, the plan-approving authority may waive the certificate of competence requirement for an agreement in lieu of a plan when construction of a single-family residence is the purpose of a land disturbing activity. Failure to provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence prior to engaging in land disturbing activities may result in revocation of the approval of the plan. 
(c)  The plan shall be acted upon within 30 days from receipt thereof by either approving said plan in writing or by disapproving said plan in writing and giving specific reasons for its disapproval. When a plan is determined to be inadequate, the plan approving authority shall specify such modifications, terms, and conditions that will permit approval of the plan. If no action is taken within 30 days, the plan shall be deemed approved and the applicant authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(d)  An approved plan may be changed by the plan approving authority when: 
(1)  The inspection reveals that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable regulations; or 
(2)  The person responsible for carrying out the plan finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this chapter, are agreed to by the plan approving authority and the person responsible for carrying out the plan. 
    No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the plan approving authority. The plan shall be acted upon within 15 days from receipt thereof by either approving said plan in writing or by disapproving said plan in writing and giving specific reasons for its disapproval. When a plan is determined to be inadequate, the plan approving authority shall specify such modifications, terms, and conditions that will permit approval of the plan. If no action is taken within 15 days, the plan shall be deemed approved and the applicant authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(e)  Electric, natural gas and telephone utility companies, interstate and intrastate natural gas pipeline companies, and railroad companies shall file general erosion and sediment control specifications annually with the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board for review and approval. The specifications shall apply to: 
(1)  Construction, installation or maintenance of electric transmission, natural gas and telephone utility lines and pipelines; and 
(2)  Construction of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of the railroad company. 
    The Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board shall have 60 days in which to approve the specifications. If no action is taken by the board within 60 days, the specifications shall be deemed approved. Individual approval of separate projects within subdivisions (1) and (2) of this subsection is not necessary when approved specifications are followed. Projects not included in subdivisions (1) and (2) of this subsection shall comply with the requirements of the city erosion and sediment control program. The board shall have the authority to enforce approved specifications. 
(f)  In order to prevent further erosion, the administrator may require approval of a conservation plan for any land identified in the local program as an erosion impact area. 
(g)  When land disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission, and approval of an erosion and sediment control plan shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-01-080, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-09-121, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 16.1-11. - Administrative procedures; conditions of approval. 
    Each plan approved by a locality shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan, the local program, these regulations and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan. Certification by a licensed design professional is required for all land disturbing activities where it is anticipated that the effects of erosion will have a significant detrimental impact on adjacent properties. It is the responsibility of the licensed design professional to insure that the plan meets or exceeds all the criteria outlined in this chapter. 
(b)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan. 
(c)  The locality shall be allowed, after giving notice to the owner, occupier or operator of the land development project, to conduct periodic inspections of the project. 
(d)  No transfer, assignment or sale of the rights granted by virtue of an approved plan shall be made unless a written notice of transfer is filed with the locality and the transferee certifies agreement to comply with all obligations and conditions of the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-01-080, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01) 
Sec. 16.1-11.1. - State agency projects. 
(a)  A state agency shall not undertake a project involving a land disturbing activity unless (i) the state agency has submitted annual specifications for its conduct of land disturbing activities which have been reviewed and approved by the State Department of Conservation and Recreation as being consistent with the state program or (ii) the state agency has submitted a conservation plan for the project which has been reviewed and approved by the department. 
(b)  The department shall not approve a conservation plan submitted by a federal or state agency for a project involving a land disturbing activity (i) in any locality which has not adopted a local program with more stringent regulations than those of the state program or (ii) in multiple jurisdictions with separate local programs, unless the conservation plan is consistent with the requirements of the state program. 
(c)  The department shall not approve a conservation plan submitted by a federal or state agency for a project involving a land disturbing activity in one locality with a local program with more stringent regulations than those of the state program unless the conservation plan is consistent with the requirements of the local program. If a locality has not submitted a copy of its local program regulations to the department, the provisions of section (b) of this section shall apply. 
(d)  The department shall have 60 days in which to comment on any specifications or conservation plan submitted to it for review and its comments shall be binding on the state agency and any private business hired by the state agency. 
(e)  As on-site changes occur, the state agency shall submit changes in a conservation plan to the department. 
(f)  The state agency responsible for the land disturbing activity shall ensure compliance with the approved plan or specifications. 
(Ord. No. O-09-121, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 16.1-12. - Administrative procedures; exceptions. 
(a)  A request for an exception shall be submitted, in writing, to the locality. An exception from the erosion and sediment control regulations may be granted, provided that: (1) exceptions to the criteria are the minimum necessary to afford relief, and (2) reasonable and appropriate conditions shall be imposed as necessary upon any exception granted so the purpose and intent of the erosion and sediment control plan is preserved. 
(b)  Economic hardship is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93) 
Sec. 16.1-13. - Land disturbing permits; fees; bonding; and maintenance agreement. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any land disturbing activity until he has acquired a land disturbing permit, and has paid the fees and posted the required bond, unless the proposed land disturbing activity is specifically exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Fees: A plan review fee and inspection fee for (1) one and two-family residential development of $50.00 per acre and (2) multi-family/commercial/industrial development of $150.00 per acre, not to exceed $5,000.00, paid to the city at the time of filing erosion and sediment control plans. 
(c)  No land disturbing permit shall be issued until the applicant submits with his application an approved erosion and sediment control plan and certification that the plan will be followed. An approved plan is required for issuance of grading, building or other permits. 
(d)  Bond: All applicants for permits shall provide to the city a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, or an irrevocable letter of credit equal to the amount necessary to implement and maintain all approved erosion and sediment control measures, including stormwater control measures in accordance with the Lynchburg Stormwater Ordinance, chapter 16.2 on the approved plan. The city reserves the right to use this performance bond, cash escrow, or letter of credit to implement these measures should the applicant fail within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation measures required of him as a result of his land disturbing activity. Should it be necessary for the city to take such conservation action, the city may collect from the applicant any costs in excess of the amount of the surety held. Within 60 days of the achievement of adequate stabilization, as determined by the department of community development, such bond, cash escrow or letter of credit, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof shall be either refunded to the applicant or terminated. These requirements are in addition to all other provisions relating to the issuance of permits and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements of such permits. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-00-105, introduced 5-9-00, adopted 5-23-00, eff. 7-1-00; Ord. No. O-01-080, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-09-121, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 16.1-14. - Monitoring, reports, and inspections. 
(a)  The program administrator or his designee shall provide for and/or conduct inspections at least once in every two-week period and within 48 hours following any runoff producing storm event of the land disturbing activity and may require monitoring and reports from the person responsible for carrying out the plan to assure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sediment. The owner, occupier or operator shall be given an opportunity to accompany the inspector. If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the land disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the specified time, the permit may be revoked and the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided by the chapter. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of violation of this chapter, the program administrator or his designee either may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in this chapter, issue an order requiring that all or part of the land disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, such an order may be issued without regard to whether the permittee has been issued a notice to comply as specified in this chapter. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the permittee has failed to comply with such a notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for a period of seven days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority or permit holder for appropriate relief to the circuit court of Lynchburg. If the alleged violator has not obtained an approved plan or any required permits within seven days from the date of service of the order, the administrator or his designee may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures be stopped until an approved plan and any required permits have been obtained. Such an order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or land records of the locality in which the site is located. The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the circuit court of the jurisdiction wherein the violation was alleged to have occurred. Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey an order issued by the chief administrative officer or his designee may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the Lynchburg Circuit Court to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion of corrective action, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the administrator from taking any other action authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-01-080, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-09-121, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 16.1-15. - Penalties, injunctions and other legal actions. 
(a)  Violators of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor for each violation. 
(b)  The City of Lynchburg may apply to the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this chapter, without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. 
(c)  In addition to any criminal penalties provided under this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be liable to the City of Lynchburg in a civil action for damages. 
(d)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation. 
(e)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation or condition of a permit or any provision of this chapter, the City of Lynchburg may provide for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified in paragraph (d) of this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under paragraph (d). 
(f)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the program administrator, or his duly authorized agent, shall have the authority to apply for the issuance of inspection warrants by a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction. The program administrator or his agent may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction and if such sworn testimony establishes probable cause that a violation of this chapter has occurred, request that the magistrate or court grant the program administrator or his agent an inspection warrant to enable the program administrator or his agent to enter the subject property for the purpose of determining whether violations of this chapter exist. The program administrator or his agent shall make a reasonable effort to obtain consent from the owner or managing agent of the subject property prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant under this section. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner, managing agent or other person, to deny the program administrator, or his duly authorized agent, access to any property after the program administrator, or his duly authorized agent have obtained an inspection warrant from a magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(g)  The city attorney shall, upon request of the city, take legal civil action to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion, siltation or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met, and the complaining party must show negligence in order to recover any damages. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93; Ord. No. O-09-121, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 16.1-16. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Final decisions of the administrator under this chapter shall be subject to review by the city board of adjustments and appeals, provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date of any written decision by the administrator which adversely affects the rights, duties, or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land disturbing activities. 
(b)  Final decisions of the city board of adjustments and appeals under this chapter shall be subject to review of the circuit court of the city; provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date of the final written decision which adversely affects the rights, duties, or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93) 
Sec. 16.1-17. - Self-imposed restrictions. 
    The subdivider may place restrictions on the development greater than the provisions of this chapter or the city zoning ordinance. Such restrictions, if any, shall be indicated on the subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93) 
Sec. 16.1-18. - Projects commenced before adoption of conservation standards not affected. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall affect any project commenced prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-93-039, 2-9-93) 
Chapter 16.2 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 16.2-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff from development sites in the City of Lynchburg to the greatest extent possible, by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff associated with land development. By converting more or less natural landscapes to sites with impervious surfaces, development can cause increases in the quantity and velocity of stormwater runoff and decreases in the water quality of stormwater runoff. Adverse impacts from development shall not be allowed to affect adjacent or downstream property owners. The Lynchburg City Council has determined that the lands and waters comprising the watersheds of the city are valuable and important natural resources, which provide subsistence for life. Therefore, it is in the public interest to establish requirements to regulate the discharge of stormwater runoff from land development projects as provided for in this chapter. The waters and waterways within the city are at times subjected to flooding. Such flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is also a danger to the natural resources of the city. Land development tends to accentuate such flooding by increasing stormwater runoff, due to alteration of the hydrologic response of the watershed in changing from the undeveloped to the developed condition. The flooding produced by the development of real property contributes increased quantities of water-borne pollutants, and tends to increase channel erosion. Such flooding, erosion, and pollution constitute deterioration of the water resources of the City of Lynchburg and downstream communities. The adverse environmental effects of development can be limited by the regulation of stormwater runoff from such land development. Proper management of stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property, reduce the effects of development on land and stream channel erosion, assist in the attainment and maintenance of water quality standards, reduce local flooding, and maintain as nearly as possible, the pre-development runoff characteristics of the area. Procedures provided in this document to reduce stormwater runoff will apply to land-disturbing activity, as done by public and private entities in the City of Lynchburg. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-2. - Title. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall constitute and be known as the "Lynchburg Stormwater Management Ordinance," as authorized by the Virginia Stormwater Management Act, Title 62.1, Chapter 3.1, Article 2.3 of the Code of Virginia as amended through 2014. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-3. - Authority. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the Virginia Stormwater Management Act, Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:27 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1, of the Code of Virginia, which enables counties, cities and towns to prepare and adopt a stormwater management program and implement the ordinance. The application of this chapter and the provisions expressed herein shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the state statute. 
(b)  Except as specifically provided here in the stormwater management standards contained in this ordinance are based on the stormwater regulations adopted by the Commonwealth of Virginia and the Federal government. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-4. - Program administration. 
    The City of Lynchburg administrator or his/her designee shall be responsible for the coordination, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-5. - Scope of chapter. 
    For land development projects that disturb 5,000 square feet or more of land area, no person shall develop any land for residential, commercial, industrial or institutional use without having provided for appropriate stormwater management measures that control or manage stormwater runoff quality, quantity, and velocity as provided within this article, except those development activities exempted in accordance with subsections 16.2-9(c)2, 16.2-9(c)3, 16.2-9(c)4, 16.2-9(c)5, 16.2-9(c)6, 16.2-9(c)7 and 16.2-9(c)8. A VSMP authority permit is only required for projects that disturb one acre or more of land or are part of a common plan of development, except as provided in subsection 16.2-9(b). 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-6. - Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. 
    Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance. If more stringent requirements concerning the regulation of stormwater runoff are contained in the other code, rule, act or ordinance, the more stringent regulation shall apply. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01) 
Sec. 16.2-7. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable, and, in the event that any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, subparagraphs, paragraphs, subsections, or sections of this chapter, since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation in this chapter of any such invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, subparagraph, paragraph, subsection or section. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01) 
Sec. 16.2-8. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
(1)  "Administrator" means the VSMP authority including the City of Lynchburg department or staff person responsible for administering the VSMP on behalf of the locality. 
(2)  "Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan" means a contract between the VSMP authority and the owner or permittee that specifies methods that shall be implemented to comply with the requirements of a VSMP for the construction of a single-family residence; such contract may be executed by the VSMP authority in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
(3)  "Applicant" means any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit under this chapter. 
(4)  "Best management practice (BMP)" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
(5)  "Board" means the State Water Control Board. 
(6)  "Channel" means a natural or manmade waterway. 
(7)  "Clean Water Act" or "CWA" means the federal Clean Water Act (33 USC § 1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
(8)  "CWA and regulations" means the Clean Water Act (CWA) and applicable regulations published in the Code of Federal Regulations promulgated thereunder. For the purposes of this chapter, it includes state program requirements. 
(9)  "Common plan of development or sale" means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on difference schedules. 
(10)  "Control measure" means any best management practice or stormwater facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
(11)  "Department" means the Department of Environmental Quality. 
(12)  "Development" means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
(13)  "Disturbed area" means all ground surface area which will be physically impacted by construction activities, including material storage areas and adequate vehicular access routes to all construction activities. No construction activity including material storage and vehicle access will be permitted outside the area designated as "disturbed area" on the approved plan. If use of such area is desired, a plan revision must be submitted for review and approval prior to such use. 
(14)  "Flooding" means a volume of water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of the stream, water body or conveyance system and that overflows onto adjacent lands, causing or threatening damage. 
(15)  "Floodplain" means those areas adjacent to a channel, river stream, or other water body that is susceptible to being inundated by water normally associated with the 100-year flood or storm event. This includes, but is not limited to, the floodplain designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(16)  "General permit" means the state permit titled general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities found at 9VAC25-880-1 et seq., of the regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Act within a geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(17)  "Illicit discharge" means any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to a Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit. This definition shall not include the discharges listed in subsection 16.2-71(b) unless the city identifies such discharges as sources of pollutants to state waters. 
(18)  "Impervious cover" means a surface composed of material that significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into soil. For the purposes of billing stormwater utility fees as provided in chapter 16.3 of City Code, impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, buildings, streets, parking areas, and any concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface. 
(19)  "Infiltration facility" means a stormwater management facility, which temporarily impounds runoff and discharges it via infiltration through the surrounding soil. While an infiltration facility may also be equipped with an outlet structure to discharge impounded runoff, such discharge is normally reserved for overflow and other emergency conditions. Since an infiltration facility impounds runoff only temporarily, it is normally dry during non-rainfall periods. Infiltration basin, infiltration trench, infiltration dry well, and porous pavement shall be considered infiltration facilities. 
(20)  "Inspection" means an on-site review of the project's compliance with the permit or state permit, the local stormwater management program, and any applicable design criteria, or an on-site review to obtain information or conduct surveys or investigations necessary in the implementation of this chapter. 
(21)  "Land disturbance" or "land-disturbing activity" means a manmade change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including clearing, grading, or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in section 16.2-9 of this chapter. 
(22)  "Layout" means a conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
(23)  "Linear development project" means a land-disturbing activity that is linear in nature such as, but not limited to the construction of (i) electric and telephone utility lines and natural gas pipelines; (ii) tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities or other related structures of a railroad company; (iii) highway reconstruction projects; (iv) construction of stormwater channels and stream restoration activities; and (v) water and sewer lines. Private subdivision roads or streets shall not be considered linear development. 
(24)  "Local stormwater management program" or "local program" means a statement of the various methods adopted by this chapter and implemented by the City of Lynchburg to manage the runoff from land development projects with provisions to require the control of post-development stormwater runoff rate of flow and may include such items as local ordinances, policies and guidelines, technical materials, inspections, enforcement and evaluation. 
(25)  "Minor modification" means, for the purposes of this chapter, minor modification or amendment of an existing state permit before its expiration for the reasons listed at 40 CFR 122.63 and as specified in 9VAC25-870-640. Minor modification for the purposes of this chapter also means other modifications and amendments not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor state permit modification or amendment does not substantially alter state permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
(26)  "Onsite stormwater management facilities" means facilities, which are designed to control stormwater runoff emanating from a specific site, at the specific site. 
(27)  "Operator" means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this ordinance. 
(28)  "Percent impervious" means the impervious area within the site divided by the total area of the site multiplied by 100. 
(29)  "Permit" or "VSMP Authority Permit" means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in accordance with this ordinance, and which may only be issued after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided by the department. 
(30)  "Permittee" means the person to whom the VSMP Authority Permit is issued. 
(31)  "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, public or private corporation, commission, city, town or other political subdivision of the Commonwealth, state or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including federal, state or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
(32)  "Planning area" means a designated portion of the parcel on which the land development project is located. Planning areas shall be established by delineation on a master plan. Once established, planning areas shall be applied consistently for all future projects. 
(33)  "Plan approving authority" refers to the administrative person or body responsible for the review and approval of land development and stormwater management in the jurisdiction in which the project is located. 
(34)  "Pollution prevention plan" means a stand-alone management document that provides information on the facility operations that directly or indirectly produce waste or use toxic substances. This written plan will record the toxic substance use, emissions, and waste from current work practices, outline potential pollution prevention opportunities and provide specific performance goals including a schedule for implementing these pollution prevention activities. 
(35)  "Post-development" refers to conditions that reasonably may be expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity on a specific site or tract of land. 
(36)  "Pre-development" refers to the land use conditions that exist at the time that plans for the land development are submitted for approval. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.); the existing land use conditions at the time the first item/phase is submitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
(37)  "Regional stormwater management facility" or "regional facility" means a facility or series of facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from a specific contributing watershed area, although only portions of the watershed may experience land development. 
(38)  "Regional stormwater management plan" or "regional plan" means a document containing material describing how runoff from open space, existing development and future planned development areas within a watershed will be controlled by coordinated design and implementation of regional stormwater management facilities. 
(39)  "Runoff" means stormwater runoff. 
(40)  "Regulations" means the Virginia Stormwater Management Program Regulations (9VAC25-870 et seq.) as amended. 
(41)  "Sanitary sewer system" means the pipelines, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, and other structures, devices, appurtenances, and facilities for collecting and conveying domestic, commercial and industrial sanitary wastewater. 
(42)  "Site" means the land or water area where any facility or land-disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land-disturbing activity. Areas channelward of mean low water in tidal Virginia shall not be considered part of a site. 
(43)  "State" means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(44)  "State board" means the Virginia State Water Control Board. 
(45)  "State permit" means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the state board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the state board for stormwater discharges from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). Under these state permits, the commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations, the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the regulations. 
(46)  "State Water Control Law" means Chapter 3.1 (§ 62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(47)  "State waters" means all waters, on the surface or under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
(48)  "Storm sewer system" means stormwater management system. 
(49)  "Stormwater" means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff and drainage. 
(50)  "Stormwater management" is the design and use of structural or nonstructural practices to achieve the responsible discharge of stormwater runoff as defined by the requirements of this chapter. 
(51)  "Stormwater management facility" or "stormwater facility" means a device that controls or conveys stormwater runoff or changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity, quality, period of release or velocity of flow. 
(52)  "Stormwater management plan" or "plan" means a document describing how a land development project shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(53)  "Stormwater management system" means one of or a series of structural and non-structural stormwater management facilities and best management practices. 
(54)  "Stormwater pollution prevention plan" or "SWPPP" means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this chapter. In addition the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
(55)  "Subdivision" means the division of a parcel of land into five or more lots or parcels of less than five acres each for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or, if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
(56)  "Virginia Stormwater Management Act" means Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(57)  "Total maximum daily load" or "TMDL" means the sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source trade-offs. 
(58)  "Virginia stormwater BMP clearinghouse website" means a website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
(59)  "Virginia stormwater management program" or "VSMP" means a program approved by the State Board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations. 
(60)  "Virginia stormwater management program authority" or "VSMP authority" means an authority approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(61)  "Watershed" means a defined land area drained by a river or stream, karst system, or system of connecting rivers or streams such that all surface water within the area flows through a single outlet. In karst areas, the karst feature to which the water drains may be considered the single outlet for the watershed. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-9. - Stormwater permit requirement; exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until a stormwater management plan or an executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan and a VSMP authority permit, if such permit is required, has been issued by the administrator, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  For construction activity involving a single-family detached residential structure, within or outside a common plan of development or sale, projects must adhere to the requirements of General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities but neither a registration statement nor payment of the department's portion of the statewide permit fee shall be required for coverage under the permit. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the following activities are exempt, unless otherwise required by federal law: 
(1)  Land disturbing activities that disturb less than one acre of land that are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one acre or greater of disturbance; 
(2)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(3)  Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the State Board in regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in subsection B of § 10.1-1163 of Article 9 of Chapter 11 of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(4)  Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one acre and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, including additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures; 
(5)  Discharges to a sanitary sewer or combined sewer system; 
(6)  Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use; 
(7)  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this subsection; and 
(8)  Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the administrator shall be advised of the disturbance within seven days of commencing the land-disturbing activity and compliance with the administrative requirements of subsection (a) is required within 30 days of commencing the land-disturbing activity. 
( Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-10. - Establishment of a stormwater management program. 
(a)  Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:27 of the Code of Virginia, the City of Lynchburg hereby establishes a Virginia Stormwater Management Program for land-disturbing activities and adopts the applicable regulations that specify standards and specifications for VSMPs promulgated by the state board for the purposes set out in section 16.2-1 of this chapter. The City of Lynchburg hereby designates the ESC program administrator or designee as the administrator of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(b)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued by the administrator, until the following items have been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed herein: 
(1)  A permit application that includes a general permit registration statement; 
(2)  An erosion and sediment control plan approved in accordance with the City of Lynchburg's erosion and sediment control ordinance as found in City Code Chapter 16.1; and 
(3)  A stormwater management plan approved in accordance with section 16.2-20 of this chapter. 
(c)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until evidence of general permit coverage is obtained. 
(d)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until the fees required to be paid pursuant to section 16.2-56, are received, and a reasonable performance bond required pursuant to section 16.2-42 of this chapter has been submitted. 
(e)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued unless and until the permit application and attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land clearing, construction, disturbance, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved permit. 
(f)  No grading, building or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless a VSMP authority permit has been issued by the administrator. 
( Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Secs. 16.2-11-16.2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN CRITERIA 

Sec. 16.2-20. - Technical criteria. 
(a)  To protect the quality and quantity of state water from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities, the City of Lynchburg hereby adopts the technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities set forth in Part II B of the regulations, as amended, expressly to include 9VAC25-870-63 [water quality design criteria requirements]; 9VAC25-870-65 [water quality compliance]; 9VAC25-870-66 [water quantity]; 9VAC25-870-69 [offsite compliance options]; 9VAC25-870-72 [design storms and hydrologic methods]; 9VAC25-870-74 [stormwater harvesting]; 9VAC25-870-76 [linear development project]; and, 9VAC25-870-85 [stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities], which shall apply to all land-disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this article, except as provided for in 9VAC25-870-48 or as expressly set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Until June 30, 2019, any land-disturbing activity for which a currently valid proffered or conditional zoning plan, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan or zoning with a plan of development, or any document determined by the locality as being equivalent thereto, was approved by a locality prior to July 1, 2012, and for which no coverage under the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities has been issued prior to July 1, 2014, shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority and shall not be subject to the technical criteria of Part II B, but shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C [9VAC25-870-93 through VAC25-870-99] for those areas that were included in the approval, provided that the VSMP authority finds that such proffered or conditional zoning plan, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan or zoning with a plan of development, or any document determined by the locality as being equivalent thereto, (i) provides for a layout and (ii) the resulting land-disturbing activity will be compliant with the requirements of Part II C [9VAC25-870-93 through VAC25-870-99]. In the event that the locality-approved document is subsequently modified or amended in a manner such that there is no increase over the previously approved plat or plan in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge of the land-disturbing activity through stormwater runoff, and such that there is no increase over the previously approved plat or plan in the volume or rate of runoff, the grandfathering shall continue as before. 
(c)  Until June 30, 2019, for locality, state, and federal projects for which there has been an obligation of locality, state, or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or for which the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012, such projects shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority and shall not be subject to the technical criteria of Part II B, but shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C [9VAC25-870-93 through VAC25-870-99] for those areas that were included in the approval. 
(d)  For land-disturbing activities grandfathered under subsections (a) and (b) of this section, construction must be completed by June 30, 2019, or portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to the technical criteria of Part II B. 
(e)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C [9VAC25-870-93 through VAC25-870-99]. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at their discretion. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ; Ord. No. O-14-127, § 1, 11-11-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-21. - Regional stormwater management. 
    Where possible all subdivisions, especially those for commercial and industrial use, shall employ a regional detention facility for all lots within the development. If a regional stormwater management plan has been adopted by the City of Lynchburg for the watershed in which the proposed land development is located, the applicant shall comply with the requirements of the regional watershed plan. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, adopted June 10, 2014, repealed § 16.2-21, which pertained to computation methodologies and derived from Ord. No. O-01-079, adopted Apr. 24, 2001, eff. May 1, 2001; and Ord. No. O-07-047, adopted Apr. 10, 2007. Ord. No. O-14-070 also renumbered § 16.2-22 as 16.2-21 to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 16.2-22. - Floodplain management. 
(a)  A study will be required for all new construction that provides a net increase in impervious area of the site and/or filling within the floodplain as determined by the most recent floodplain study adopted by the City of Lynchburg. This study shall meet the requirements as specified in section 35.1-45, Flood hazard districts. 
(b)  In addition, such construction shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations under the national flood insurance program and code of the City of Lynchburg. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, adopted June 10, 2014, renumbered § 16.2-23 as 16.2-22 to read as set out herein. 
Secs. 16.2-23-16.2-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, adopted June 10, 2014, repealed § 16.2-24, which pertained to nonstructural measures and derived from Ord. No. O-01-079, adopted Apr. 24, 2001, eff. May 1, 2001; Ord. No. O-07-047, adopted Apr. 10, 2007. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 16.2-36. - Plan required. 
(a)  Except as provided for in subsection 16.2-5(b) of this chapter, no land-disturbing, building, or other permit shall be issued for land development unless a stormwater management plan has been submitted to and approved by the administrator or his designee. 
(b)  The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the criteria set forth in this chapter including the technical criteria in article II of this chapter which shall apply to the entire land-disturbing activity. Individual lots in new residential, commercial, or industrial developments shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  A stormwater management plan shall consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to surface runoff. 
(d)  Failure of the applicant to demonstrate that the project meets the criteria set forth in this chapter shall be reason to deny the applicant's underlying application for approval. 
(e)  Planning, design, and approach to storm water management in the City of Lynchburg shall be in conformance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-37. - Plan submission. 
(1)  The applicant shall submit, to the plan approving authority, the material required in a stormwater management plan in accordance with section 16.2-38 of this chapter. 
(2)  Five copies of the stormwater management plan shall be submitted. 
(3)  The fee specified in section 16.2-56 of this chapter shall accompany the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 16.2-38. - Plan contents. 
    The following information, where applicable, shall be required for each proposed project subject to review under this chapter. Stormwater management plans (maps, plans, designs and calculations) shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional in adherence to all minimum standards and requirements pertaining to the practice of that profession in accordance with Chapter 4 (54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia and attendant regulations. 
(a)  General: 
(1)  General description of the project. 
(2)  General description of the erosion and sediment controls. 
(3)  Information on type/location of stormwater discharges, information on features to which stormwater is being discharged, including surface waters or karst features if present, and predevelopment/postdevelopment drainage areas. 
(4)  General description of temporary and permanent stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete. 
(5)  Information on proposed stormwater management facilities, including (i) type of facilities; (ii) location, including geographic coordinates; (iii) acres treated; and (iv) surface waters or karst features into which the facility will discharge 
(6)  Project schedule and narrative, including a sequence of construction. 
(7)  Names and contact information, including email addresses of the project owner, and the submitting agent. 
(8)  The acreage of the disturbed area of the project. 
(9)  An estimate of the amount of security for a bond or other instrument based on current construction costs; however, the city may use an average cost to determine this amount. The city shall not be required to use this estimated amount as its bond requirement. 
(b)  Technical: 
(1)  Map or maps of the project area showing: 
a.  The watershed in which the project site is located using hydrologic unit maps (as found in the design protocol manual) and the boundary of the drainage area tributary to the project site using United States Geological Survey quadrangle map or City of Lynchburg topography for offsite areas. 
b.  Contributing drainage areas. 
c.  The location of the project relative to significant features in the general surroundings such as roads, adjacent land uses, property lines, existing manmade structures and public facilities. 
d.  Existing contours at two-foot intervals for the on-site area. 
e.  Existing streams, lakes, ponds, culverts, ditches, drainage swales, wetlands, other water bodies, floodplains, and other physical features within or adjacent to the project area. 
f.  Unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
g.  Soil types, geologic formations if karst features are present in the area, forest cover and other vegetative areas. 
h.  Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels; 
i.  Current land use including existing structures, roads, locations of known utilities, sewers water lines and easements. 
j.  General alterations in the natural terrain, cover, and grade including lawns and other landscaping. 
k.  The location of proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities and other permanent structures. 
l.  Proposed contours at two-foot intervals. 
m.  All stormwater management facilities including details, plan, profile, and cross-sections. 
n.  If any infiltration facilities are proposed, the locations of existing and proposed wells and septic system drain fields must be shown. 
o.  Limits of construction, clearing and grading and proposed drainage patterns on site. 
p.  Proposed land use with tabulation of percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of utilities, roads and easements. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-39. - Reports. 
(a)  Comprehensive hydrologic, hydraulic and water quality design calculations, including all assumptions and criteria, for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in article II of this chapter. 
(b)  A soils report/geotechnical analysis and boring logs, for infiltration facilities. 
(c)  A signed maintenance agreement, in a format designated by the plan approving authority, suitable for recording at the Lynchburg Circuit Court, including a) a drawing indicating the facilities to be maintained, b) the person or entity responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facilities, c) the prescribed maintenance program for the proposed stormwater management facilities and d) the annual reporting requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 16.2-40. - Plan approval. 
(a)  The VSMP authority shall determine the completeness of a plan in accordance with 9VAC25-870-55, and shall notify the applicant of any determination, within 15 calendar days of receipt. Where available to the applicant, electronic communication may be considered communication in writing. 
(1)  If within those 15 calendar days the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons the plan is deemed incomplete. 
(2)  If a determination of completeness is made and communicated to the applicant within the 15 calendar days, an additional 60 calendar days from the date of the communication will be allowed for the review of the plan. 
(3)  If a determination of completeness is not made and communicated to the applicant within the 15 calendar days, the plan shall be deemed complete as of the date of submission and a total of 60 calendar days from the date of submission will be allowed for the review of the plan. 
(4)  The VSMP authority shall review, within 45 calendar days of the date of resubmission, any plan that has been previously disapproved. 
(b)  The applicant or any aggrieved party authorized by law may appeal the plan approving authority's decision of approval or disapproval of a stormwater management plan application within 30 days after the rendering of such a decision, to the City of Lynchburg Circuit Court. 
(c)  Judicial review shall be on the record previously established and shall otherwise be in accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Process Act (Sec. 9-6.14:1 et seq. of the Code of Virginia). 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-41. - Conditions of plan approval. 
    Each approved stormwater management plan shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  A stormwater management plan approved for a residential, commercial, or industrial subdivision shall govern the development of the individual parcels, including those parcels developed under subsequent owners. 
(b)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and the local program and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan. 
(c)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the limits of construction, clearing and grading specified in the approved plan. 
(d)  The City of Lynchburg or its designee shall be allowed, after giving notice to the owner, occupier or operator of the land development project, to conduct periodic inspections of the project. The owner, occupier or operator shall be given the opportunity to accompany the inspector. 
(e)  No transfer, assignment or sale of the rights granted by virtue of an approved plan shall be made unless the transferee certifies agreement to comply with all obligations and conditions of the approved plan. 
(f)  A set of certified as-built plans for the stormwater management facilities and cover letter from the design professional with the appropriate seal stating that the objectives of the design have been achieved by the facility as constructed shall be submitted to the City of Lynchburg upon completion of the project. Said as-builts shall include volume confirmation with supporting computations and include structural elevations and dimensions. 
(g)  While the project is under bond, the person responsible for implementing the approved plan shall conduct monitoring and submit reports to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the plan provides effective stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-42. - Performance bond required. 
(a)  All applicants shall submit to the City of Lynchburg a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the city attorney, to ensure that measures could be taken by the city at the applicant's expense should the applicant fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be required of the applicant by the approved stormwater management plan. 
(b)  If the City of Lynchburg takes such action upon such failure by the applicant, the city may collect from the applicant the costs of such action in excess of the amount of the security held. 
(c)  Within 60 days of the completion of the requirements of the approved stormwater management plan, including necessary stabilization, the bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
(d)  These requirements are in addition to all other provisions of law relating to the issuance of such plans and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements for such plans. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01) 
Sec. 16.2-43. - Changes to an approved plan. 
    No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the City of Lynchburg. Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the administrator. The administrator shall have 60 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. The administrator may also require amendments to an approved stormwater management plan, within a time prescribed by the administrator, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection. Upon the release of the land disturbance bond, any proposed changes to the site layout, increases in impervious area or alterations of stormwater conveyance systems, easements or facilities must be submitted to the plan approving authority of the City of Lynchburg for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Secs. 16.2-44-16.2-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 16.2-53. - Plan contents. 
(a)  The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall include, but not be limited to, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, a pollution prevention plan for regulated land-disturbing activities, and a description of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL as specified by Section 9VAC25-870-54 and must also comply with the requirements and general information set forth in Section 9VAC25-880-70 of the general permit. 
(b)  The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP. 
(c)  The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location onsite. If an onsite location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy. 
( Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-54. - Pollution prevention plan. 
(a)  Pollution prevention plan, required by 9VAC25-870-56, shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to: 
(1)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and 
(3)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
(b)  The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
(1)  Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control; 
(2)  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
(3)  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and 
(4)  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
(c)  Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls. 
( Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
ARTICLE V. - ENFORCEMENT AND FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, adopted June 10, 2014, renumbered the former Art. IV as Art. V to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 16.2-55. - Exceptions. 
(a)  A request for an exception shall be submitted, in writing, to the administrator. An exception from this chapter may be granted, provided that: (i) exceptions to the criteria are the minimum necessary to afford relief, and (ii) reasonable and appropriate conditions shall be imposed as necessary upon any exception granted so that the purpose and intent of this chapter is preserved. 
(b)  Economic hardship is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-56. - Fees. 
(a)  An applicant shall pay the fees provided in Table 1 for initial issuance of general permit coverage and VSMP authority permit coverage. No more than 50 percent of the total fee to be paid by the applicant set out in Table 1 shall be due at the time a stormwater management plan or an initial stormwater management plan is submitted to the City of Lynchburg for review. The balance shall be paid prior to the issuance of coverage under the general permit. When a site or sites are purchased for development within a previously permitted common plan of development or sale, the applicant shall be subject to fees in accordance with the disturbed acreage of the site or sites according to the following table. 
Table 1: Fees for permit issuance 
Fee type Total fee to be paid by Applicant (includes both VSMP authority and Department portions where applicable) Department portion of "total fee to be paid by Applicant" (based on 28% of total fee paid*) General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre, except for a single family detached residential structure.) $290 $81 General/ Stormwater Management - SmallConstruction Activity/Land Clearing (Single family detached residential structure, within or outside a common plan of development or sale, with land disturbance acreage less than five acres. Residential subdivisions that require the construction of new streets will be considered General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing activities as defined below.) $209 N/A General/Stormwater Management - SmallConstruction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 Acres), including the development of residential subdivision that require the construction of new streets. $2,700 $756 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $3,400 $952 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $4,500 $1,260 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $6,100 $1,708 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres) $9,600 $2,688  
* If the project is completely administered by the department such as may be the case for a state or federal project or projects covered by individual permits, the entire applicant fee shall be paid to the department. 
(b)  Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements from the general permit issued by the state board shall be imposed in accordance with Table 2. If the general permit modifications result in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the City of Lynchburg, such reviews shall be subject to the fees set out in Table 2. The fee assessed shall be based on the total disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the general permit modification fee, modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed acreage shall pay the difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have applied for the total disturbed acreage in Table 1. Fees required by this section go to the City of Lynchburg. 
Table 2: Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements for the General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities 
Type of Permit Fee Amount General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre) $20 General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres) $200 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $250 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $300 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $450 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/LandClearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres) $700  
(c)  The following annual permit maintenance shall be imposed in accordance with Table 3, including fees imposed on expired permits that have been administratively continued. With respect to the general permit, these fees shall apply until the permit coverage is terminated. Fees specified by this section will go to the City of Lynchburg. 
Table 3: Permit Maintenance Fees 
Type of Permit Fee Amount Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land-Disturbing Activity (not subjectto General Permit coverage; sites within designated areas of ChesapeakeBay Act localities with land-disturbance acreage equal to or greater than2,500 square feet and less than 1 acre) $50 General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre) $50 General/Stormwater Management - Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres) $400 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $500 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $650 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $900 General/Stormwater Management - Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater 100 acres) $1,400  
    General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be paid annually to the City of Lynchburg by the anniversary date of general permit coverage. No permit will be reissued or automatically continued without payment of the required fee. General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be applied until a notice of termination is effective. 
(d)  The fees set forth in subsections (a) through (c) above, shall apply to: 
(1)  All persons seeking coverage under the general permit. 
(2)  All permittees who request modifications to or transfers of their existing registration statement for coverage under a general permit. 
(3)  Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to the department for an individual permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities. 
(4)  Permit and permit coverage maintenance fees outlined in this section may apply to each general permit holder. 
(e)  No general permit application fees will be assessed to: 
(1)  Permittees who request minor modifications to general permits as defined in subsection 16.2-8(25) of this chapter. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the administrator shall not be exempt pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Permittees whose general permits are modified or amended at the initiative of the department, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the administrator or errors related to the acreage of the site. 
(f)  All incomplete payments will be deemed as nonpayments, and the applicant shall be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest may be charged for late payments at the underpayment rate set forth in Section 58.1-15 of the Code of Virginia and is calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A ten percent late payment fee shall be charged to any delinquent (over 90 days past due) account. The City of Lynchburg shall be entitled to all remedies available under the Code of Virginia in collecting any past due amount. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-127, § 1, 11-11-14 ; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-57. - Inspections and monitoring. 
(a)  The administrator or designee shall inspect the land-disturbing activity during construction for: 
(1)  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(2)  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and 
(4)  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(b)  The applicant shall notify the city 48 hours prior to the commencement of any activity covered by this chapter so that appropriate inspections can be made to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the administrator may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
(e)  The administrator may require every VSMP authority permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to VSMP authority permit requirements under this chapter, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. 
(f)  Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted by the administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator pursuant to the City of Lynchburg's adopted and state board approved inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five years. 
(g)  Inspection reports shall be maintained as part of the land development project file. 
(h)  In order to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and all applicable city ordinances, state and federal laws, orders or regulations, the stormwater administrator or his agent shall have the right to inspect any property on which a stormwater maintenance facility is located, public or private, within the city at any reasonable time. In the event the stormwater administrator or his agent shall be denied access to property, the stormwater administrator or his agent may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction and if such sworn testimony establishes (i) probable cause that a violation of this chapter has occurred, or (ii) that the stormwater administrator or his agent has been denied access to property as part of a routine inspection program, request that the magistrate or court grant the stormwater administrator or his agent an inspection warrant to enable the stormwater administrator or his agent to enter the property for the purpose of determining whether a violation of this chapter exists. The stormwater administrator or his agent shall make a reasonable effort to obtain consent from the owner or occupant of the subject property prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant under this section. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to deny the stormwater administrator or his agent access to any property after the stormwater administrator or his agent has obtained an inspection warrant from a magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction for the inspection of such property. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the stormwater administrator or his agent to enter or inspect the interior portions of any structure situated on such property unless the inspection is reasonably necessary to verify the presence and character of a stormwater maintenance facility or control measure that the owner of the property claims to be installed therein. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-58. - Hearings by the city manager, or his designee. 
(a)  Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to the requirements of this chapter, who is aggrieved by a permit of enforcement decision of the city, may request in writing a hearing by the city manager, or his designee, provided a written request of a hearing is filed with the city manager, or his designee, within 15 days of the incident giving rise to the request for a hearing. 
(b)  Within 30 calendar days after receiving a written request for a hearing, the city manager, or his designee, will meet with the person filing the request for a hearing. 
(c)  A record of the hearing shall be taken and retained by the city manager, or his designee, pending an appeal to the circuit court as provided in section 16.2-60. The record shall contain documentation of the date the hearing took place, the decision made, and the date the decision was provided to the person requesting the hearing. 
(d)  Within 15 calendar days after the hearing takes place, the city manager, or his designee, shall issue a written decision in the matter and shall provide a copy of the decision to the person requesting the hearing. The written decision will be retained as part of the record. 
(e)  All hearings shall be in accordance with the process adopted by the city manager. The hearing before the city manager, or his designee, is not intended to be conducted like a court proceeding, and the rules of evidence do not apply to such hearing. The city manager, or his designee, shall have the discretion to determine the propriety of attendance of persons at the hearing, and the admissibility of evidence, so long as a fair and full opportunity is afforded to all parties for the presentation of their evidence. 
(f)  The time frames in these procedures, may be extended by the mutual agreement of the city manager, or his designee, and the person requesting the hearing. 
(g)  The decision of the city manager, or his designee, may be appealed to the circuit court as provided in section 16.2-60. 
( Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-59. - Appeals to circuit court. 
(a)  Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to the requirements of this chapter, who is aggrieved by a permit or enforcement decision of the city manager, or his designee, may file with the clerk of the circuit court a petition for the review of such decision. An appeal must be filed in writing with the clerk of the circuit court within 30 days after a final decision is rendered by the city manger, or his designee, and must specify the grounds on which the appeal is based. The filing of the said petition shall stay the decision of the city manager, or his designee, pending the outcome of the appeal. 
(b)  Upon the presentation of such petition, the court shall allow a writ of certiorari to review the decision of the city manager, or his designee, and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made to the petition. A copy of the writ of certiorari shall be served upon the city manager. Within 15 calendar days after the writ of certiorari is served upon the city manager, the city manager shall transmit to the clerk of the court: a copy of the city manager's, or his designee's, decision, a copy of the record, and the exhibits. The court, sitting without a jury, shall hear the appeal on the record transmitted by the city manager and such additional evidence as the court determines may be necessary to resolve any controversy as to the correctness of the record. The court, in its discretion, may receive such other evidence as the ends of justice require. 
(c)  The burden of proof shall be upon the party filing the appeal to designate and demonstrate that the decision of the city manager or his designee, was arbitrary and capricious, or contrary to the law. When the decision on review is to be made on the record, the duty of the court with respect to issues of fact shall be to determine whether there was substantial evidence in the record to support the city manager's, or his designee's, decision. The duty of the court with respect to the issues of law shall be to review the city manager's, or his designee's, decision de novo to determine if there was an error of law. Whether the fact issues are reviewed on the record submitted by the city manager, or a record made during a review action, the court shall take due account of the presumption of the validity of the city's ordinances, the experience and specialized competence of city staff, and the purposes of the basic laws, regulations, and ordinances under which the city has acted. 
(d)  A party shall be deemed to be an aggrieved party for the purpose of filing an appeal if (i) such party has suffered an actual or imminent injury which is an invasion of a legally protected interest and which is concrete and particularized, (ii) such injury is fairly traceable to the decision of the city and not the result of the independent action of some third party not before the court, and (iii) such injury will likely be redressed by a favorable decision by the court. 
( Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-60. - Maintenance agreement. 
(a)  A maintenance agreement, on a form prescribed by the City of Lynchburg, between the city and the owner of any permanent stormwater control facility shall be submitted and recorded prior to approval of the stormwater management plan required by this chapter. 
(b)  Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities, unless assumed by the city or other governmental agency, shall run with the land and remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor or owner. If portions of the land are to be sold, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the basic responsibility to successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each parcel the property owner, governmental agency, or other legally established entity to be permanently responsible for maintenance. 
(c)  In the event that the stormwater management facilities are in need of maintenance or become a danger to public safety or public health, the responsible person shall be notified in writing, and given a reasonable period of time to take necessary action. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the city has the authority to perform the work and to recover the costs from the responsible person. Any costs, including interest, which remain unpaid, may be collected in the same manner as unpaid taxes are collected, and shall constitute a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes. 
(d)  To ensure proper performance of the stormwater management facility, the owner is responsible for inspecting the stormwater management facility on an annual basis and after any storm, which causes the capacity of the facility to be exceeded. More frequent inspections may be required if deemed necessary by the administrator. The owner must file written record of inspections to the department of water resources within five working days of the inspection. 
(e)  The maintenance agreement submitted to the City of Lynchburg shall allow for the city to enter the property for purposes of inspection by the administrator or designee shall permit the city or designee to enter the property for the purpose of maintenance and repair should the responsible party not fulfill these duties, shall provide for the submission of inspection and maintenance reports as required by the city, and shall be enforceable by all appropriate governmental parties. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-07-047, 4-10-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, adopted June 10, 2014, renumbered § 16.2-58 as § 16.2-60 to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 16.2-61. - Maintenance of stormwater management facilities. 
(a)  Any property owner that has a stormwater management facility on his property, shall maintain such facility in a good operating condition. The maintenance of the stormwater management facility shall be in accordance with all applicable city and state requirements and regulations, and shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The filing of an annual inspection of the facility by a qualified inspector and the filing of an annual written inspection report with the city's stormwater administrator, describing the condition of the stormwater management facility. The annual inspection report shall be due by the end of each calendar year, and the inspection shall have been performed within two months prior to the date of the report. The report shall state the property's address, the owner's name, the inspection date, the inspector's name and qualifications, and shall describe any deficiencies and any required maintenance that is needed to bring the stormwater management facility into compliance with city and state requirements and regulations; 
(2)  The filing of a supplementary report on the remediation of any deficiencies identified in the annual inspection report; such supplementary report on remediation efforts shall be due within three months of the date of the inspection report; 
(3)  The removal and proper disposal of sediment when the flow or storage of the stormwater has been significantly restricted or reduced by sediment; 
(4)  The removal and proper disposal of trash, debris, loose brush and other growth from the stormwater management facility, as needed; 
(5)  The removal and proper disposal of any oil or grease which has accumulated within the stormwater management facility; 
(6)  The replacement and proper disposal of any chemical treatment media and any filter media which have ceased to function at design levels; 
(7)  The annual cutting of any brush and other woody growth on and around any embankment fill, and the stabilization of the banks of the stormwater management facility, as needed; 
(8)  The inspection, maintenance and repair of any fence installed around the stormwater management facility; 
(9)  Any necessary repairs to the dam, emergency spillway and any low spots in any stormwater retention pond; and 
(10)  All other repairs and improvements which are reasonably necessary to keep the stormwater management facility operating in an efficient, safe and sanitary manner. 
(b)  In the event that the stormwater management facilities are in need of maintenance or become a danger to public safety or public health, the property owner shall be notified in writing, and given a reasonable period of time to take necessary action. If the property owner fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the city has the authority to perform the work and to recover the costs from the property owner. Any costs, including interest, which remain unpaid, may be collected in the same manner as unpaid taxes are collected, and shall constitute a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes. 
(c)  For purposes of this chapter, "property owner" means the owner or owners of the freehold of the property or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, or lessee in control of the property. 
( Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-62. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the VSMP authority permit conditions or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for implementing the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the application or plan certification, or by delivery at the land development site to the agent or employee supervising such activities. 
(b)  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. 
(c)  Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued or the permit or approval may be revoked and the applicant or person responsible for implementing the plan shall be deemed to be in violation of this ordinance. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment for each violation, or both, as provided for in Section 62.1-44.15:48 of the Code of Virginia. 
(e)  The administrator may apply to the circuit court to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this chapter as provided for in Section 62.1-44.15.48 of the Code of Virginia without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. 
(f)  Without limiting the remedies, which may be obtained in this section, the administrator may bring a civil action against any person for violation of this chapter, or any condition of the permit or approval, or any provision of the local program. The action may seek to impose of a civil penalty of not more than $32,500.00 for each violation as provided for in Section 62.1-44.15.48 of the Code of Virginia. 
(g)  In addition to any other remedy provided by this chapter, if the administrator determines there is a failure to comply wit the provisions of this chapter, the administrator may initiate such informal and/or formal administrative enforcement procedures in a manner authorized by this chapter and any applicable city-issued policies. Such procedures may include, but are not limited to: 
(i)  Verbal warning; 
(ii)  Notices of corrective actions; 
(iii)  Consent special orders and civil charges pursuant to subsection (h) below; 
(iv)  Notices to comply; 
(v)  Special and emergency special orders; 
(h)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey this chapter or any condition of the permit or approval or any provision of the local program, the administrator may issue an order against or to such person, for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified in subsection (f) of this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty, which could be imposed under subsection (f). 
(i)  Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this Subsection shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(i)  No state permit registration; 
(ii)  No SW PPP; 
(iii)  Incomplete SW PPP; 
(iv)  SWPPP not available for review; 
(v)  No approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(vi)  Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls; 
(vii)  Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained; 
(viii)  Operational deficiencies; 
(ix)  Failure to conduct required inspections; 
(x)  Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and 
(xi)  Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of Section 9VAC25-880-1170 of the general permit. 
(Ord. No. O-01-079, 4-24-01, eff. 5-1-01; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, adopted June 10, 2014, renumbered § 16.2-59 as § 16.2-62 to read as set out herein. 
Secs. 16.2-63-16.2-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER POLLUTION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, adopted June 10, 2014, renumbered the former Art. V as Art. VI to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 16.2-70. - Purpose. 
(a)  The 1987 amendments to the federal clean water act (CWA) required the United States environmental protection agency to establish national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) requirements for municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4). NPDES regulations require the city to reduce the flow of pollutants into waters of the United States through ordinance, permit, contract or other available means. 
(b)  Pollutants discharged from the city's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) have an adverse impact upon the quality of receiving waters. Stormwater, and any other materials which enter the city's MS4, travel through the system and are discharged into receiving waters with minimal or no treatment. Since pollutants entering this system come from many sources and are to date largely uncontrolled, reduction of pollutant discharges can only be achieved by a broad restriction on a variety of activities occurring throughout the city. This article is intended to prevent pollutants from being discharged by the city's stormwater collection system by requiring all citizens to prevent such pollutants from initially entering the system. 
(c)  This article is adopted as an integral part of the city's stormwater management program. 
(Ord. No. O-07-032, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 16.2-71. - Discharges to the city's storm sewer system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to: 
(1)  Connect, cause, or allow to be connected, any sanitary sewer to the separate storm sewer system; 
(2)  Discharge the following in any amount to the city's storm sewer system, to any private stormwater conveyance system, or to any stormwater management system whether intended for water quality or water quantity control, unless the system conveys the fluids to an appropriate water treatment facility or the discharge is permitted by a Virginia pollution discharge elimination system [VPDES] permit or by a national pollution discharge elimination system [NPDES] permit: 
(i)  Sewage; 
(ii)  Greases; 
(iii)  Fuels; 
(iv)  Oil or oil waste; 
(v)  Antifreeze; 
(vi)  Other automotive, motor or equipment fluids; 
(vii)  Paints and/or organic solvents; 
(viii)  PCBs; 
(ix)  Pesticides; (x) Herbicides; 
(xi)  Toxic materials; 
(xii)  Waste disposal site leachate; 
(xiii)  Radioactive materials; 
(xiv)  Fertilizers 
(xv)  Organic matter; 
(xvi)  Any fluid at a temperature greater than 65° celsius; 
(xvii)  Any fluid having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 9.0; 
(xviii)  Any fluid containing more than 15 milligrams per liter of total suspended solids; 
(xix)  Any fluid containing dyes or coloring material which discolor the water no more than 50 American dye manufacturers institute [ADMI] units; 
(xx)  Any fluid containing material which causes a visible film, sheen or discoloration on the water surface; 
(xxi)  Any substance which may cause or do any injury to, interfere with the proper operation of, obstruct the flow into or through, or pollute a stormwater management facility; 
(xxii)  Any commercial, industrial, or manufacturing process water, wash water, or unpermitted discharge; 
(xxiii)  Boiler blowdown; 
(xxiv)  Any substance of non-stormwater origin unless specifically exempted from this article; 
(xxv)  Matter of any type which may: 
a.  Result in a hazard to any person, animal, property, or vegetation; or, 
b.  Impair the quality of the water in any well, lake, river, pond, spring, stream, reservoir or other water or watercourse. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the following activities shall be allowed: 
(1)  Potable water line flushing; 
(2)  Lawn watering; 
(3)  Landscape irrigation; 
(4)  Diverting stream flows or uncontaminated groundwater flows; 
(5)  Water from public safety activities, including, but not limited to, law enforcement and fire suppression; 
(6)  Pumping or drainage of uncontaminated groundwater from potable water sources, foundation drains, basements, springs, or water from crawl spaces, or footing drains; 
(7)  Non-commercial car washing; 
(8)  Swimming pool discharges with less than one parts per million [PPM] chlorine; 
(9)  Street washing; 
(10)  Any activity authorized by a valid national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, waiver, or discharge order; a Virginia pollutant discharge elimination system (VPDES) permit, waiver, or discharge order; or a Virginia pollution abatement (VPA) permit; 
(11)  Any activity by a governmental entity or its employees and agents in accordance with federal, state, and local regulations and standards for the maintenance or repair of drinking water reservoirs or water treatment or distribution systems; 
(12)  Any activity by a governmental entity or its employees and agents in accordance with federal, state, and local regulations and standards, for the maintenance of any component of its stormwater management system; 
(13)  Discharges specified in writing by the program administrator and/or his or her designee as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(14)  Dye testing, following notification to the program administrator; 
(15)  Residential yard maintenance, including seasonal leaf pick-up and brush removal. 
(c)  If any of the activities listed in subsection (b), above, of this section are found to be sources of pollutants to public waters, the program administrator shall so notify the person performing such activities and shall order that such activities be stopped or performed in such a manner as to avoid discharge of pollutants into such waters. The failure to comply with any such order shall be unlawful and a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-07-032, 3-13-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-72. - Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. 
(a)  Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers are common household products that have beneficial uses in the homes, lawns and gardens of many city residents. When used properly and in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations they provide significant enhancement of our quality of life. When used inappropriately, however, these products can have unintended negative impacts on the quality of public waters. These consequences frequently are not readily apparent to the individual responsible for the improper usage. 
    Therefore to reduce the incidences of negative environmental impacts to water quality, the city enacts the following restrictions on the uses of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. 
(b)  Pesticides and herbicides. It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To use any pesticide or herbicide not approved by the U.S. environmental protection agency (EPA). 
(2)  To use any pesticide or herbicide in a fashion not in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations or label directions as approved by the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services [VDACS] and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
(c)  Fertilizers. To avoid contamination of water bodies and aquifers: 
(1)  Fertilizers should be applied in a manner which does not exceed manufacturer's recommendations for frequency and rates approved by the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services [VDACS] and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
(2)  Fertilizers should not be directly applied to impervious areas subject to runoff. 
(Ord. No. O-07-032, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 16.2-73. - Construction activities. 
    Stormwater management at all construction activities shall be governed by the city's erosion and sediment control and stormwater ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-07-032, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 16.2-74. - Good housekeeping requirements. 
    The following good housekeeping requirements shall be adhered to by all persons within the City of Lynchburg: 
(a)  The uncovered outdoor storage of unsealed containers containing hazardous substances or waste material is prohibited. 
(b)  Unless otherwise approved, objects such as vehicle motor parts containing grease, oil, or other hazardous materials, shall not be stored in such a manner as to cause leaks, spills, or discharges into stormwater management facilities. 
(c)  Unless otherwise approved, work on any machine that is to be repaired or maintained in an uncovered outdoor area shall be performed in such a manner as to prevent leaks, spills, or discharges into any stormwater management facilities and/or any municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(d)  Fuel and chemical residue or other types of potentially harmful material, garbage, or batteries, which are located in an area susceptible to runoff, shall be removed immediately and disposed at a hazardous waste collection site. 
(Ord. No. O-07-032, 3-13-07) 
Sec. 16.2-75. - Inspections and monitoring. 
(a)  The administrator and/or his or her designee(s) shall have authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with the provisions of this article, including the prohibition of illicit discharges to the storm sewer system. The program administrator and/or his or her designee(s) may monitor stormwater outfalls or other components of the municipal storm sewer system as may be appropriate in the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(b)  The administrator and/or his or her designee(s) shall have the authority to require pollution prevention plans from any person whose discharges cause or may cause a violation of any VPDES permit, including the one held by the city. 
(c)  The administrator and/or his designee(s) shall have the authority to enter into private property to conduct investigations relative to this article. No inspection shall be conducted without the consent of the tenant, occupant, property owner or the owner's representative or pursuant to a duly issued administrative inspection warrant or as authorized by other lawful means. 
(Ord. No. O-07-032, 3-13-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 16.2-76. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A willful violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a continuing violation of this article is maintained or permitted to remain shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who commits any act prohibited by this article shall be liable to the city for all costs of detecting, tracing, testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal, and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the storm sewer system. 
(c)  Any person who commits any act prohibited by this article shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each day that a violation exists. The city may issue a summons for the collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted in the local courts. Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the city shall be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
(d)  The city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding. The existence of any other remedy, at law or in equity, shall be no defense to any such action. 
(e)  The administrator and/or his or her designee(s) shall have authority to order that any activity found to be in violation of this article be stopped or conducted in such a manner as to avoid the discharge of any illicit materials into the storm sewer system. 
(f)  Any discharge caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this article constitutes a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is hereby declared and deemed a public nuisance. Following receipt of written notice of such nuisance from the administrator and/or his or her designee(s), if the responsible person fails to abate or obviate such nuisance, then the city may do so and charge and collect the cost thereof from the responsible person, in any manner provided by law (including, without limitation, any manner provided by law for the collection of state or local taxes). 
(g)  The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. 
(Ord. No. O-07-032, 3-13-07; Ord. No. O-14-070, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Chapter 16.3 - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 16.3-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to create a stormwater utility and enterprise fund to manage and fund the planning, design, monitoring, operation, maintenance and construction of the stormwater system in the City of Lynchburg, both to meet rquirements of the city's National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) permit and new federal and state regulations to address identified water quality and flood event needs. The elements of the city's stormwater infrastructure provide benefit and service to properties within the city through direct protection of property and through control of flooding of critical components of the infrastructure and protection of the city's natural environment. Stormwater runoff is associated with all improved properties in the city, whether residential or nonresidential, and the individual property impacts of runoff are correlated to the amount of impervious surface area on the property and land-disturbing activities on property. This runoff contributes to non-point source pollution to the streams of the city's watersheds and a stormwater utility can help reduce this type of pollution. Therefore, the costs of the stormwater utility shall be allocated, to the extent practicable, to all property owners or occupants based on their impact on the stormwater system. 
(Ord. of 12-13-11, Ord. No. O-11-138) 
Sec. 16.3-2. - Authority. 
    The city is authorized by the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-100 et seq., specifically § 15.2-2114, and the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Virginia to construct, reconstruct, improve and extend the stormwater system; establish and impose stormwater utility charges; and to issue bonds and other debts as needed to finance in whole or in part the costs of the system and to establish rents, fees and charges for the services and facilities provided by the system. 
(Ord. of 12-13-11, Ord. No. O-11-138) 
Sec. 16.3-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  "Developed property" means real property that has been altered from its "natural" state by the addition of any improvements such as buildings, structures and other impervious surfaces. For new construction, property shall be considered developed pursuant to this section upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy (CO), temporary CO or equivalent. 
(2)  "Developed detached single-family residential property" means a developed lot or parcel containing one residence or dwelling unit, and accessory uses related to but subordinate to the purpose of providing permanent dwelling facilities. 
(3)  "Developed multi-family residential property" means developed property containing more than one residence or dwelling unit, and accessory uses related to but subordinate to the purpose of providing permanent dwelling facilities. Such property shall include duplexes, triplexes, quadruplexes, townhomes, apartments, condominiums and mobile homes. 
(4)  "Developed nonresidential property" means developed property which does not serve a primary purpose of providing permanent dwelling units. Such property shall include, but not be limited to, commercial properties, industrial properties, parking lots, recreational and cultural facilities, hotels, offices, hospitals, institutions, schools and churches. 
(5)  "Impervious surface area" means a man-made surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious cover includes, but is not limited to, roofs, buildings, concrete, asphalt, gravel surfaces that are or may become compacted, or managed or artificial turf athletic fields that have an underdrain system. 
(6)  "Revenues" means all rates, fees, assessments, rentals or other charges or other income received by the utility, in connection with the management and operation of the system, including amounts received from the investment or deposit of monies in any fund or account and any amounts contributed by the city, fees-in-lieu-of provided by developers or individual residents and the proceeds from sale of bonds. 
(7)  "Single-family unit" or "SFU" means the equivalent impervious area of a detached single-family residential developed property per dwelling unit located within the city based on the statistical average horizontal impervious area of this residence in the city. SFU value in square feet of impervious surface area will be established by city council resolution. 
(8)  "SFU rate" means the utility fee charged on a single-family unit. 
(9)  "Stormwater fee factor" means a factor multiplied by the SFU rate to determine the monthly billing rate for each property. 
(10)  "Stormwater system" or "system" means the stormwater infrastructure and equipment of the city and all improvements thereto for stormwater control in the city. Infrastructure and equipment shall include structural and natural stormwater control systems of all types, including, without limitation, retention basins, sewers, conduits, pipelines, pumping and ventilation stations, and other plants, structures and real and personal property used for support of the system. The system does not include privately owned ditches, drainage systems or stormwater systems, unless otherwise explicitly stated by written agreement with the city. 
(11)  "Stormwater utility" or "utility" means the enterprise fund created by this section to operate, maintain and improve the city's stormwater system. 
(12)  "Undeveloped property" means any parcel which has not been altered from its natural state to disturb or alter the topography or soils on the property in a manner which substantially reduces the rate of infiltration of stormwater into the earth. 
(13)  "Utility fees" means any permit or local program fees as allowed by State Code, and the monthly service charges based on the SFU rate applied to all developed properties all as more fully described in sub-paragraphs (1) through (4) of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-13-11, Ord. No. O-11-138) 
Sec. 16.3-4. - Establishment of a stormwater utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility to be known as the City of Lynchburg Stormwater Utility, which shall be under the administration of the director of utilities and responsible for the stormwater services throughout the city, and which shall provide for the manangement, protection, control, regulation, use and enchancement of the city's stormwater services, systems and facilities. 
(b)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsiblities of the city stormwater utility. The utility shall deposit in a separate ledger account all revenues collected pursuant to this chapter. The funds deposited shall be used exclusively to provide services and facilities related to the stormwater system pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia § 15.2-2114. The stormwater utility and enterprise fund will be established effective July 1, 2012. Stormwater utility charges will become effective July 1, 2012 and the first bills shall be due with the first water/sewer billing cycle of July 2012. 
(Ord. of 12-13-11, Ord. No. O-11-138) 
Sec. 16.3-5. - Assessment of stormwater utility charge. 
    Adequate revenues shall be generated to provide for a balanced operating and capital improvement budget for the stormwater utility by setting sufficient levels of utility fees. Income from utility fees shall not exceed actual costs incurred in providing the services and facilities described in section 16.3-4. Utility fees shall be charged to owners or occupants of all developed property in the city. 
(a)  SFU area established. The single-family unit (SFU) area is hereby established to be 2,672 square feet of impervious surface area. 
(b)  The utility fee for each property shall be the SFU rate times the stormwater fee factor for each individual property. 
(c)  The SFU rate shall be $4.00 per month. 
(d)  The stormwater fee factor shall be as follows: 
Property Type Impervious Area on 
Property 
(in square feet) Stormwater Fee 
Factor Detached single-family residential Less than 1,300 0.5 Detacted single-family residential 1,301 to 4,300 1.0 Detached single-family residential Greater than 4,301 1.6 Duplex 0.5 per unit Triplex, Quadplex, and Mobile Homes 0.7 per unit Condominiums and Townhomes 0.33 per unit Apartments or 5 or more units and all nonresidential property As defined in 16.3-5(e) Undeveloped property 0.0  
(e)  The stormwater fee factor for apartment properties of five or more units and for all nonresidential properties shall be equal to the impervious area of the property in square feet divided by the SFU area of 2,672 square feet, rounded to the nearest 0.1, except that the minimum factor shall be 1.0. For example a nonresidential property of 10,000 square feet of impervious area shall have a stormwater fee factor of 10,000 divided by 2,672, or a stormwater fee factor of 3.7. 
(f)  The utility fee for unoccupied developed property, both residential and nonresidential, shall be the same as that for occupied property of the same class. 
(Ord. of 12-13-11, Ord. No. O-11-138; Ord. No. O-12-040, 4-24-12, eff. 7-1-12) 
Sec. 16.3-6. - Billing, payment and penalities. 
(a)  The utility fee is to be paid by the owner or occupant of each lot or parcel subject to the utility fee. All properties, except as stated in section 16.3-5, shall be rendered bills or statements for stormwater services. Such bills or statements shall be combined with sewer and water bills levied pursuant to chapters 34 and 39 of the City of Lynchburg Code. For properties which do not receive a water or sewer bill a separate bill for stormwater services will be issued. 
(b)  All payments received shall first be credited to stormwater charges, and then to the sewer charges and finally to the water charges. 
(c)  If any such stormwater bill is not paid within five days after due date, it shall be declared delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty of five percent of the amount of the bill. The penalty shall be added to the unpaid bill or subsequent bills. 
(d)  Whenever the city utilizes the services of an attorney or a collection agency to collect any delinquent fees, rents or charges for the use and services of the city's stormwater system, reasonable attorney's fees or collection agency's fees shall be added to the delinquent bill. The attorney's fees or collection agency's fees shall not exceed 20 percent of the delinquent bill and may be recovered by the city by action at law or suit in equity. Attorney's fees shall be added only if such delinquency is collected by action at law or suit in equity. 
(Ord. of 12-13-11, Ord. No. O-11-138; Ord. No. O-12-040, 4-24-12, eff. 7-1-12) 
Sec. 16.3-7. - Adjustment of fees and exemptions. 
    The city shall provide a system of credits to reduce stormwater utility fees for properties on which stormwater control measures substantially mitigate the peak discharge or runoff pollution flowing from such properties or substantially decreases the city's cost of maintaining the stormwater system. The utilities department will develop written policies to implement the credit system. No credit will be authorized until the city council approves written policies to implement the system of credits; a copy of the approved policies shall be on file with the utilities department. Nothing shall prevent the city council from modifying the adopted system of credits, and such modifications may apply to holders of existing credits. 
(Ord. of 12-13-11, Ord. No. O-11-138) 
Sec. 16.3-8. - Appeal. 
    The city manager shall have the authority to adopt an appeals process for customers who believe the provisions of this chapter have been applied in error. All appeals shall be in accordance with the process adopted by the city manager. A copy of the appeals process shall be kept in the city manager's office and the office of the utilities department and shall be available for review upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-13-11, Ord. No. O-11-138) 
Sec. 16.3-9. - Limitations of responsibility. 
(a)  The city shall be responsible only for the portions of the stormwater system that are in city maintained street rights-of-way, permanent stormwater easements conveyed to and accepted by the city, or as otherwise explicitly stated in a written agreement with the city. Repairs and improvements to the drainage system shall be in accordance with established standards, policies and schedules. 
(b)  The city's acquisition of permanent storm drainage easements and/or the construction or repair by the city of stormwater control measures and drainage facilities does not constitute a warranty against stormwater hazards, including, but not limited to, flooding, erosion or standing water. 
(Ord. of 12-13-11, Ord. No. O-11-138) 
Sec. 16.3-10. - Severability. 
(a)  All laws and clauses of laws in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of said conflict. 
(b)  If this ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given separate effect and to this end the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. of 12-13-11, Ord. No. O-11-138) 
Sec. 16.3-11. - Right to enter property. 
    In order to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and all applicable city ordinances, state and federal laws, orders or regulations, the director of utilities or his agent shall have the right to inspect any property, public or private, within the city at any reasonable time. In the event the director of utilities, or his agent shall be denied access to property, the director of utilities or his agent may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction and if such sworn testimony establishes probable cause that a violation of this ordinance has has occurred, request that the magistrate or court grant the director of utilities or his agent an inspection warrant to enable the director of utilities or his agent to enter the property for the purpose of determining whether a violation of this ordinance exists. The director of utilities or his agent shall make a reasonable effort to obtain consent from the owner or occupant of the subject property prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant under this section. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to deny the director of utilities or his agent access to any property after the director of utilities or his agent has obtained an inspection warrant from a magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction for the inspection of such property. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the director of utilities or his agent to enter or inspect the interior portions of any dwelling or structure situated on such property unless that inspection be reasonably necessary and directly related to verifying the presence and character of a stormwater control mitigation system or control measure that the owner of the property claims to be installed therein. 
Secs. 16.3-12-16.3-19. - Reserved. 
Chapter 17 - FENCES AND WALLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of council to regulate the erection of party walls and fences, § 38(19). 
Cross reference- Building, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 30; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 35; zoning, Ch. 35.1. 
State Law reference- Division fences, Code of Virginia, § 55-317 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, a "fence" shall be taken to mean any masonry wall, wire or wood pickets, woven wire or solid boards, constructed in a manner to enclose a lot or a plot of ground, or erected in a manner to separate the lot from another lot or from a street or alley. 
(Code 1959, § 11-6(a)) 
Sec. 17-2. - Partition fences to be jointly erected and maintained. 
    All partition fences shall be made and kept in good repair by the proprietors of the ground on each side at their joint expense; provided, that the ground on each side shall be enclosed, used or occupied. 
(Code 1959, § 11-1) 
Sec. 17-3. - When adjoining owner to contribute to existing fence. 
    If any person shall enclose ground adjoining that already enclosed, whereby he shall be benefited by any fence before erected, he shall pay therefor a just and reasonable compensation, regard being had to the condition of the fence at the time. 
(Code 1959, § 11-2) 
Sec. 17-4. - Location of party fences; disputes as to location. 
    All party fences shall be erected on or as near the division line as possible. If any difference shall arise concerning the line on which a fence may have been or is about to be erected, either party may cause such line to be marked off by any licensed engineer, on giving at least 24 hours' notice to the other parties interested, or to their agents, and the licensed engineer shall measure and lay off the line in dispute, and mark the same by a ground mark, the expense whereof shall be equally borne by the parties interested. 
(Code 1959, § 11-3) 
Sec. 17-5. - Failure to maintain fences. 
    If any person, whose duty it shall be to make or keep in good repair any fence or part of a fence, shall refuse or neglect so to do for five days after request being made by the other party interested, or his agent, then it shall be lawful for the party so making request as aforesaid to make or repair the whole fence, or part of a fence, and to recover one-half the expense thereof from the person so refusing or neglecting; provided, that any fence erected under authority of this section shall conform to the provisions of chapter 11 and shall be at the expense of the party making such addition thereto; and, provided further, that the expense of making such fence shall not exceed $0.50 per lineal foot, except by consent of the parties aforesaid. 
(Code 1959, § 11-4) 
Sec. 17-6. - Injury or destruction by part owner of fence. 
    If any person interested in any party fence shall take down, injure or destroy the same, or if the same be done by his tenants, servants or persons in his employ, without the consent of the other party interested, except as provided for in section 17-5, he shall replace such fence at his own proper cost; but, if he neglects or refuses to do so for five days after request being made by the other party interested, or his agent, then it shall be lawful for the party so making the request to make or repair the whole fence or part of a fence, and to recover the expense thereof from the person so neglecting or refusing. 
(Code 1959, § 11-5) 
Secs. 17-7-17-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS, RESTRICTED FENCES 

Sec. 17-18. - Height in front yards. 
    No fence over four feet in height shall be erected on the front yard of a residence or between the front yards of residences within the city unless the fence be of a nature that does not obstruct the view from either side. 
(Code 1959, § 11-6(b)) 
Sec. 17-19. - Corner lots. 
    No fence shall be constructed on a corner lot when such fence will obstruct the view of traffic; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to fences around business buildings or manufacturing or industrial plants when such fence is located in a business "B-5", manufacturing "M" or industrial "I" zone, as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 11-16(c)) 
Sec. 17-20. - Barbed wire. 
    Barbed wire shall not be used in the construction of any fence unless such wire is at least seven feet above the adjacent ground level. 
(Code 1959, § 11-6(d)) 
Sec. 17-21. - Pointed fences. 
    No pointed fence shall be erected within the city which shall be a hazard to the public safety. 
(Code 1959, § 11-6(e)) 
Sec. 17-22. - Electrically charged fence. 
    No electrically charged fence shall be erected or maintained within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 11-6(f)) 
Sec. 17-23. - Retaining walls. 
    Retaining walls shall be adequately designed and drained so as to resist all lateral pressure to which they may be subject. 
(Code 1959, § 11-6(g)) 
Chapter 18 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Bonds, taxes, sinking funds, etc., § 44 et seq. 
Cross reference- Department of finance, § 2-324 et seq.; tax code, Ch. 36. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-01. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly means otherwise, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Department: The department of finance. 
    Director: The director of the department of finance. 
Sec. 18-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the July 1 and end on the June 30. 
(Code 1959, § 1-7) 
Sec. 18-2. - Billing for city services. 
    Whenever any bureau of any department or any department renders any services, sells any product or performs any work for any person a bill shall be rendered therefor in quadruplicate; one copy shall be presented to the person for whom the services were rendered and the work performed, or to whom the product sold, one copy to the collector of city taxes, whose duty it shall be to collect such bill, one copy to the director, who shall charge the collector of city taxes therewith, and one copy shall be retained by the department performing the work, rendering the service or selling the product. 
(Code 1959, § 12-1) 
Sec. 18-3. - Cash payment for city services. 
    Whenever any bureau of any department or any department renders any services, sells any product or performs any work for any person for which payment is made in cash, a statement thereof in triplicate shall be prepared; one copy shall be presented to the collector of city taxes, together with the cash and his receipt obtained, one copy to the director, who shall charge the collector of city taxes therewith, and one copy shall be retained by the department performing the work, rendering the service or selling the product. A receipt shall be given to the person making the payment. 
(Code 1959, § 12-1) 
Sec. 18-4. - Real estate transfer fees. 
    The clerk of the general district court shall collect all real estate transfer fees and pay 90 percent of such fees into the treasury not later than the tenth day of the month following receipt. 
(Code 1959, § 12-7) 
Sec. 18-5. - Penalty and interest for failure to pay certain accounts when due. 
(a)  Any person failing to pay any account on or before its due date, other than accounts for taxes and other accounts for which a penalty is otherwise specifically provided, shall incur a penalty of ten percent. The penalty shall be added to the amount of the account due from such person. No penalty shall be imposed for failure to pay if such failure was not in any way the fault of the debtor. 
(b)  Interest at the rate of ten percent annually from the first day of the month following the month in which such account is due shall be collected upon the principal and penalty of all such accounts then remaining unpaid. 
(Ord. No. O-04-123, 9-14-04) 
Secs. 18-6-18-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DIRECTOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Director of Finance, § 2-336 et seq. 

Sec. 18-16. - Appointment. 
    The city manager shall appoint a director, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 12-8) 
Sec. 18-17. - Powers, duties in general. 
    The director shall be the general accountant of the city and shall devote his entire time to the duties of his office. He shall keep a complete set of books for the city in accordance with such system and such forms as the city council shall prescribe which shall include books showing the condition of the sinking fund, school fund and other funds of the city, the condition and amount of the bonded and floating debt of the city, and all other accounts necessary to an accurate understanding of the financial affairs of the city. All books and papers in the director's custody shall be open to the inspection of the city manager, members of the council, city attorney or any other officer of the city who in the discharge of his duties shall have occasion to examine the same. He shall have the right to appoint assistants, to be approved by the city manager, for whose acts and doings he and his sureties shall be responsible. He shall be charged with the responsibility for and exercise a general supervision over the accounts of all of the officers of the city charged in any manner with the receipt, collection or disbursement of city revenues. 
    The director, as the chief accounting officer of the city, is authorized to issue instructions relating to the handling of accounts, including requisitions, orders, advices, payrolls, bills, receipts, charges, credits, payments and all financial records of whatsoever nature pertaining to all accounting matters of the city, and shall further have authority to require full and prompt compliance therewith by all departments and offices of the city, and the decision of the director in all matters and in the interpretation of the duties and procedure required to be performed by the accounting offices of the city shall be final. No payment of any money owing by the city shall be made unless the same shall have been previously approved by the director in such form and manner as the director of finance may determine, and not then unless there is sufficient money in the account upon which such warrant or check is drawn to cover such warrant or check. He shall make a complete detailed audit of the accounts of all such officers at least once a year and at such other times as he may deem necessary or upon request by the council or the city manager and shall file a written report thereof with the city manager for presentation to council. He shall perform all of the duties heretofore performed by the city auditor and such other duties as the city manager may, from time to time, require of him. Whenever the terms city auditor or auditor appear in this Code it shall be taken to mean the director. 
(Code 1959, § 12-8; Ord. of 4-13-76) 
Sec. 18-18. - Delinquent taxes. 
    The director shall perform the duties imposed upon the auditor by the Charter in connection with delinquent property and the sale thereof for delinquent taxes. 
(Code 1959, § 12-9) 
Sec. 18-19. - Examination of bills, payrolls, etc. 
    The director shall examine all payrolls, bills, accounts, claims and demands against the city and no money, including interest on the debt of the city, shall be drawn from the treasury or paid by the city to any person, unless the director has first ascertained that the same is correct and owing. 
(Code 1959, § 12-10) 
Sec. 18-20. - Checks. 
    All balances found by the director to be due from the city shall be paid by check drawn by the director or his duly authorized designee and countersigned by the city manager or his duly authorized designee, stating to whom payable and from what account the same is payable; and no money, including interest on the funded debt, shall be drawn from the treasury, except on the check of the director as aforesaid, and no check shall be so given by the director, unless authorized by the council. The director may select other appropriate devices to place such signatures upon the checks. Such device shall be kept so that no one shall have access thereto other than the officers herein authorized to sign checks. Before giving any such check the director shall take care that the payee is not indebted to the city for taxes or other debts, or if indebted, that the amount so due the city is deducted from the checks. 
(Code 1959, § 12-11; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81; Ord. No. O-02-144, 8-13-02) 
Sec. 18-21. - Semiannual reports. 
    The director shall present to the council, through the city manager, quarterly financial statements showing the general status of all city funds and accounts as of the last day of the months of December and June. These quarterly reports shall be presented to the council by the 45th day following the end of the reporting period. 
(Code 1959, § 12-12) 
Sec. 18-22. - Annual reports. 
    The director shall present to the council, through the city manager, by August 15th of each year, a statement of all receipts and disbursements during the preceding fiscal year. 
(Code 1959, § 12-13) 
Sec. 18-23. - Information, books, etc., to be furnished on demand. 
    To enable him to make up his reports, the director is authorized to call on the city attorney, collector of city taxes, commissioner of the revenue or any other officer of the city for any information, books or accounts in their possession which he may deem necessary for the proper discharge of such duty, and any and all officers and departments of the city shall make such reports to the director as he may require. 
(Code 1959, § 12-14) 
Sec. 18-24. - Duties in connection with municipal credit and indebtedness. 
    The director is specially charged with the maintenance of the faith and credit of the city, and the preservation of all books, papers and other data relating to its public debt and other liabilities, and shall do and perform any and all other acts and things not inconsistent with the provisions of the ordinances, which are proper to accomplish the fiscal objects contemplated herein. 
(Code 1959, § 12-15) 
Sec. 18-25. - Enforcement of settlement by officers. 
    Should any officer whose duty it is to receive and collect any of the revenues of the city neglect to submit to the director the information and reports required by section 18-23 as therein prescribed, or fail to settle his accounts and pay into the treasury at the times prescribed by law the balance found due from him, it shall be the duty of the director to give notice of such default to such officer and his sureties, and demand immediate settlement; and in case such settlement is not then made, the director shall call upon the city attorney to take such steps as may be necessary to enforce the payment of any balance which may be due from such officer. He shall also notify the city manager of such default, so that he or the city council may suspend such person from office. 
(Code 1959, § 12-16) 
Sec. 18-26. - Charges and credits on accounts of officers who collect city revenues; certain powers and duties enumerated. 
(a)  The director shall charge each officer whose duty it is to collect the revenues of the city from any source whatsoever with the whole amount which it is the duty of such officer to endeavor to collect, and shall credit him with all collections made by him and paid over to the city collector. All officers whose duty it is so to collect, shall, at such times as the city ordinances may require or the director may demand, submit to him reports of such collections, accompanied with the receipts of the collector for payments. Credits shall also be allowed to the collector for all taxes or other claims in his hands, which may be duly ascertained to be uncollectible and returned as such. 
(b)  When moneys on hand belonging to the city, in the opinion of the director, justify his doing so, the director may invest or reinvest city funds in accord with provisions of all applicable laws; provided that the director shall provide council with a synopsis of each such investment within a reasonable time after such investment is made. Whenever the use of the money, or any part thereof, is required by the city, the director is authorized and empowered to endorse such certificates of deposit or sell such securities, or any one or more thereof, and to deposit directly the proceeds therefrom to the credit of the city in the same bank which issued the certificate of deposit or through which the securities were purchased and held for safekeeping on behalf of the city. 
(c)  The director shall be the custodian of all bonds, notes, choses in action and other assets of the city, and he shall be specially chargeable with the assets belonging to the sinking fund. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the director to place insurance on the city properties, subject to the council's approval; to have custody of the insurance policies; to arrange temporary loans in accordance with the resolutions and ordinances of the council and the financial requirements of the city; to pass upon, approve or disapprove all orders issued through the purchasing office; to approve and cause to be secured all official bonds required on any officers or employees of the city; and, to exercise control and supervision of all accounting matters not otherwise specifically delegated. He shall at all times have access to voucher records of the council and all other documents and records of the city required for the proper conduct of his duties. 
(Code 1959, § 12-17; Ord. of 7-10-79) 
Secs. 18-27-18-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ASSESSMENT OF TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Assessment of collection provisions in tax code, § 36-164 et seq. 
State Law reference- Property exempt from taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3600 et seq. 

Sec. 18-38. - Compensation of commissioner of the revenue. 
    The city shall pay such portion of the salary and office expenses of the commissioner of the revenue, including compensation to his deputies, clerks and assistants, as may be fixed by the state law governing the same. 
(Code 1959, § 12-27) 
State Law reference- Compensation of city commissioner of the revenue, Code of Virginia, § 14.1-57. 
Sec. 18-39. - Duties of commissioner of revenue. 
    The duties of the commissioner of the revenue, with reference to the assessment of the taxes for the city, except so far as modified by this article, shall be the same as those prescribed for him by law with reference to the assessment of taxes for the state. 
(Code 1959, § 12-88) 
Sec. 18-40. - Personal property books. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall annually prepare three copies of a personal property book in the form provided by state law, and shall properly certify the same. The personal property book shall be delivered before August twenty-fifth of each year and distributed as follows: One copy to the city collector, one copy to the state department of taxation, taking appropriate receipts for the same, with one copy being retained by the commissioner of the revenue. Should the commissioner fail to deliver such copies before the dates above specified, he shall be fined $200.00. 
(b)  It shall further be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to prepare and deliver personal property tax tickets at the same time the books are delivered. 
(c)  After the time such books are delivered and in the event of omitted assessments made by the commissioner or the assessor of real estate, as the case may be, the city collector shall prepare tickets on the basis of such assessments. 
(Code 1959, § 12-29) 
Sec. 18-41. - Omitted assessments. 
    Should the commissioner of the revenue at any time after the personal property book has been delivered to the collector discover that he has omitted any personal property therefrom, he shall assess the same and send a copy of such assessment to the collector and to the director of finance, and keep a record thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 12-30) 
Sec. 18-42. - False entries by commissioner. 
    If the commissioner of the revenue or assessor of real estate shall knowingly make a false entry upon their books, they shall, for each offense, be fined not more than $500.00. 
(Code 1959, § 12-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-207, 58.1-3121. 
Sec. 18-43. - False returns. 
    If any person shall knowingly render a false list or statement of his property for taxation to the commissioner of the revenue or assessor of real estate, he shall be fined $300.00. 
(Code 1959, § 12-31) 
Sec. 18-44. - Refusal to make return. 
    When a person refuses to give to the commissioner of the revenue or assessor of real estate the required list of his taxable property, the commissioner or the assessor may make such assessment from any information within their reach, and the person so refusing to give such list shall be fined not less than $20.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(Code 1959, § 12-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3519, 58.1-3110. 
Sec. 18-45. - Forms for tax returns; delivery to taxpayers; failure to make return on time. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall annually prepare and cause to be printed, at the expense of the city, blank forms upon which all taxpayers shall be required to render their lists of personal property for taxation, which forms shall, except to the extent modified by the ordinances of the city, conform to those prescribed by law for the same purposes as regards assessments for state taxes, which forms shall be delivered in person or by mail to each taxpayer in the city by the commissioner of the revenue, and the taxpayer shall fill out the same and make return to the office of the commissioner of the revenue within the time required by law. If the taxpayer shall fail to make the return within the time required by law, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed forthwith to fill out such form and make such assessment as he deems proper in each particular case. 
(Code 1959, § 12-32) 
State Law reference- Taxpayer to make return, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3518. 
Sec. 18-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-01-209, adopted Nov. 27, 2001, repealed § 18-46. 
Sec. 18-47. - Rate of taxation. 
    The council shall annually fix the rate of taxation which shall be assessed upon real and personal property and shall prescribe all necessary rules and regulations for assessing and collecting the same which are not provided in the general ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-34) 
Sec. 18-48. - Bienniel assessment and reassessment of real estate. 
    By virtue of the authority granted and set forth in Title 58.1, Chapter 32, Articles 5 and 6 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, there shall be a biennial assessment and reassessment of real estate in the city, such assessments to be made as provided herein. 
(Code 1959, § 12-35; Ord. No. O-93-249, 9-14-93; Ord. No. O-95-073, 3-28-95; Ord. No. O-98-046, 3-24-98) 
State Law reference- Special acts for assessment of taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3260. 
Sec. 18-49. - Election of assessor. 
    For purposes of personnel management, the city manager shall appoint a person as city assessor who shall assess for taxation all real estate in the city. In assessing such real property, the city assessor shall follow the assessment methods as prescribed by the Code of Virginia and the regulations as developed by the Virginia Department of Taxation. Included in such provisions is a procedure for the orderly consideration of appeals by a court-appointed board of equalization. Questions regarding assessment practices of the city assessor may be directed to either the city manager or city council. 
(Code 1959, § 12-36; Ord. of 4-13-76; Ord. No. O-93-250, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 18-50. - Term, compensation and duties of assessor or assessors. 
    The term of office of the assessor shall be for an indefinite period, such assessor to serve at the pleasure of the city manager. Any vacancy, however, occurring shall be filled by the city manager. Such assessor shall receive such compensation, and shall be provided such clerical or other assistance as may be necessary, and the city manager shall provide for the payment of such salaries and other expenses as may be properly incident to the work involved. All such salaries, expenses and other costs incurred in connection with such assessment or reassessment shall be paid out of the treasury of the city. Such assessor shall have the same authority as the assessors appointed under the provisions of the Code of Virginia and shall be charged with duties similar to those imposed upon such assessors, except that such assessments or reassessments shall be made and shall have the same effect as if they had been made by assessors appointed under the provisions of the Code of Virginia. 
    During such time as the assessor appointed hereunder are in office, except when kept in office after an assessment for the sole purpose of equalizing the assessment, all duties imposed and all powers conferred by law on the commissioner of the revenue with respect to the assessment of real estate are transferred to the assessor. Each assessor, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the laws of the state for state officers, which oath shall be filed with the clerk of council. 
(Code 1959, § 12-37; Ord. No. O-93-250, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 18-51. - How assessment to be made. 
    The city assessor shall assess for taxation at its fair market value all real estate within the city subject to assessment by law and all rights thereto and interest therein, and shall have the right and power to do all things necessary to assess such property. 
    Every assessment of real estate shall be effective for tax purposes on the first day of July of the fiscal year for which the assessment is made and the taxes and other charges shall be extended on the basis of every such assessment. The beginning of the tax year and assessment year for the assessment of taxes on all real estate assessable by the city for taxation shall be July 1, and the owner of such real estate on that day shall be assessed with taxes for the fiscal year beginning on that day. 
    In assessing any building and the land it occupies which may be owned exclusively by a benevolent or charitable institution, or by a church or religious body, but all of which is not used exclusively for lodge purposes or meeting rooms or for church or religious or charitable purposes, the assessor or assessors shall assess for taxation such proportionate part of the fair market value of the entire property as would be the comparative fair market value of the part of such land and building not used exclusively for lodge purposes or meeting rooms, or for a church or religious or charitable purposes. In addition to the property required to be assessed by the provisions of this article, the assessor or assessors shall value all nontaxable real estate in the city and all other property in the city as may be required by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 12-38; Ord. No. O-01-132, eff. 7-1-01) 
Sec. 18-51.1. - Special assessments for agricultural, horticultural, forest or open space real estate. 
(a)  The city finds that the preservation of real estate devoted to agricultural, horticultural, forest and open space uses within its boundaries is in the public interest and, having heretofore adopted a land-use plan, hereby ordains that such real estate shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of Article 4 of Chapter 32 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, and of this section. 
(b)  (1)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in Sections 58.1-3230 and 58.1-3233 of the Code of Virginia shall, on or before May 1 of each year, apply to the city assessor for the classification, assessment and taxation of such property for the next succeeding tax year on the basis of its use, under the procedures set forth in Section 58.1-3236 of the Code of Virginia. In any year in which a general reassessment is being made such application may be submitted until 30 days have elapsed after the notice of increase in assessment is mailed or 60 days proceeding the tax year, whichever is later. Such application shall be on forms provided by the state department of taxation and supplied by the city assessor and shall include such additional schedules, photographs and drawings as may be required by the city assessor. An individual who is the owner of an undivided interest in a parcel may apply on behalf of himself and the other owners of such parcel upon submitting an affidavit that such other owners are minors or cannot be located. An application shall be submitted whenever the use or acreage of such land previously approved changes; provided, however, that such property owner must revalidate annually with the city assessor any applications previously approved. A fee of $40.00 shall accompany each initial application for the classification, assessment and taxation of property in accordance with the provisions of this section and a fee of $15.00 shall accompany each annual revalidation application. 
(2)  A separate application shall be filed for each parcel on the land book. 
(c)  Promptly upon receipt of any application, the city assessor shall determine whether the subject property meets the criteria for taxation hereunder. If the city assessor determines that the subject property does meet such criteria, he shall determine the value of such property for its qualifying use, as well as its fair market value. 
    In determining whether the subject property meets the criteria for "agricultural use" or "horticultural use" the city assessor may request an opinion from the commissioner of agriculture and commerce; in determining whether the subject property meets the criteria for "forest use" he may request an opinion from the director of the department of conservation and economic development; and in determining whether the subject property meets the criteria for "open space use" he may request an opinion from the director of the commission of outdoor recreation. Upon the refusal of the commissioner of agriculture and commerce, the director of the department of conservation and economic development or the director of the commission of outdoor recreation to issue an opinion, or in the event of an unfavorable opinion which does not comport with standards set forth by the respective director, the party aggrieved may seek relief from the circuit court for the city. If said court finds in his favor it may issue an order which shall serve in lieu of an opinion for the purposes of this section. 
(d)  The use value and fair market value of any qualifying property shall be placed on the land book before delivery to the city collector and the tax for the next succeeding tax year shall be extended from the use value. 
(e)  There is hereby imposed a roll-back tax, and interest thereon, in such amounts as may be determined under Virginia Code Section 58.1-3237, upon any property as to which the use changes to a non-qualifying use. 
(f)  (1)  The owner of any real estate liable for roll-back taxes shall, within 60 days following a change in use, report such change to the city assessor on such forms as may be prescribed. The city assessor shall forthwith determine and assess the roll-back tax, which shall be paid to the city collector within 30 days of assessment. On failure to report within 60 days following such change in use and/or failure to pay within 30 days of assessment of said roll-back tax and interest such owner shall be liable for an additional penalty equal to ten percent of the amount of the roll-back tax and interest, which penalty shall be collected as a part of the tax. In addition to such penalty, there is hereby imposed interest of one-half percent of the amount of the roll-back tax, interest and penalty, for each month or fraction thereof during which the failure continues. 
(2)  Any person making a material misstatement of fact in any application filed pursuant thereto shall be liable for all taxes, in such amounts and at such times as if such property had been assessed on the basis of fair market value as applied to other real estate in the city, together with interest and penalties thereon, and he shall be further assessed with an additional penalty of one hundred per centum of such unpaid taxes. 
(g)  The provisions of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950) as amended, applicable to local levies and real estate assessment and taxation shall be applicable to assessments and taxation hereunder mutatis mutandis including, without limitation, provisions relating to tax liens and the correction of erroneous assessments, and for such purposes the roll-back taxes shall be considered to be deferred real estate taxes. 
(Code 1959, § 12-38.1; Ord. of 5-24-77; eff. 1-1-78; Ord. No. O-84-141, § 1, 6-12-84, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-01-132, 7-10-01, eff. 7-1-01) 
Sec. 18-52. - When assessment to be completed and procedure upon completion. 
    The assessor shall have a goal of completing such assessment and notifying property owners whose assessment values have changed on or before the thirty-first day of March of each year. Except with respect to new construction and other cases where the same is not practicable, such assessments shall be completed not later than the thirty-first day of March of the year preceding the tax year for which the same shall be effective, and taxes for each year on such real estate shall be made on the basis of the last assessment made prior to such year, subject to such changes as may have been lawfully made. A certified copy of the assessment, shall be delivered to the director of finance of the city on or before the first day of September of each year. The assessor shall prepare the land book for each year on the basis of the last assessment made prior to such year, subject to such changes as may have been lawfully made by the assessor(s) and shall verify all transfers. It shall not be necessary for the assessor(s) to prepare a reassessment book, but the records of the assessment may be kept on cards or in such other way as the council prescribes; or, in case no such provision is made, as the assessor deems best. 
(Code 1959, § 1 2-39; Ord. No. O-93-249, 9-14-93; Ord. No. O-01-132, 7-10-01, eff. 7-1-01) 
Sec. 18-52.1. - Notice to owner sent only when change in value. 
    Whenever the assessment of any real estate is changed by the city assessor, the assessor shall give written notice thereof to the owner in whose name such property is listed by mailing the notice to the last known post office address of such owner or person having an interest in the property, but the validity of such assessment shall not be affected by any failure to give or receive such notice. Every such notice shall contain the assessed value of such real estate immediately preceding such increase. 
(Ord. No. O-01-132, 7-10-01, eff. 7-1-01) 
Sec. 18-52.2. - Deadlines for appeals to city assessor and board of equalization. 
    Any property owner or lessee of real property in the city shall have the right to appeal any assessment thereof to the city assessor at any time prior to March 31 of the year prior to the effective date of assessment or 30 days after the mailing date of the assessment notice, whichever is later. Any property owner remaining unsatisfied with the action taken on appeal may further appeal to the city's board of equalization by making application at any time prior to July 31 of the year for which the assessment was made or 30 days after the deadline for review by the city assessor, whichever is later. Any appeal not timely filed shall not be considered. 
(Ord. No. O-01-132, 7-10-01, eff. 7-1-01) 
Sec. 18-52.3. - Assessment of new buildings substantially completed; extension of time for paying assessment. 
    All new buildings substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy prior to May 1 of the year of completion shall be assessed when so completed or fit for use and occupancy, and the city assessor shall enter in the books the fair market value of such building. No partial assessment as provided herein shall become effective until information as to the date and amount of such assessment is recorded in the office of the official authorized to collect taxes on real property and made available for public inspection. The total tax on any such new building for that year shall be the sum of (i) the tax upon the assessment of the completed building, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year such building is substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire year, and (ii) the tax upon the assessment of such new building as it existed on July 1 of that assessment year, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year such building was not substantially complete or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire year. With respect to any assessment made under this section after March 1 of any year, the penalty for nonpayment by June 5 shall be extended to August 5 of the succeeding fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. O-01-132, 7-10-01, eff. 7-1-01) 
Sec. 18-52.4. - Abatement of taxes on buildings razed, destroyed or damaged. 
    The city assessor shall, upon application made as hereinafter provided, abate the current tax on any building which is razed or destroyed or damaged by a fortuitous happening beyond the control of the owner. However, no such abatement shall be allowed if the destruction or damage to such building shall decrease the value thereof by less than $500.00. Also, no such abatement shall be allowed unless the destruction or damage renders the building unfit for use and occupancy for thirty days or more during the tax year. The tax on such razed, destroyed or damaged building is computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year the building was fit for use, occupancy and enjoyment bears to the entire tax year. Application for such abatement shall be made by or on behalf of the owner of the building within six months of the date on which the building was razed, destroyed or damaged. 
(Ord. No. O-01-132, 7-10-01, eff. 7-1-01) 
Sec. 18-53. - Reproduction and sale of modified land book. 
    The assessor may annually after the current land book is prepared cause certain information regarding ownership, assessed value and description of property in such land book to be reproduced in such number of copies as he deems necessary to meet the demands of the public for its use, and to authorize such reproductions to be sold to persons applying for such reproductions at a price to be fixed by the director. The proceeds of the sale of such reproductions shall be paid into the general fund. It shall be unlawful for any person except the assessor and his duly authorized representative to sell or offer any such reproduction for sale or to copy, or cause to be copied or reproduced, the whole or any part of any such reproduction and to sell or offer such copy or reproduction for sale. 
(Code 1959, § 12-39.1) 
Sec. 18-54. - Board of equalization-Appointment; composition; term; compensation. 
    Each tax year, beginning with the tax year starting on July 1, 2002, the circuit court for the City of Lynchburg appoints for the city the board of equalization or review of real estate assessments in the city to be composed of not less than three nor more than five members who shall be freeholders of the city. Terms of the members so appointed shall commence on the first day of July and shall expire on the thirtieth day of June in the tax year in which they are appointed. Members of the board shall receive per diem compensation, for time actually engaged in the duties of the board, to be fixed by the council of the city and paid out of the city treasury. The council may limit the per diem compensation to such number of days, as in its opinion, is sufficient for the completion of the work of the board. The assessor or a representative designated by him shall attend all meetings of the board with the right to take part in the discussion but having no vote. 
(Code 1959, § 12-40; Ord. No. O-87-042, § 1, 3-10-87; Ord. No. O-87-266, § 1, 11-24-87; Ord. No. O-93-191, 6-22-93; Ord. No. O-01-132, 7-10-01, eff. 7-1-01) 
Sec. 18-55. - Same-Powers. 
    The board of equalization or review shall and may exercise the power to revise, correct and amend any assessment of real estate made by the assessor or assessors in the year in which they serve, and to that end shall have all the powers conferred upon boards of equalization by Section 58.1-3378, Section 58.1-3379 and Section 58.1-3387 of the Code of Virginia. The board of equalization or review may adopt any regulations providing for oral presentations, with formal petitions or other pleadings or requests for review and looking to the further facilitation and simplification of the proceedings before the board, provided such regulations do not conflict with the provisions of this article. Any person wishing to apply to the board of equalization for review of an assessment must submit an application to the board no later than the thirty-first day of July for the year the assessment is effective. The city shall assess real estate on a biennial basis and during the off year the board's authority to hear complaints shall be limited to assessments based upon new construction, improvements, alterations, rezoning, demolitions, fire losses, land subdivisions and similar situations for which changes of assessment are mailed to property owners by the city assessor's office. 
(Code 1959, § 12-41; Ord. No. O-87-266, § 1, 11-24-87; Ord. No. O-93-249, 9-14-93; Ord. No. O-01-132, 7-10-01, eff. 7-1-01) 
Sec. 18-56. - Same-Right of appeal. 
    Any person of the city aggrieved by any assessment may apply for relief in the manner provided by Code of Virginia, Sections 58.1-3984 to 58.1-3989. 
(Code 1959, § 12-42; Ord. No. O-87-266, § 1, 11-24-87) 
Secs. 18-57-18-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COLLECTION OF TAXES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Assessment of collection provisions in tax code, § 36-164 et seq. 

Sec. 18-68. - Appointment of collector of taxes; duties; appointment of assistants; collection of fees. 
    The city manager, upon recommendation of the director of finance, shall appoint a collector of city taxes, whose duty it shall be to collect all taxes, including license fees, assessments, rents, fines, penalties and other income and revenue of the city which it is not made specially the duty of some other officer to collect. He shall also be the collector of all delinquent taxes due the city. He shall have the right to appoint one or more assistants, to be approved by the city manager, for whose acts and doings he and his sureties shall be responsible. 
    The collector and his assistants shall collect such fees as are allowed to the collector by virtue of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city, but shall pay such fees into the city treasury along with other collections. 
(Code 1959, § 12-43) 
Sec. 18-69. - Allocation of local taxes. 
    As of July 1, 1954, any ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, all local taxes collected, current and delinquent, including penalties and interest, shall be credited to the general fund, and, beginning July 1, 1954, the allocation of funds to the schools and the public works reserve fund shall be by way of appropriations from the general fund; provided, however, that the school fund for the fiscal year 1953-54 shall be entitled to one-half of its former share [$1.15 per hundred of assessment] of real estate taxes levied for the calendar year 1954, notwithstanding the fact that more than one-half of its former share was collected prior to July 1, 1954. 
    All acts of officers of the city in effectuating the change of method outlined in this section prior to the adoption hereof are hereby in all respects ratified and confirmed. 
(Code 1959, § 12-44) 
Sec. 18-70. - Property omitted from assessment. 
    Should the city collector discover any property, real or personal, or any capitation taxes, which have been omitted from assessment upon the books of the commissioner of the revenue, he shall report the same to the commissioner, in writing, who shall make the proper assessments. 
(Code 1959, § 12-45) 
Sec. 18-71. - Tax tickets. 
    It shall be the duty of the city collector, upon receipt from the commissioner of the revenue of a separate ticket against each taxpayer whose name is contained on the real and personal property tax books, to verify each such ticket and appropriate assessment in the land book or the personal property book. 
(Code 1959, § 12-46) 
Sec. 18-72. - Sale of property to satisfy delinquent taxes. 
    When it becomes necessary for the city collector to levy or distrain upon the property of any delinquent taxpayer, the same shall be sold at public auction on the premises of such taxpayer, or at such public place as the collector may deem best calculated to secure a fair price for such property. From the proceeds of such sale he shall satisfy the tax due the city, and all costs of collection, paying the residue over to the delinquent. 
(Code 1959, § 12-47) 
Sec. 18-73. - Payments into treasury. 
    The city collector shall pay into the treasury daily all collections made by him of all moneys in his hands, or that may come into his hands, belonging to the city in one (1) or more of the following banks, savings and loan associations or other financial institutions: Signet Bank, VA, Central Fidelity Bank, Sovran Bank, N.A., Crestar Bank, The Co-Operative Building and Loan Association of Lynchburg, Incorporated, First Federal Savings and Loan Association of Lynchburg, Incorporated, Coreast Savings Bank, Colonial American Bank, First Community Bank, Investors Savings Bank and Jefferson Savings & Loan Association to the credit of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-48; Ord. of 5-11-76; Ord. of 6-28-77; Ord. No. O-87-125, § 1, 6-23-87; Ord. No. O-88-185, § 1, 8-9-88) 
Sec. 18-74. - Annual lists of delinquent taxes. 
    On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of August in each year the city collector shall classify into the following alphabetical lists all claims of the city in his hands for taxes and assessments due for the preceding year, which he is unable to collect by garnishment, distress, levy or other means in his power: 
(a)  A list of the property, both real and personal, improperly placed on the commissioner's books, or not ascertainable, together with the amount of taxes or assignments charged thereon. 
(b)  A list of the delinquent taxes on personal property, with the names and residences of the persons assessed therewith. 
(c)  A list of real estate which is delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes thereon, which list shall be in the following form: 
"List of real estate in the City of Lynchburg, delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes thereon for the year...".. 
Name of Owner No. of Lot Feet 
Front Location Amount of 
Taxes Penalty  
And the collector shall, at the foot thereof, subscribe the following oath: 
"I, A. B., collector of the City of Lynchburg, do swear that the foregoing list is, I verily believe, correct and true; and I have received no part of the taxes for which the real estate therein mentioned is returned delinquent, and that I have used due diligence to find property liable to distress for said taxes, but have found none." 
(Code 1959, § 12-49) 
Sec. 18-75. - Delinquent lists to speak as of June 30. 
    The lists mentioned in section 18-74 shall speak as of June 30 of each year, that is to say, such lists shall conform to the facts as they existed on such date. 
(Code 1959, § 12-50) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1800, 58.1-3922. 
Sec. 18-76. - Delivery of delinquent lists; settlement; collection of delinquent taxes. 
    The city collector shall, on or before the fifteenth day of August in each year, deliver the lists called for in items (a) and (b) of section 18-74, to the director, who shall examine the same before the thirtieth day of August. If the director of finance be satisfied that the lists are correct, he shall allow the collector credit for the amounts thereof in his annual settlement of such taxes, which shall be made on the thirtieth day of August; but if such lists, or any of them, be found incorrect, credit shall be allowed for all or so much thereof as is correct. 
    The city collector shall, as delinquent tax collector, proceed to collect such delinquent taxes as speedily as possible and make daily settlement for all such delinquent taxes so collected with the director who shall give him credit for all such delinquent taxes so collected and accounted for. 
(Code 1959, § 12-51) 
Sec. 18-77. - False returns by collector. 
    If the city collector shall return in any such list real estate as delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes, when such taxes, or any part thereof, shall actually have been received by him, he shall forfeit, if the return was by design, ten times the amount of the taxes so actually received, and if the return was by mistake, twice the amount, one-half of which forfeiture shall, in any case, go to the city, and the other half to the person charged with such taxes. If the collector shall return in any such list any real estate as delinquent, when he has either found, or by using due diligence might have found, sufficient property liable to distress for the taxes for which such real estate is returned delinquent, he shall forfeit to the city five times the amount of such taxes. 
(Code 1959, § 12-52) 
Sec. 18-78. - Lien on real property for taxes. 
    The year for which taxes on real estate are assessed shall be deemed to commence on the first day of January, and from that day, there shall be a lien on such real estate for the taxes assessed thereon until the same are paid and for any penalties for failing to pay same as provided by law. It is further provided, however, that for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1972, and ending June 30, 1973, and also for each and every fiscal year thereafter beginning July first and ending June 30, of each such year, unless otherwise changed by council, that the year for which taxes on real estate are assessed shall be deemed to commence on the first day of July, and from that day, there shall be a lien on such real estate for the taxes assessed thereon until the same are paid and for any penalties for failing to pay the same as provided by law. All taxes and assessments shall be regarded as due and payable at such time as may be prescribed in the annual tax ordinances. 
(Code 1959, § 12-53) 
State Law reference- Connection with the creation of liens, § 58. 
Sec. 18-79. - Persons by whom taxes payable. 
    All taxes on real estate imposed by any ordinance of the council shall be payable by the persons, who, on the first day of January in each and every year, were the respective owners thereof. It is further provided, however, that for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1972 and ending June 30, 1973, and also for each and every fiscal year thereafter beginning July first and ending June 30, of each such year, unless otherwise changed by council, that all taxes on real estate imposed by any ordinance of the council shall be payable by the persons, who, on the first day of July in each and every year, were the respective owners thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 12-54) 
Sec. 18-80. - Fee for passing bad checks. 
    Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation which shall utter, publish or pass any check or draft for payment of taxes or any other sums due the city, which is subsequently returned for insufficient funds or because there is no account or the account has been closed shall be required to pay in addition to the amount of the check or draft a penalty fee of $25.00 for each bad check or draft so uttered, published or passed. 
(Code 1959, § 12-54.1; Ord. No. O-84-141, § 1, 6-12-84, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-86-054, § 1, 4-8-86, eff. 7-1-86; Ord. No. O-88-062, § 1, 3-22-88, eff. 7-1-88; Ord. No. O-91-053, 3-26-91, eff. 7-1-91; Ord. No. O-98-188, 8-11-98) 
Sec. 18-81. - Sale of land for delinquent taxes. 
    When the city collector shall collect any delinquent taxes which have been filed in the clerk's office of the general district court, as provided in Section 57 of the Charter, he shall collect a fee of $0.25 from the party paying such taxes, such fee to be paid to the clerk for marking the same redeemed on the delinquent land books as provided in Title 58, Chapter 21, Article 8, of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1959, § 12-55) 
State Law reference- Sale of delinquent lands generally, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3965 et seq. 
Secs. 18-82-18-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL FUNDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-100. - Creation of electrical rate adjustment fund. 
    In order to prepare for the increased electrical rates the City and Public Schools will experience at the conclusion of the current franchise agreement with Appalachian Power Company on August 16, 1996, there is hereby established a fund for electrical rate adjustment for the 1991 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, as follows: 
(a)  The preparation of future budgets shall include the "dedication" of sums within the general fund and the utility fund which are equal to 15 percent of that portion of all fund revenues in excess of the original council-adopted budget income to the fund for the preceding budget year. For each fund, these dedicated revenues for the applicable budget year shall be combined with the total amount of revenues as similarly-dedicated within the fund from prior budget years to produce a sum which represents the cumulative amount of "recurring, dedicated revenues for electrical rate adjustment." For the purposes of budgetary forecasting or formulation, the total amount of annual revenues/income to each Fund shall be reduced by the respective amount of such "recurring, dedicated revenues" until such time that this cumulative amounts equal $2.4 million annually in the general fund and $1.1 million annually in the utility fund. 
(b)  There is hereby established a "Reserve for Electrical Rate Adjustment" in the general fund and in the utility fund. Resources of this special reserve account within each fund shall become available to subsidize the recurring increase in annual electricity costs for municipal services which results from the expiration of the current electrical service contract in August 1996. On a year-to-year basis, the amount of this subsidization may equal a sum up to the difference between the "recurring, dedicated revenues for electrical rate adjustment," as defined above, and the sum of $2.4 million in the general fund and $1.1 million in the utility fund. 
Funding to this "Reserve for Electrical Rate Adjustment" within each fund will include (1) the cumulative amounts of "recurring, dedicated revenues for electrical rate adjustment" during the five fiscal years from 1991-92 through 1995-96; (2) sums equal to 25 percent of the amount which remains in the "Reserve for Contingencies" of each Fund at the June 30 close of each year commencing with the 1990-91 fiscal year; (3) interest savings which result from refinancing of any bonded indebtedness; (4) interest earnings which are earned via investment of the resources within this reserve; and (5) such other resources which city council may choose to direct to this Reserve. 
(Ord. No. O-91-108, 5-28-91; Ord. No. O-95-036, 2-14-95, eff. 7-1-96) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. O-95-036, adopted February 14, 1995, repeals Sec. 18-100 to become effective July 1, 1996. 
Sec. 18-100.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-02-161, adopted Sept. 10, 2002, repealed § 18-100.1 which pertained to creation of a support fund for strategic initiatives. 
Sec. 18-100.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-0-105, adopted May 23, 2000, eff. July 1, 2000, repealed § 18-100.2, which pertained to creation of designated general fund balance. 
Secs. 18-101-18-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SINKING FUNDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Sinking funds, §§ 50, 51. 
State Law reference- Sinking funds, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3006. 

Sec. 18-106. - Creation of sinking fund. 
    The council shall provide a sinking fund of one and one-half percent on all sinking fund bonds of the city now outstanding, and a like sinking fund of one and one-half percent for all sinking fund bonds of the city hereafter issued, until such time as the assets of the sinking fund are sufficient to retire such sinking fund bonds. 
(Code 1959, § 12-63) 
Sec. 18-107. - Commission of the sinking fund-Purpose; membership. 
    For the purpose of managing, preserving and applying the sinking fund required to be created by the city Charter and section 18-106, there shall be a board of five members to be called the "Commission of the Sinking Fund," which shall be composed of the following officers of the city: The city manager, the director, the mayor, the vice-president of the council and one other member of the council elected by the council for a term concurrent with the term of office of the mayor. 
(Code 1959, § 12-64) 
Sec. 18-108. - Same-Officers. 
    The director shall be the secretary of the sinking fund commission and shall keep a full and correct journal of the proceedings of every meeting, to be signed by himself and the president, and shall preserve all books and papers of the sinking fund commission in his office. The president of the sinking fund commission shall be the mayor. 
(Code 1959, § 12-65) 
Sec. 18-109. - Same-Destruction of canceled bonds. 
    Twice a year or oftener, the sinking fund commission shall cause all canceled coupons paid, and all city bonds paid off, to be burned, in the presence of the sinking fund commission, and a proper record of the burning shall be noted by the secretary of the sinking fund commission. 
(Code 1959, § 12-66) 
Sec. 18-110. - Same-Report of commissioners. 
    On or before the first regular meeting of the council in February of each year, the commissioners of the sinking fund shall make a report to the council of its proceedings during the previous year. 
(Code 1959, § 12-67) 
Sec. 18-111. - Accounts; custody and use of funds. 
    The director shall keep an account of and shall be the custodian of all moneys, bonds and other evidences of debt belonging to the sinking fund, and shall deposit the same in the name of the sinking fund commission in one or more of the banks of the city designated as depositories of the city, and all sums deposited to the credit of such account shall be sacredly applied to the redemption of the bonds of the city, for which the sinking fund was created. 
(Code 1959, § 12-68) 
Sec. 18-112. - Investments. 
    The sinking fund commission shall apply all appropriations and interest or other proceeds from any bonds held by the sinking fund commission to the purchase at market value of bonds of the city, or of the United States, or of this state, or of any city of the state having a population of over 10,000 inhabitants, or in other bonds or securities, the payment of which are guaranteed both as to principal and interest by the government of the United States, or to the purchase of such other securities as may now or hereafter be authorized by law for sinking fund investments. The accruing interest on all securities held by the sinking fund commission shall be collected by the director when due, and deposited to the credit of the sinking fund commission. Whenever any part of the city debt for which the sinking fund was created shall become due, unless other provision be made by the council, such securities, so far as may be necessary, shall be sold by the sinking fund commission and the proceeds applied to the payment of such matured part of such city debt. The sinking fund commission may at any other time and from time to time, but only with the approval of the council, sell or otherwise dispose of any securities held in the sinking fund and reinvest the proceeds in such lawfully authorized investments as may be approved by the council. 
(Code 1959, § 12-69) 
Secs. 18-113-18-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SELF INSURANCE FUND 

Secs. 18-119-18-123. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-84-205, § 2, adopted Aug. 14, 1984, repealed §§ 18-119-18-123, pertaining to the fire protection reserve fund, and derived from §§ 12(a)-(c) of an ordinance adopted June 10, 1975. 
Sec. 18-124. - Creation of self-insurance fund. 
    The city council hereby establishes a self-insurance fund for the payment of claims and judgments against the City of Lynchburg, and expenses in connection therewith, by transferring the funds that were previously held in the general fund reserve for uninsured deductibles and a utilities fund reserve for uninsured deductibles. The funds shall be administered by the city attorney's office and will be used for the purpose of paying property damage and liability claims, judgments and expenses according to regulation promulgated by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-84-205, § 1, 8-14-84; Ord. No. O-86-059, § 1, 4-22-86, eff. 1-1-86; Ord. No. O-91-224, 9-10-91, eff. 10-1-91) 
Sec. 18-125. - Appropriations. 
    The sum of $508,146.66 is hereby transferred into the self-insurance fund. All interest earned by the moneys in such funds shall be deposited in the self-insurance fund to which such interest is attributable and all excess premiums and insurance refunds shall also be deposited in the fund to which such moneys are attributable. If the self-insurance fund balance is less than the $500,000.00, funds shall be appropriated as are necessary to restore the Fund to the required balance. 
(Ord. No. O-84-205, § 1, 8-14-84; Ord. No. O-86-059, § 1, 4-22-86, eff. 1-1-86) 
Sec. 18-126. - Annual report. 
    The city attorney shall file a report with the city manager in such form and at such time as the city manager may require. 
(Ord. No. O-84-205, § 1, 8-14-84; Ord. No. O-86-059, § 1, 4-22-86, eff. 1-1-86; Ord. No. O-91-224, 9-10-91, eff. 10-1-91) 
Secs. 18-127-18-144. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Division 4 of Article V, Public Works Reserve Fund, was repealed by Ord. No. O-01-169, adopted Sept. 18, 2001, effective June 30, 2001. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY CONTRACTS AND PROCUREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-145-18-148. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-82-262, adopted Dec. 14, 1982, repealed §§ 18-145-18-148. 
Sec. 18-149. - Interest of city officials. 
(a)  No member of the council, member of the school board or any other officer or agent of the city, during the term for which he is elected or appointed, shall be a contractor or subcontractor with the city or its agents nor shall he be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract, subcontract, or job of work, or materials, or the profits or contract price thereof, or any services to be performed for the city for pay under any contract or subcontract; and no such councilman, officer or employee shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract, subcontract, or job of work, or materials or the profits or the contract price thereof, or services to be furnished or performed for the city for pay under any contract or subcontract; nor as agent for such contractor or subcontractor, or other person furnishing any supplies or materials. Every such contract or subcontract shall be void, and the officer, councilmen council member or agent, making such contract shall forfeit to the city the full amount stipulated for thereby. 
(b)  No officer of the city, who alone, or with others is charged with the duty of auditing, settling or providing, by levy or otherwise, for the payment of claims against the city shall, by contract, directly or indirectly, become the owner of or be interested in any claim against the city. Every such contract or subcontract shall be void, and if any such claim be paid, the amount paid, with interest, may be recovered back by the city, within two years after payment, by action or motion in the circuit or general district court having jurisdiction over the city. 
(c)  The term "contract" as used in this section shall not be held to include the depositing of city funds in, or the borrowing of funds from, local banks in which a councilman or other officer of the city may be director or officer or have a stock interest; nor shall it include the granting of franchises to or purchase of services from public service corporations. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to attorneys for the state employed by the governing bodies of cities under the provisions of Code of Virginia, sections 58-762, 58-1016 or 58-1102 to collect taxes which are a lien on real estate. 
(Code 1959, § 12-74) 
State Law reference- Conflict of interests act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCUREMENTS 

Sec. 18-150. - Title; purposes. 
(a)  This ordinance may be cited as the Lynchburg Public Procurement Act. 
(b)  The purpose of this ordinance is to supplement the provisions of the Virginia Public Procurement Act (the Act) by enunciating the city's policies pertaining to governmental procurement from nongovernmental sources, to encourage competition among vendors and contractors, to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing by this city, to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement so that high quality goods and services may be obtained at the lowest possible price and to increase public confidence in procurement practices by providing safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85) 
Sec. 18-151. - Definitions. 
    The words defined in this section shall have the meanings set forth below throughout this ordinance: 
(a)  Competitive sealed bidding is a method of contractor selection which includes the following elements: 
(1)  Issuance of a written invitation to bid containing or incorporating by reference the specifications and contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. Unless the city has provided for prequalification of bidders, the Invitation to Bid shall include a statement of any requisite qualifications of potential contractors. When it is impractical to prepare initially a purchase description to support an award based on prices, an invitation to bid may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation to bid limited to those bidders whose offers have been qualified under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. 
(2)  Public notice of the invitation to bid at least ten days prior to the date set for receipt of bids by posting in a designated public area, or publication in a newspaper of general circulation, or both. In addition, bids may be solicited directly from potential contractors. Any such additional solicitation shall include businesses selected from a list made available by the office of minority business enterprise. 
(3)  Public opening and announcement of all bids received. 
(4)  Evaluation of bids based upon the requirements set forth in the invitation, which may include special qualifications of potential contractors, life cycle costing, value analysis and any other criteria such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose, which are helpful in determining acceptability. 
(5)  Award to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. When the terms and conditions of multiple bids are so provided in the invitation to bid, awards may be made to more than one bidder. 
(6)  Competitive sealed bidding shall not be required for procurement of professional services. 
(b)  Competitive negotiation is a method of contractor selection which includes the following elements: 
(1)  Issuance of a written request for proposal indicating in general terms that which is sought to be procured, specifying the factors which will be used in evaluating the proposal and containing or incorporating by reference the other applicable contractual terms and conditions, including any unique capabilities or qualifications which will be required of the contractor. 
(2)  Public notice of the request for proposal at least ten days prior to the date set for receipt of proposals by posting in a public area normally used for posting of public notices or by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the contract is to be performed, or both. In addition, proposals may be solicited directly from potential contractors. 
(3)  a.  Procurement of professional services. The city shall engage in individual discussions with two or more offerors deemed fully qualified, responsible and suitable on the basis of initial responses and with emphasis on professional competence to provide the required services. Repetitive informal interviews shall be permissible. Such offerors shall be encouraged to elaborate on their qualifications and performance data or staff expertise pertinent to the proposed project, as well as alternative concepts. The request for proposal shall not, however, request that offerors furnish estimates of man-hours or cost for services. At the discussion stage the city may discuss nonbinding estimates of total project costs, including, but not limited to, life cycle costing, and where appropriate, nonbinding estimates of price for services. Proprietary information from competing offerors shall not be disclosed to the public or to competitors. At the conclusion of discussion, outlined in this paragraph above, on the basis of evaluation factors published in the request for proposal and all information developed in the selection process to this point, the city shall select in the order of preference two or more offerors whose professional qualifications and proposed services are deemed most meritorious. Negotiations shall then be conducted, beginning with the offeror ranked first. If a contract satisfactory and advantageous to the city can be negotiated at a price considered fair and reasonable, the award shall be made to that offeror. Otherwise, negotiations with the offeror ranked first shall be formally terminated and negotiations conducted with the offeror ranked second, and so on until such a contract can be negotiated at a fair and reasonable price. Should the city determine in writing and in its sole discretion that only one offeror is fully qualified, or that one offeror is clearly more highly qualified and suitable than the others under consideration, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that offeror. 
b.  Procurement of other than professional services. Selection shall be made of two or more offerors deemed to be fully qualified and best suited among those submitting proposals, on the basis of the factors involved in the request for proposal, including price if so stated in the request for proposal. Negotiations shall then be conducted with each of the offerors so selected. Price shall be considered, but need not be the sole determining factor. After negotiations have been conducted with each offeror so selected, the city shall select the offeror which, in its opinion, has made the best proposal, and shall award the contract to that offeror. Should the city determine in writing and in its sole discretion that only one offeror is fully qualified, or that one offeror is clearly more highly qualified than the others under consideration, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that offeror. 
(c)  City shall mean the City of Lynchburg. 
(d)  Construction shall mean building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any structure, building or highway, and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property. 
(e)  Construction management contract shall mean a contract in which a party is retained by the owner to coordinate and administer contracts for construction services for the benefit of the owner, and may also include, if provided in the contract, the furnishing of construction services to the owner. 
(f)  Goods shall mean all material, equipment, supplies, printing and automated data processing hardware and software. 
(g)  Informality shall mean a minor defect or variation of a bid or proposal from the exact requirements of the invitation to bid, or the request for proposal, which does not affect the price, quality, quantity or delivery schedule for the goods, services or construction being procured. 
(h)  Nonprofessional services shall mean any services not specifically identified as professional services in the definition of professional services. 
(i)  Professional services shall mean work performed by an independent contractor within the scope of the practice of accounting, architecture, land surveying, landscape architecture, law, medicine, optometry or professional engineering. 
(j)  Potential bidder or offeror shall, for the purposes of section 18-159, mean a person who, at the time a public body negotiates and awards or proposes to award a contract, is engaged in the sale or lease of goods, or the sale of services, insurance or construction, of the type to be procured under such contract, and who at such time is eligible and qualified in all respects to perform that contract, and who would have been eligible and qualified to submit a bid or proposal had the contract been procured through competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation. 
(k)  Responsible bidder or offeror shall mean a person who has the capability, in all respects, to perform fully the contract requirements and the moral and business integrity and reliability which will assure good faith performance, and who has been prequalified, if required. 
(l)  Responsive bidder shall mean a person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the invitation to bid. 
(m)  Services shall mean any work performed by an independent contractor wherein the service rendered does not consist primarily of acquisition of equipment or materials, or the rental of equipment, materials and supplies. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85; Ord. No. O-88-015, § 1, 1-26-88) 
Sec. 18-152. - Methods of procurement. 
(a)  All contracts by the city with nongovernmental contractors for the purchase or lease of goods, or for the purchase of services, insurance or construction shall be awarded after competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation as provided in this section, unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(b)  Professional services shall be procured by competitive negotiation. 
(c)  (1)  Upon a determination, made in advance by the city manager and set forth in writing, that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the public, goods, services or insurance may be procured by competitive negotiation. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. 
Upon a written determination made in advance by city council that competitive negotiation is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous, insurance may be procured through a licensed agent or broker selected in the manner provided for the procurement of things other than professional services in subsection 18-151(3)b of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Lynchburg. The basis for this determination shall be documented in writing. 
(2)  Construction may be procured only by competitive sealed bidding, except that competitive negotiation may be used in the following instances upon a determination, made in advance by the city manager and set forth in writing, that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous to the public, which writing shall document the basis for this determination: 
a.  For the alteration, repair, renovation or demolition of buildings when the contract is not expected to cost more than $500,000.00; or 
b.  For the construction of highways and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property. 
(d)  Upon a determination in writing that there is only one source practicably available for that which is to be procured, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that source without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. The city manager or his designee shall issue a written notice stating that only one source was determined to be practicably available, and identifying that which is being procured, the contractor selected and the date on which the contract was or will be awarded. This notice shall be posted in a designated public area or published in a newspaper of general circulation on the day the city awards or announces its decision to award the contract, whichever occurs first. 
(e)  In case of emergency, a contract may be awarded without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation; however, such procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. The city manager or his designee shall issue a notice stating that the contract is being awarded on an emergency basis, and identifying that which is being procured, the contractor selected and the date on which the contract was or will be awarded. This notice shall be posted in a designated public area or published in a newspaper of general circulation on the day the city awards or announces its decision to award the contract, whichever occurs first, or as soon thereafter as is practicable. 
(f)  The city may award single or term contracts not to exceed $30,000.00 and contracts for microcomputers and related peripheral equipment and services not expected to exceed $30,000 without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation. Competition will be required wherever practical, pursuant to written policies and procedures adopted by the city manager. 
(g)  Upon a determination made in advance by the city manager and set forth in writing that the purchase of goods, products or commodities from a public auction sale is in the best interests of the public, such items may be purchased at the auction. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85; Ord. No. O-88-015, § 1, 1-26-88; Ord. No. O-88-284, § 1, 10-25-88; Ord. No. O-90-129, 5-8-90; Ord. No. O-96-041, 2-13-96; Ord. No. O-96-272, 10-8-96) 
Sec. 18-152.1. - Exceptions to requirement for competitive procurement. 
(a)  The city may enter into contracts without competition for the purchase of goods or services (i) which are performed or produced by persons, or in schools or workshops, under the supervision of the Virginia Department for the Visually Handicapped; or (ii) which are performed or produced by nonprofit sheltered workshops or other nonprofit organizations which offer transitional or supported employment services serving the handicapped. 
(b)  The city may enter into contracts without competition for (i) legal services; or (ii) expert witnesses and other services associated with litigation or regulatory proceedings. 
(c)  The city may extend the term of an existing contract for services to allow completion of any work undertaken but not completed during the original term of the contract. 
(d)  The city, while administering public assistance programs as defined in Section 63.1-87 or the fuel assistance program, may procure goods or personal services for direct use by the recipients of such programs without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiations if the procurement is made for an individual recipient. Contracts for the bulk procurement of goods or services for the use of recipients shall not be exempted from the requirements of section 18-152 of this Code. 
(e)  The city may enter into contracts without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation for insurance if purchased through an association of which it is a member if the association was formed and is maintained for the purpose of promoting the interest and welfare of and developing close relationships with similar public bodies; provided, such association has procured the insurance by use of competitive principles and provided that the city manager or his designee has made a determination in advance after reasonable notice to the public and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding and competitive negotiation are not fiscally advantageous to the public. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. 
(f)  The city may purchase goods and services by means of contracts obtained by the commonwealth through competitive sealed bidding. 
(Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85; Ord. No. O-88-015, § 1, 1-26-88) 
Sec. 18-152.2. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    In the solicitation or awarding of contracts, the city shall not discriminate because of the race, religion, color, sex or national origin of the bidder or offeror. Whenever solicitations are made, the city shall include businesses selected from a list made available by the Office of Minority Business Enterprise. 
(Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85) 
Sec. 18-153. - Bonds. 
    Bids and performance and payment bonds, payable to the City of Lynchburg as provided for in section 11-57 and section 11-58 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, shall be required in all construction contracts. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85) 
Sec. 18-154. - Cancellation, rejection of bids; waiver of informalities. 
(a)  An Invitation to Bid, a Request for Proposal, any other solicitation, or any and all bids or proposals may be cancelled or rejected. The reasons for cancellation or rejection shall be made part of the contract file. 
(b)  The city may waive informalities in bids. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85) 
Sec. 18-155. - Use of brand names. 
    Unless otherwise provided in the Invitation to Bid, the name of a certain brand, make or manufacturer does not restrict bidders to the specific brand, make or manufacturer named; it conveys the general style, type, character and quality of the article desired, and any article which the public body in its sole discretion determines to be the equal of that specified, considering quality, workmanship, economy of operation, and suitability for the purpose intended, shall be accepted. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Sec. 18-156. - Employment discrimination by contractor prohibited. 
    The city shall include in every contract of over $10,000.00 the provisions in (a) and (b) herein: 
(a)  During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows: 
(1)  The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, religion, color, sex or national origin, except where religion, sex or national origin is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the contractor. The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 
(2)  The contractor, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, will state that such contractor is an equal opportunity employer. 
(3)  Notices, advertisements and solicitations placed in accordance with federal law, rule or regulation shall be deemed sufficient for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section. 
(b)  The contractor will include the provisions of the foregoing paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) in every subcontract or purchase order of over $10,000.00, so that the provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85) 
Sec. 18-157. - Debarment. 
    The director of public works, in the case of construction projects, and the budget and procurement administrator, in all other matters, may, in the public interest, debar a prospective contractor for any of the causes in subsection (a), using the procedures in subsection (c). The existence of a cause for debarment under subsection (a), however, does not necessarily require that the contractor be debarred; the seriousness of the contractor's acts or omissions and any mitigating factors should be considered in making any debarment decision. 
(a)  Causes for debarment. The appropriate administrator/director may debar a prospective contractor for any of the causes listed in paragraphs (1) through (3) following: 
(1)  Conviction of or civil judgment for: 
a.  Commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with (i) obtaining, (ii) attempting to obtain, or (iii) performing a public contract or subcontract; 
b.  Violation of federal or state antitrust statutes relating to the submission of offers; 
c.  Commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, making false statements or receiving stolen property; or 
d.  Commission of any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty that seriously and directly affects the present responsibility of a government contractor or subcontractor. 
(2)  Violation of the terms of a government contract or subcontract so serious as to justify debarment, such as: 
a.  Willful failure to perform in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; or 
b.  A history of failure to perform, or of unsatisfactory performance of, one (1) or more contracts. 
(3)  Any other cause of so serious or compelling a nature that it affects the present responsibility of a government contractor or subcontractor. 
(b)  The budget and procurement administrator and the director of public works shall establish procedures for the prompt reporting, investigation and referral of matters appropriate for their consideration. 
(c)  Procedures for debarment. The following procedures governing the debarment decision making process are designed to be as informal as practicable, consistent with principles of fundamental fairness: 
(1)  Debarment shall be initiated by advising the prospective contractor and any specifically named affiliate, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that debarment is being considered. Said notice shall include: 
a.  The reasons for the proposed debarment in terms sufficient to put the contractor on notice of the conduct or transaction upon which it is based; 
b.  The causes relied upon under subsection (a); and 
c.  The potential effect of the proposed debarment. 
(2)  Debarment shall be a period commensurate with the seriousness of the cause. 
(3)  The prospective contractor may submit within 30 days after receipt of notice, in person, in writing, or through a representative, information and argument to the proposed debarment, including any additional specific information that raises a genuine dispute over the material fact. 
(4)  The appropriate administrator/director shall render a written decision within 15 days of the receipt of information and argument in opposition to the proposed debarment. 
(5)  The decision of the administrator/director shall be final unless the prospective contractor appeals within 30 days of receipt by invoking administrative procedures provided for by this ordinance, or in the alternative by instituting legal action as provided in the act. 
(6)  No contract shall be awarded to the contractor pending a debarment decision. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85; Ord. No. O-91-224, 9-10-91, eff. 10-1-91) 
Sec. 18-157.1. - Participation of small businesses and businesses owned by women and minorities. 
    The city shall establish programs consistent with all provisions of this division to facilitate the participation of small businesses and businesses owned by women and minorities in procurement transactions. Such programs shall be in writing, and shall include cooperation with the State Office of Minority Business Enterprise, the United States Small Business Administration and other public or private agencies. 
(Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85) 
Sec. 18-158. - Negotiation with lowest responsible bidder. 
    Unless cancelled or rejected, a responsive bid from the lowest responsible bidder shall be accepted as submitted, except that if the bid from the lowest responsible bidder exceeds available funds, the city may negotiate with the apparent low bidder to obtain a contract price within available funds. 
(a)  Procedures for negotiations. If the city wishes to negotiate with the apparent low bidder to obtain a contract price within available funds, negotiations shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The using agency shall provide the director of public works, in the case of construction projects, and the budget and procurement administrator, in all other matters, with a written determination that the apparent low bid exceeds available funds. Said determination shall be confirmed in writing by the director of finance or his designee. The using agency shall also provide the appropriate administrator/director with a suggested reduction in scope for the proposed purchase. 
(2)  The appropriate administrator/director shall advise the lowest responsible bidder, in writing, that the proposed purchase exceeds available funds. He shall further suggest a reduction in scope for the proposed purchase, and invite the lowest responsible bidder to amend its bid proposal based upon the proposed reduction in scope. 
(3)  Repetitive informal discussions with the lowest responsible bidder for purposes of obtaining a contract within available funds shall be permissible. 
(4)  The lowest responsible bidder shall submit an addendum to its bid, which addendum shall include the change in scope for the proposed purchase, the reduction in price and the new contract value. 
(5)  If the proposed addendum is acceptable to the city, the city may award a contract within funds available to the lowest responsible bidder based upon the amended bid proposal. 
(6)  If the city and the lowest responsible bidder cannot negotiate a contract within available funds, all bids shall be rejected. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85; Ord. No. O-91-224, 9-10-91, eff. 10-1-91) 
Sec. 18-158.1. - Public inspection of certain records. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, all proceedings, records, contracts and other public records relating to procurement transactions shall be open to the inspection of any citizen, or any interested person, firm or corporation, in accordance with the Virginia Freedom of Information Act (section 2.1-340 et seq. of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended). 
(b)  Cost estimates relating to a proposed procurement transaction prepared by or for the city shall not be open to public inspection. 
(c)  Any competitive sealed bidding bidder, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect bid records within a reasonable time after the opening of all bids but prior to award, except in the event that the city decides not to accept any of the bids and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, bid records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. 
(1)  Any competitive negotiation offeror, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect proposal records within a reasonable time after the evaluation and negotiations of proposals are completed but prior to award, except in the event that the city decides not to accept any of the proposals and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, proposal records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. 
(2)  Any inspection of procurement transaction records under this section shall be subject to reasonable restrictions to ensure the security and integrity of the records. 
(d)  Trade secrets or proprietary information submitted by a bidder, offeror or contractor in connection with a procurement transaction shall not be subject to public disclosure under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act; however, the bidder, offeror or contractor must invoke the protections of this section prior to or upon submission of the data or other materials, and must identify the data or other materials to be protected and state the reasons why protection is necessary. 
(Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85) 
Sec. 18-159. - Administrative appeals procedure. 
(a)  Any bidder, offeror or contractor may protest a decision to award or an award, appeal a decision to refuse to allow withdrawal of bids, appeal a decision of disqualification, debarment or a determination of nonresponsibility, or appeal a decision on disputes arising during the performance of a contract. 
(b)  Any protest or appeal pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with such administrative procedures as the city manager may prescribe. 
(1)  Any bidder, offeror or contractor shall submit a written protest or letter of appeal to the city manager with a copy to the director of public works, in the case of construction contracts, and the budget and procurement administrator, in all other matters, within the time constraints as set forth in the act. The written protest or appeal shall include the basis for the protest or appeal and the relief sought, and whether the bidder, offeror or contractor wishes to have a hearing with respect to the protest or appeal. 
(2)  If no hearing is requested, the city manager or his designee shall render a written decision to the bidder, offeror or contractor within ten days of receipt of the written protest or letter of appeal. 
(3)  If a hearing is requested, it shall be held within ten days of receipt of the written protest or letter of appeal, and a final decision shall be rendered within ten days of the hearing. During the hearing, the protesting party shall have the opportunity to present pertinent information and to cross-examine adverse witnesses. The hearing shall be an informal administrative proceeding rather than a judicial-type trial, and it will be conducted by a disinterested person, who may be a city employee, appointed by the city manager. 
(4)  The findings of fact shall be final and conclusive and shall not be set aside unless the same are fraudulent or arbitrary or capricious, or so grossly erroneous as to imply bad faith. No determination on an issue of law shall be final if appropriate legal action is instituted in a timely matter. 
(5)  Any party to the administrative procedure shall be entitled to institute judicial review if such action is brought within 30 days of receipt of the written decision. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85; Ord. No. O-91-224, 9-10-91, eff. 10-1-91) 
Sec. 18-160. - Preference for Virginia products and firms. 
(a)  In the case of a tie bid, preference shall be given to goods, services and construction produced in Virginia or provided by Virginia persons, firms or corporations, if such a choice is available; otherwise the tie shall be decided by lot. 
(b)  Whenever any bidder is a resident of any other state and such state under its laws allows a resident contractor of that state a preference, a like preference may be allowed to the lowest responsible bidder who is a resident of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85) 
Sec. 18-161. - Cooperative procurement. 
    The city may participate in, sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative procurement agreement with one or more other public bodies for the purpose of combining requirements to increase efficiency or reduce administrative expenses. Any public body which enters into a cooperative procurement agreement with the city shall comply with the policies and procurements adopted by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Sec. 18-162. - Adoption of Code of Virginia provisions. 
    The provisions of the following sections of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, are hereby enacted by reference and become a part of this ordinance as if fully set out herein: 
Section 11-63, "Ineligibility;" 
Section 11-64, "Appeal of Denial of Withdrawal of Bid;" 
Section 11-65, "Determination of Nonresponsibility;" 
Section 11-66, "Protest of Award or Decision to Award;" 
Section 11-67, "Effect of Appeal upon Contract;" 
Section 11-68, "Stay of Award During Protest;" 
Section 11-69, "Contractual Disputes;" 
Section 11-70, "Legal Actions;" and 
Sections 11-72 through 11-80, "Ethics in Public Contracting." 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-85-002, § 1, 1-8-85) 
Sec. 18-163. - Adoption of procurement manual. 
    The city manager is authorized and directed to establish procedures, which may be in the form of a procurement manual, to implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Sec. 18-164. - Separability. 
    If any provision of this ordinance or any application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. O-82-262, § 1, 12-14-82) 
Chapter 18.1 - CITY CONTRACTS AND PROCUREMENTS 

Sec. 18.1-1. - Title, purposes. 
(a)  This ordinance may be cited as the Lynchburg public procurement code. 
(b)  The city and the Lynchburg school system agree that the city's procurement division will oversee the procurement of goods and services for the Lynchburg public schools as well as the city. Accordingly, the word "city" when used in the Lynchburg Public Procurement Code shall be construed to also mean the Lynchburg Public Schools, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the intent or the context of the public procurement code. 
(c)  The purposes of this ordinance are (i) to prescribe how the city is to conduct procurements from nongovernmental sources; (ii) to prescribe policies and procedures based on competitive principles generally applicable to the city's procurement of goods and services that the city adopts as alternatives to certain provisions of the Virginia public procurement act, as allowed by Va. Code § 2.2-4343; and (iii) to adopt and supplement other provisions of the Virginia Public Procurement Act. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05; Ord No. O-09-062, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 18.1-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  The definitions contained in the Virginia Public Procurement Act, including without limitation, those at Va. Code § 2.2-4301, apply to this Lynchburg Public Procurement Code. 
(b)  In addition to the definitions contained in the Virginia Public Procurement Act, the following definitions apply to this Lynchburg Public Procurement Code: 
    Business day means a day that the City of Lynchburg government offices are officially open for business. 
    City manager means the city manager of the City of Lynchburg or his designee(s), and, if the city manager is absent or unable to carry out his duties, the person acting as city manager during such period of absence or incapacity. 
    City attorney means the city attorney of the City of Lynchburg or his designee(s), and if the city attorney is absent or unable to carry out his duties, the person acting as city attorney during such period of absence or incapacity. 
    Claim means a demand or assertion by a contractor seeking, as a matter of right, adjustment or interpretation of contract terms, payment of money, extension of time, or other relief with respect to the terms of a contract with the city. "Claim" also includes other disputes and matters in question between the contractor and the city arising out of, or relating to, a contract between the contractor and the city. 
    Contractor means the person entering into a contract with the city, as well as any successor, authorized assign, surety, or insurance company claiming contractor's rights through contractor's privity of contract with the city. "contractor" does not include subcontractors, vendors, suppliers, or lower tier subcontractors lacking privity of contract with the city. 
    Day means calendar day unless otherwise indicated. 
    Lynchburg PPTA/PPEA procedures means the City of Lynchburg implementation procedures and guidelines for the public-private transportation act of 1995 and the public-private education facilities and infrastructure act of 2002. 
    Occurrence means when a condition is encountered by a contractor that may result in a claim by the contractor against the city. In construction, an "occurrence" is a condition encountered as a project progresses (including without limitation, a differing site condition, alleged delay in, or interference with, contractor's performance by the city or its architect, engineer, or consultant or alleged errors or omissions in plans or specifications) that the contractor contends would entitle it to a change in the contract's price, schedule, or manner of performance, and an occurrence would not be a later dispute about payment for such a condition. 
    Procurement administrator means the procurement administrator for the City of Lynchburg or his designee(s), and, if the procurement administrator is absent or unable to carry out his duties, the person acting as procurement administrator during such period of absence or incapacity. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-3. - Methods of city procurement, nongovernmental services. 
    Unless otherwise authorized by law and approved by the city manager and city attorney, all procurement by the city from nongovernmental sources shall be conducted (1) pursuant to this Lynchburg Public Procurement Code; (2) pursuant to the Virginia Public-Private Transportation Act of 1995 ("PPTA") and the Lynchburg PPTA/PPEA procedures for projects within the PPTA's and the Lynchburg PPTA/PPEA procedures' scope, if the city manager so directs; or (3) pursuant to the Virginia public-private education facilities and infrastructure act of 2002 ("PPEA") and the Lynchburg PPTA/PPEA procedures for projects within the PPEA's and Lynchburg PPTA/PPEA procedures' scope, if the city manager so directs. Procurements conducted pursuant to the PPTA or PPEA and the Lynchburg PPTA/PPEA procedures are not subject to the Lynchburg Public Procurement Code or any provision thereof except to the extent such provision is expressly made applicable by the Lynchburg PPTA/PPEA procedures. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-4. - Provisions of Virginia Public Procurement Act that are and are not part of the Lynchburg Public Procurement Code. 
(a)  All provisions of the Virginia Public Procurement Act shall be a part of the Lynchburg public procurement code except the following: Va. Code § 2.2-4303.G., Va. Code § 2.2-4359 through § 2.2-4363, Va. Code § 2.2-4364 A, C, E, and F, and Va. Code § 2.2-4365 through § 2.2-4366. 
(b)  In lieu of Va. Code § 2.2-4359 and those portions of Va. Code §§ 2.2-4364 to 4365 and § 2.2-4360 referenced in Va. Code § 2.2-4359, the city has adopted the alternative policies and procedures at section 18.1-5. 
(c)  In lieu of Va. Code § 2.2-4360 through § 2.2-4363, Va. Code § 2.2-4364 A, C, E, and F, and Va. Code § 2.2-4365 through § 2.2-4366, the city has adopted the alternative policies and procedures at sections 18.1-6 and 18.1-7. 
(d)  In lieu of Va. Code § 2.2-4303.G., the city has adopted the alternative policies and procedures at section 18.1-8. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-5. - Alternative policies on determination of non-responsibility in lieu of Va. Code § 2.2-4359 and portions of Va. Code §§ 2.2-4360, 4364, and 4365. 
    The following contains the exclusive procedures a bidder may use to protest a determination by the city that the bidder is not responsible: 
(a)  Following the public opening and announcement of bids received on an Invitation to bid, the city shall evaluate the bids in accordance with element 4 of the definition of "competitive sealed bidding" in Va. Code § 2.2-4301. Following bid opening, the city also shall determine whether the apparent low bidder is responsible. If the city so determines, then it may proceed with an award in accordance with element 5 of the definition of "competitive sealed bidding" in § 2.2-4301. If the city determines that the apparent low bidder is not responsible, it shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  The city first shall (i) notify the apparent low bidder in writing of its determination, (ii) disclose the factual support for the determination, and (iii) allow the apparent low bidder an opportunity to inspect any documents that relate to the determination, if so requested by the bidder within five business days after receipt of the notice. 
(2)  Within ten business days after receipt of the notice, the bidder may submit rebuttal information challenging the city's determination. If bidder fails to submit rebuttal information to the city within ten business days after receipt of the notice, the city may make its final determination without considering rebuttal information. Unless the city and bidder agree otherwise, within 15 days after the city has provided the notice to bidder, the city shall issue its final written determination of responsibility based on all information in the city's possession, including any rebuttal information timely received from the bidder. At the same time, the city shall notify, with return receipt requested, the bidder in writing of its final determination. 
(3)  Notice of the city's final determination shall state the basis for the determination, which shall be final and conclusive unless the bidder appeals the decision within ten days after receipt of the notice by instituting legal action in Lynchburg Circuit Court, Lynchburg, Virginia, and by serving the city with the action within that time. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the existence of information from which the city could determine the bidder not to be responsible, the bidder may offer the city additional assurances of responsible performance if it were to be awarded the contract, either pending the city's final written determination of whether bidder is responsible or during pendency of any appeal of a final determination of the bidder's non-responsibility, which the city, in its sole discretion, may consider and accept as curing the city's concerns with bidder's apparent non-responsibility. 
(b)  The provisions of this section 18.1-5 shall not apply to procurements involving the prequalification of bidders and the rights of any potential bidders under such prequalification to appeal a decision that such bidders are not responsible. 
(c)  If, upon appeal pursuant to subsection 18.1-5(a)3, it is determined that the final determination of non-responsibility by the city was not (i) an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or (ii) in accordance with applicable state law, regulation, or the terms or conditions of the invitation to bid, the sole relief shall be a finding that the bidder is a responsible bidder for the contract in question. 
(d)  A bidder contesting a determination that he is not a responsible bidder for a particular contract shall proceed under this section and may not protest the award or proposed award under the provisions of section 18.1-6. 
(e)  No bidder shall have the right to challenge the responsibility of another bidder. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the city, when procuring by competitive negotiation, to furnish a statement of the reasons why a particular proposal was not selected. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-6. - Alternative policies on protests of award or decisions to award a contract in lieu of Va. Code § 2.2-4360 through § 2.2-4362 and Va. Code § 2.2-4364. 
(a)  The following are the exclusive procedures for a bidder or offeror to protest the city's award or decision to award a contract. 
(1)  Any protest to award a contract shall be in writing and shall be delivered so that it is received by the city manager not later than five business days after announcement of the award or decision to award, whichever comes first. Otherwise any such protest shall be deemed to be waived. 
(2)  Except for a protest of an emergency or sole source procurement, a protest of a city award or decision to award a contract may only be made by a person who submitted a bid or proposal for the procurement at issue and who was reasonably likely to have its proposal accepted but for the city's decision. In the case of an emergency or sole source procurement, a protest may only be made by a person who can show that he was reasonably likely to have submitted a successful bid or proposal if the procurement had been other than emergency or sole source. 
(3)  Protests shall only be granted if (1) the protester has complied fully with this section 18.1-6 and there has been a violation of law, the Lynchburg Public Procurement Code, or mandatory terms of the solicitation that clearly prejudiced the protestor in a material way, or (2) a statute requires voiding of the decision. 
(4)  The city manager shall issue a written decision on a protest within ten days of its receipt by the city manager. 
(5)  If the protest is denied, the protestor may only appeal the denial or otherwise contest or challenge the procurement by then filing suit in the Lynchburg Circuit Court, Lynchburg, Virginia, and serving the city with such suit within ten days of such denial. Otherwise, the city manager's decision shall be final and conclusive, and the protester's right to appeal the denial or to otherwise contest or challenge the procurement shall be deemed to be waived. 
(6)  The city should defer award of a contract where the decision to award has been protested unless there is a written determination by the city manager that proceeding without delay is necessary to protect the public interest or unless the bid or offer of the prospective awardee would expire. 
(7)  The validity of a contract awarded and accepted in good faith shall not be affected by the fact that a protest or appeal is filed. 
(8)  The exclusive relief allowed if a protest is granted is to void the decision being protested. If a contract has already been awarded and performance under the contract has begun, the contract need not be voided if not in the public interest to do so. Under no circumstances will any monetary amount be allowed to the protestor as part of any relief granted. 
(9)  Strictly following these procedures shall be a mandatory prerequisite for protest of the city's award or decision to award a contract. Failure by a bidder to follow these procedures strictly shall preclude that bidder's protest and be deemed to constitute a waiver of any protest. 
(b)  A protest may not be based upon the alleged non-responsibility of a person to whom the city awards or makes a decision to award a contract. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-7. - Alternative policies on claims in lieu of Va. Code § 2.2-4363, Va. Code § 2.2-4364 E, and Va. Code § 2.2-4365 through § 2.2-4366. 
    Any claims by a contractor or anyone claiming on the contractor's behalf against the city arising under or relating to any contract between the city and the contractor shall only be resolved as follows: 
(a)  Initial notice, submission of claim, and consideration. 
(1)  The contractor shall give the city written notice of any claim within ten days of the beginning of the occurrence of the event leading to the claim being made. The written notice shall be a document from the contractor addressed to the city official or employee designated by the contract to receive such notice, or if no one is so designated, to the city manager. The written notice shall clearly state the contractor's intention to make a claim, shall describe the occurrence involved, and shall be transmitted in a manner to ensure receipt by the city official or employee designated in the contract to receive such notice, or if no one is so designated, by the city manager, within the ten days. The contractor shall submit the claim and any supporting data to the city within 30 days after the occurrence giving rise to the claim ends. The burden shall be on the contractor to substantiate that it has given written notice and submitted its claim in accordance with this provision. 
(2)  The claim must be certified under oath as true and correct by a principal of contractor; must be for specific relief; if any money is sought, must specify the dollar amount sought; and must contain sufficient supporting documentation to reasonably allow its consideration, including without limitation, any documentation required by the contract. The burden shall be on the contractor to substantiate the claim. 
(3)  In circumstances where the terms and conditions of a contract require the contractor to submit a claim to an architect, engineer, or consultant for decision or to appeal a decision of an architect, engineer, or consultant, or to provide additional supporting documentation for its claim, the contractor shall comply with such terms and conditions in addition to these procedures. No decision by the architect, engineer, or consultant shall be binding on the city, but such decision shall have whatever effect on the contractor that the contract provides. 
(4)  Following consideration by the architect, engineer, or consultant, if applicable, and following initial, informal consideration by the city manager, the parties shall endeavor to resolve any claim through direct negotiations, and if such direct negotiations fail, and if the city requests, by non-binding mediation conducted pursuant to the rules of the American Arbitration Association, with the site of the mediation being Lynchburg, Virginia. 
(5)  Should the claim remain unresolved for more than 60 days after it is submitted, then the city manager shall, within no later than 90 days after the claim's submission, render a written decision on the claim on behalf of the city. The contractor may not institute any legal action with respect to the claim until after the city manager renders his written decision or 90 days from its receipt by the city manager has passed, whichever comes first. 
(b)  Appeal of denial of claim. 
(1)  If the city denies in whole or part a claim by a contractor or more than 90 days have passed since the claim was received by the city manager but no written decision has been issued, the contractor may appeal denial of the claim by instituting a lawsuit or chancery action, as appropriate, in the Lynchburg circuit court, Lynchburg, Virginia, or if the subject or amount in controversy is within its jurisdiction, the Lynchburg general district court, Lynchburg, Virginia, and may thereafter pursue all available appeals in Virginia state courts, to the extent they have jurisdiction. 
(2)  The contractor must initiate its appeal of the claim within 180 days of the date it first has the right to do so or the claim will be barred and the city manager's decision will be binding and conclusive. 
(3)  The contractor may not amend its claim on appeal to increase the amount of money sought. 
(c)  In the event of any claim arising, contractor shall continue its performance diligently during such claim's pendency and thereafter as if no claim had arisen. During the pendency of any claim in connection with the payments of moneys, contractor shall be entitled to receive payments for non-disputed items, subject to any right of set-off by the city. 
(d)  These procedures and the provisions of this Lynchburg public procurement code and the contract supersede any right at common law by contractor for a claim of material breach or for rescission of such contract. 
(e)  Any purportedly binding arbitration provision in a contract with the city shall be void and of no effect unless the arbitration has expressly been considered and specifically approved in writing by the city manager and city attorney. 
(f)  No claims by a contractor for cumulative impacts of purported schedule delays may be made. Contractors must provide separate written notice and separate claims for each alleged schedule delay as it arises. 
(g)  These procedures shall be deemed automatically incorporated by reference into any contract entered into by the city. However, the city manager or his designee(s) should ensure this section is referenced or included in all the city's contracts. 
(h)  The city manager or his designee(s) may further supplement this section 18.1-7 of this Lynchburg Public Procurement Code with the terms and conditions of any contract. 
(i)  Complete satisfaction of this section 18.1-7 is an absolute prerequisite for contractor to pursue a claim arising under or relating to the contract. Failure by contractor to satisfy any provision of this section 18.1-7 shall constitute a waiver by contactor of the claim and shall preclude the contractor's further pursuit of such claim. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-8. - Small purchase procedures. 
    Subject to such small purchase procedures as are established in the procurement manual adopted by the city manager pursuant to section 18.1-12, the city manager, or those to whom he delegates authority, may enter into single or term contracts for goods and services other than professional services if the aggregate or sum of all phases is not expected to exceed $50,000.00. Such small purchase procedures shall provide for reasonable competition when practicable, including, without limitation, when such small purchases are for over $10,000.00, use of three quotes when reasonably practicable. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-9. - Negotiations when all bids exceed available funds. 
(a)  Unless cancelled or rejected, a responsive bid from the lowest responsible bidder shall be accepted as submitted, except that, if such bid exceeds available funds, and if the city deems it appropriate to do so rather than cancel the solicitation, the city may negotiate with the lowest responsive, responsible bidder to obtain a contract price within available funds using the procedures set out in this section. 
(1)  If the using agency wishes to conduct negotiations pursuant to this section, it shall provide the procurement administrator with a written determination that the bid from lowest responsive, responsible bidder exceeds available funds. This determination shall be confirmed in writing by the director of finance or his designee. The using agency shall also provide the procurement administrator with suggested measures to bring the proposed purchase within budget through negotiations with the lowest responsive, responsible bidder, including reductions in scope, changes in quality, value engineering, changes in terms and conditions, or changes in schedule. 
(2)  The procurement administrator shall advise the lowest responsive, responsible bidder, in writing, that the proposed purchase exceeds available funds. He shall further invite proposed measures, such as a reduction in scope, change in quality, value engineering, changes in terms or conditions, or changes in schedule for the proposed purchase, and invite the lowest responsive, responsible bidder to amend its bid based upon the proposed measures to bring the purchase within available funds. 
(3)  Informal discussions between the city and the lowest responsive, responsible bidder, either in person, by e-mail, by telephone, or by other means, may be used to attempt to obtain a contract within available funds. 
(4)  Following any successful negotiations, the lowest responsive, responsible bidder shall submit a proposed addendum to its bid, which addendum shall include the specific changes in the proposed purchase, the reduction in price, and the new contract value. The addendum shall be reviewed by the purchasing agency, the city manager, and city attorney for acceptability. 
(5)  If an addendum is acceptable to the city, the city may award a contract within funds available to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder based upon the amended bid proposal. 
(6)  If the city and the lowest responsive, responsible bidder cannot negotiate a contract within available funds, all bids shall be rejected. 
(b)  These procedures shall be deemed to be incorporated automatically in all invitations to bid issued by the city. However, the city manager or his designee(s) should ensure this section is set out in all invitations to bid. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-10. - Debarment. 
    The procurement administrator, may, in the public interest, debar a prospective contractor for any of the causes in subsection (a) using the procedures in subsection (c). The existence of a cause for debarment under subsection (a), however, does not necessarily require that the contractor be debarred. The seriousness of the contractor's acts or omissions showing non-responsibility; the ability and willingness of the contractor to promptly correct them; any mitigating factors; and the public interest should be considered in making any debarment decision. 
(a)  Causes for debarment. The procurement administrator may debar a prospective contractor for any of the causes listed in paragraphs (1) through (3) following: 
(1)  Conviction of or civil judgment of the contractor or any of its principals within the last five years for: 
a.  Commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with (i) obtaining, (ii) attempting to obtain, or (iii) performing a public contract or subcontract; 
b.  Violation of federal or state antitrust statutes; 
c.  Commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, making false statements, or receiving stolen property; or 
d.  Commission of any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty that seriously and directly affects the present responsibility of a government contractor or subcontractor. 
(2)  Violation of the terms of a government contract or subcontract so serious as to justify debarment, such as: 
a.  Willful failure to perform in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; or 
b.  A history of failure to perform, or of unsatisfactory performance of, one or more contracts. 
(3)  Any other cause of so serious or compelling a nature that it affects the contractor's present responsibility. 
(b)  The procurement administrator shall establish procedures for the prompt reporting, investigation and referral of matters relating to potential contractors who should be considered for debarment appropriate for the city manager's and city attorney's consideration. 
(c)  Procedures for debarment. The following procedures governing the debarment decision-making process are designed to be as informal as practicable, consistent with principles of fundamental fairness: 
(1)  Debarment shall be initiated by the procurement administrator, after coordinating with the city manager and city attorney, notifying the prospective contractor by certified mail, return receipt requested, that debarment is being considered. This notice shall include: 
a.  The reasons for the proposed debarment in terms sufficient to put the contractor on notice of the circumstances upon which it is based; 
b.  The procedures the contractor may take to examine evidence the city has supporting the proposed debarment; 
c.  The procedures the contractor may take to oppose the proposed disbarment; and 
d.  The potential effect of the proposed debarment. 
(2)  Debarment shall be for a period commensurate with the seriousness of the cause. 
(3)  The prospective contractor may submit to the procurement administrator, within 30 days after receipt of notice, written information and argument to the proposed debarment, including any additional specific information that raises a genuine dispute over a material fact. The prospective contractor may request a hearing in person, with counsel present, before the city manager and city attorney. 
(4)  The city manager, after conferring with the city attorney, may, in his discretion, grant or deny a hearing in person with the contractor and the contractor's attorney and take such other action on the debarment as the evidence and circumstances warrant. 
(d)  The city manager may, after conferring with the city attorney, temporarily suspend from consideration for award of any city contract a potential contractor whom the city notifies that it is considering for debarment if the public interest so requires. In such cases, the city manager should give expedited consideration to the debarment so as to afford the contractor as prompt a consideration of its case as is reasonably practicable. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-11. - Procedures for withdrawal of bid due to error (in implementation of Va. Code § 2.2-4330). 
(a)  To withdraw a bid after bid opening due to error, a bidder must satisfy the substantive requirements of Va. Code § 2.2-4330. In addition, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The bidder shall give notice in writing of his claim of right to withdraw his bid within two business days after the conclusion of the bid opening procedure and shall submit original work papers with such notice. 
(2)  The mistake may be proved only from the original work papers, documents and materials delivered as required herein. 
(b)  This section shall be deemed to be incorporated automatically into all invitations to bid issued by the city pursuant to the Lynchburg Public Procurement Code. Nonetheless, the city manager or his designee(s) should ensure that this section is set out in all invitations to bid. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-12. - Adoption of procurement manual. 
    The city manager is authorized to establish and adopt procedures, which may be in the form of a procurement manual, to implement and supplement the provisions of this Lynchburg Public Procurement Code. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-13. - Delegations of authority and responsibilities. 
(a)  Subject to the restrictions in subsection 18.1-13(d) and (e), the city manager is delegated authority to take all actions for the city pursuant to this Lynchburg Public Procurement Code. 
(b)  Subject to the restrictions in subsection 18.1-13(c), (d) and (e) and to the procedures adopted by the city manager pursuant to section 18.1-12, the city manager, city attorney, and procurement administrator may delegate any of their duties and authority they have under this Lynchburg Public Procurement Code to other city officials and employees. 
(c)  The city school superintendent, or his designee, shall have the authority to sign contracts and other documents and to take all actions for the procurement of goods and services for the public schools pursuant to this Lynchburg Public Procurement Code. 
(d)  The following authority may not be delegated: 
(1)  The authority under section 18.1-3 of the city manager and city attorney to approve procurements from nongovernmental sources when such procurements are to be done other than pursuant to the Lynchburg Public Procurement Code or the Lynchburg PPTA/PPEA procedures. 
(2)  The city manager's authority to approve binding arbitration pursuant to subsection 18.1-7(e). 
(3)  The city manager's authority under subsection 18.1-10(d) to take final action on a debarment. 
(4)  The authority given in subsection 18.1-13(d) to approve payment for changes and claims. 
(e)  Provided that the change or claim will not cause total expenditures for a contract to exceed the amount budgeted for that contract, authority to approve changes and claims is delegated as follows: 
(1)  The city manager may approve a change or claim that increases the amount of a contract by no more than $50,000.00. 
(2)  The procurement administrator may approve a change or claim that increases the amount of a contract by no more than $50,000.00. 
(3)  The city school superintendent or his designee may approve a change or claim that increases the amount of a contract for the public schools by no more than $50,000.00. 
(4)  Any city official or employee to whom the city manager has specifically delegated authority in writing may approve a change or claim that increases the amount of a contract by no more than $50,000.00. 
(f)  Approval of changes or claims that increase a contract amount by more than $50,000.00 or that will cause total expenditures for a city contract to exceed the amount budgeted for that contract may only be made by the city council. Approval of changes or claims that increase a contract amount by more than $50,000.00 or that will cause total expenditures for a public school contract to exceed the amount budgeted for that contract may only be made by the school board. 
(g)  The city manager may place such conditions and restrictions as he deems appropriate on the exercise of any authority granted to the procurement administrator by this Lynchburg Public Procurement Code and on the exercise of any authority delegated to any city official or employee pursuant to this Lynchburg Public Procurement Code. 
(h)  Nothing in this section 18.1-13 shall be construed as granting authority to any person to incur any contract obligation on behalf of the city or the city schools beyond appropriations available for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05; Ord No. O-09-062, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 18.1-14. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this ordinance or any application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this ordinance that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. O-05-161, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 18.1-15. - Design-build and construction management contracts. 
(a)  While competitive sealed bidding remains the preferred method of construction contracting, the city may enter into a contract for construction on a fixed price or not-to-exceed price design-build or construction management basis, in compliance with the requirements of this section once the city has obtained the approval of the Commonwealth of Virginia Design-Build/Construction Management Review Board (the review board) pursuant to section 2.2-2403.D.4 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(b)  Prior to making a determination as to the use of design-build or construction management for a specific construction project, the city shall employ or contract with a licensed architect or engineer with professional competence appropriate to the project to advise the city regarding the use of design-build or construction management for that project and to assist in the preparation of the request for qualifications and the request for proposals and the evaluation of such proposals. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of an RFP, the city manager or procurement administrator shall: 
(1)  Determine in writing that a design-build or construction management contract is more advantageous for the construction project than competitive sealed bidding, that there is benefit to the city in using a design-build or construction management contract, and that competitive sealed bidding is not practical or fiscally advantageous; and 
(2)  Appoint an evaluation committee (committee) of not less than three members, one of whom shall be the architect or professional engineer employed by or under contract with the city. 
(3)  The procurement administrator shall issue a written RFP by posting both on a public bulletin board and the city's website at least ten days preceding the date set for the receipt of proposals. In addition, proposals may be solicited directly from potential offerors. The RFP shall: 
a.  Define the pre-design, design phase, bid phase and/or construction phase services to be performed by the design-builder or construction manager; 
b.  Include and define the requirements of the specific construction project in areas such as site plans, floor plans, exterior elevations, basic building envelope materials, fire protection information plans, structural, mechanical (HVAC) and electrical systems, and special telecommunications; 
c.  Specify the criteria which will be used in evaluating the proposals; 
d.  Contain or incorporate by reference the applicable contractual terms and conditions, including any unique capabilities or qualifications which will be required of offerors; and 
e.  Include such other requirements as the city manager or procurement administrator deems appropriate for the construction project. 
(4)  The RFP shall request of offerors only such information as is appropriate for an objective evaluation of all offerors pursuant to the specified criteria. The procurement administrator shall receive and consider comments concerning specifications or other provisions in the RFP, prior to the time set for receipt of proposals. 
(5)  Each offeror shall submit a cost proposal and a technical proposal. Cost proposals shall be sealed separately from technical proposals. Cost proposals shall include a lump sum or guaranteed maximum price for all requested services. Upon receipt of an offeror's technical and cost proposals, the offeror's cost proposal shall be secured by the procurement administrator and kept sealed until evaluation of all technical proposals is completed. 
(6)  The evaluation committee shall evaluate each technical proposal and select two or more offerors deemed to be fully qualified and best suited among those submitting proposals based on the criteria set forth in the RFP for further consideration. The evaluation committee shall hold discussions with each of the selected offerors exercising care to discuss the same owner information with each offeror. In addition, the committee shall not disclose any trade secret or proprietary information for which the offeror has invoked protection pursuant to section 2.2-4342.F of the Code of Virginia. 
(7)  Upon completion of the discussions, the committee shall determine whether any changes to the proposals should be requested to correct errors or omissions or to clarify ambiguities, or to incorporate project improvements or additional details identified by the committee during its review. Offerors may submit revised technical proposals, as well as sealed modifications to their cost proposals. The committee will complete its evaluations of the revised technical proposals. Following opening of the cost proposals, the committee shall make its recommendation to the procurement administrator based upon the criteria included in the RFP. Award shall be made to the fully qualified offeror determined to offer the best value in response to the RFP. 
(8)  Should the procurement administrator determine in writing that only one offeror is fully qualified, or that one offeror is clearly more highly qualified than the other offerors under consideration, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that offeror. 
(9)  The city manager may promulgate such additional procedures, not inconsistent with the provisions of this section or the rules and regulations of the review board, and consistent with the procedures for the procurement of nonprofessional services through competitive negotiation, as deemed necessary and appropriate to effect the selection and evaluation of offerors and the award of design-build and construction management contracts. 
(Ord. of 6-12-07, Ord. No. O-07-088) 
Chapter 19 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ambulances, Ch. 5; buildings, Ch. 11; fire districts, § 11-5; exemption of fire-fighting apparatus from traffic regulations, § 25-132; following, parking near fire apparatus, § 25-133; driving over fire hose, § 25-134. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1-19-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Fire department, § 39. 
Cross reference- Authority of fire officials to direct traffic, § 25-11. 
State Law reference- Fire departments, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1 et seq. 

Sec. 19-16. - Composition. 
    The fire department shall consist of a chief, assistant to the chief and such number of officers and other personnel as the council may, on the recommendation of the city manager, deem necessary for proper fire prevention and suppression work of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1) 
Sec. 19-17. - Physical qualifications of members. 
    Neither the chief nor any member of the fire department shall qualify until he shall have been physically examined and found to be physically fit to perform the duties he is to undertake. 
(Code 1959, § 13-2) 
Sec. 19-18. - Appointment of chief; term. 
    The city manager shall appoint a chief of the fire department, whose term of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 13-3) 
Sec. 19-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed § 19-19. 
Sec. 19-20. - Police powers of firemen fire fighters. 
    The officers and members of the fire department are hereby empowered during the time of a fire and while responding to any alarm or notice of fire with the powers and functions of policemen police officers, and in such capacity, may do all things necessary for the public safety. 
(Code 1959, § 13-5) 
Sec. 19-21. - Summoning fire-fighting, ambulance, or other emergency equipment without just cause. 
(a)  Any person who, without just cause therefor, calls or summons, by telephone or otherwise, any ambulance, fire-fighting apparatus or other emergency vehicle or equipment, or any person who maliciously activates a manual or automatic fire alarm in any building used for public assembly or for any other public use, including, but not limited to, schools, theatres, stores, office buildings, shopping centers and malls, coliseums and arenas, regardless of whether ambulances, fire apparatus or other emergency equipment responds or not, shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who aids, counsels or procures another, without just cause therefor, to call or summons by telephone, street alarm box, or otherwise, any emergency equipment described in paragraph (a) above shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 13-6; Ord. No. O-81-265, § 1, 11-10-81) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212. 
Sec. 19-22. - Disobedience of orders of officer in command at fire. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person at a fire to refuse or neglect to obey any order duly given by the officer in command. 
(Code 1959, § 13-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 27-19. 
Sec. 19-23. - Power of officer in command at fire to order destruction of property. 
    The officer commanding at a fire may direct the pulling down or destroying of any fence, house or other thing which he may judge necessary to be pulled down or destroyed, to prevent the further spreading of the fire, and for this purpose, may require such assistance from all present as he shall judge necessary. 
(Code 1959, § 13-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 27-20. 
Sec. 19-24. - Emergency firemen. 
    In times of emergency, the chief of the fire department may appoint such additional number of firemen as may seem necessary, report of which shall be made to the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 13-9) 
Sec. 19-25. - Duplicate keys to alarm boxes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the authority of the chief of the fire department, to make or cause to be made, or have in his possession, a duplicate or impression of the key of any fire alarm box. Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 13-10) 
Sec. 19-26. - Tampering with or defacing fire alarm system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with the alarm boxes, poles, wires, insulators, batteries or any other thing connected with the fire alarm system or to deface the poles or alarm boxes of the system. 
(Code 1959, § 13-11) 
Sec. 19-27. - Willful injury to fire apparatus. 
    If any person shall willfully injure any of the fire apparatus in the custody of the fire department, he shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 13-12) 
Sec. 19-28. - Hindering firemen. 
    If any person shall willfully hinder or attempt to hinder any fireman in the discharge of his duty, such person shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 13-13) 
Sec. 19-29. - Assault, battery on firefighters. 
    Any person who shall commit a simple assault or assault and battery on any member of the fire department while engaged in his official duties shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
Sec. 19-30. - Emergency medical services. 
    The Lynchburg Fire Department shall be a designated emergency response agency (DERA) for the delivery of emergency medical services within the city and its primary service area shall include all areas within the legal geographical boundaries of the City of Lynchburg. 
(Ord. of 9-11-12, Ord. No. O-12-108) 
Sec. 19-31. - Fees for removal of water from basements. 
(a)  If the fire department is requested on more than two occasions to pump water from the same basement and the fire department believes that the basement flooding has been caused by the same problem, the property owner or tenant, as the case may be, may be required to submit information to the fire chief to demonstrate that reasonable efforts have been made to correct the problem causing the flooding. If the property owner or tenant is unable to demonstrate that reasonable efforts have been made to rectify the problems causing the flooding, the fire chief, at his discretion, will either charge a fee of $50.00 for each incident of basement pumping or basement pumping may be discontinued at such location. In making his decision, the fire chief shall consider the cause of the flooding, the measures that must be taken to correct the problem and the cost of the repair work. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or tenant to furnish the fire chief with all information necessary to make a decision regarding basement pumping. The property owner or tenant shall furnish the fire chief with a written statement from a licensed contractor setting forth the cause of the basement flooding and the estimated cost of the necessary repairs. 
(b)  This fee would be the responsibility of the resident and/or owner. In the case of rental property the owner of the property would be responsible. 
(c)  No fee would be charged in the event of natural disasters. 
(d)  No substance, other than uncontaminated water, will be pumped from a basement by fire department personnel. 
(Ord. No. O-84-181, § 1, 6-12-84, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-87-095, § 1, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 19-32. - Local fire marshal. 
    The city council shall appoint a fire marshal for the city. The fire marshal shall report to and work under the supervision and control of the chief of the fire department. The chief of the fire department, with the approval of the city manager, shall have the authority to remove the fire marshal for cause. The chief of the fire department, with the approval of the city manager, is authorized to appoint such deputy or assistant fire marshals as may be necessary to assist the fire marshal in the performance of his duties. The fire marshal, deputy fire marshals and assistant fire marshals shall have all of the duties and powers that are set forth in Title 27, Chapter 3, Sections 27-30 through 27-37.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. Such powers and duties shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(a)  The fire marshal shall make an investigation into the origin and cause of fires and explosions occurring within the city. 
(b)  In making investigations into the origin and cause of every fire and explosion occurring within the limits of the city, the fire marshal may issue a summons directed to the sheriff commanding the sheriff to summon witnesses to attend before them at such time and place as they may direct. Witnesses, on whom the summons before mentioned is served, may be compelled by the fire marshal to attend and give evidence, and shall be liable in like manner as if the summons had been issued by a justice of the peace in a criminal case. They shall be sworn by the fire marshal before giving evidence, and their evidence shall be reduced to writing by them, or under their direction, and subscribed by them respectively. 
(c)  The fire marshal shall have the duties and powers at fires as set forth in Virginia Code Section 27-34, to be present at the fire and advise and act in concert with such police officers as may be present; and, for preserving order at and during the existence of such fire, and for the protection of property, the fire marshal shall have concurrent powers with the police officers, and the chief or other officer in charge, but shall not exercise any authority which will conflict with the powers of any chief or other officer in command of any fire department in the discharge of their special duties as such. 
(d)  The fire marshal is authorized to take and preserve any property found at the scene of a fire or explosion during his presence there while in the act of extinguishing such or found later with the consent of the owner or pursuant to Virginia Code Section 27-32.1, which property indicates the fire or explosion was intentionally caused. 
(e)  The fire marshal shall have the authority to arrest, to procure and serve warrants of arrest and to issue summons in the manner authorized by general law for violation of fire prevention and fire safety laws and related ordinances. 
(f)  The fire marshal shall have the same police powers as a sheriff, police officer or law enforcement officer. The investigation and prosecution of all offenses involving hazardous materials, fires, fire bombings, bombings, attempts or threats to commit such offenses, false alarms relating to such offenses, possession and manufacture of explosive devices, substances and fire bombs shall be the responsibility of the fire marshal. 
(g)  The fire marshal shall have the right to enter upon any property from which a release of any hazardous material, hazardous waste, or regulated substance, as defined in Virginia Code Section 10.1-1400 or Virginia Code Section 62.1-44.34:8 has occurred, or is reasonably suspected to have occurred, and which has entered into the ground water, surface water or soils of the city in order to investigate the extent and cause of any such release. 
Whenever the words fire marshal or local fire official or fire official are used in the VSFPC or the City of Lynchburg Fire Prevention Code or Chapter 19, Article 3 of the City Code, they shall mean both the fire marshal, deputy fire marshal(s) or assistant fire marshal(s) except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Ord. No. O-04-121, 9-14-04; Ord. No. O-08-099, 7-8-08) 
Secs. 19-33-19-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Secs. 19-40-19-40.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-88-274, § 2, enacted Oct. 11, 1988, repealed §§ 19-40--9-40.2, which pertained to adopting the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code/1981, establishing and describing the duties of the fire official, and setting out amendments to the fire prevention code. Said sections were derived from Code 1959, § 13-1.1; and ordinance adopted Dec. 13, 1977; Ord. No. O-83-053, § 1, adopted March 22, 1983; and Ord. No. O-84-141, § 1, adopted June 12, 1984, effective July 1, 1984. 
Sec. 19-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-81-149, § 3, adopted June 23, 1981, repealed § 19-41, concerning leaf burning. Former § 19-41 was derived from an ordinance of Oct. 12, 1976. 
Sec. 19-42. - Adoption of code. 
    For the purposes of establishing rules and regulations to safeguard life, and property and public welfare from the hazards of substances, materials or devices and from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the use of or occupancy of buildings, structures, sheds, tents, lots or premises, that certain fire prevention code known as the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code 2012 edition, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, amended, added or changed is hereby adopted and incorporated, subject to the aforesaid deletions, modifications, amendments, additions and changes as fully as if set out at length herein, including all appendices and all of the codes and standards referenced therein, as provided by Virginia Code Section 1-220. As provided by Virginia Code Section 27-97, the following Appendices as written by the International Code Council and included as part of the 2012 edition of the International Fire Code, to-wit: Appendix B - Fire Flow Requirements For Buildings, Appendix C - Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution, and Appendix D - Fire Apparatus Access Roads, are also adopted and incorporated as part of the city's fire prevention code. Further, all future editions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Fire Prevention Code and all amendments thereto and all future editions of Appendices B, C and D of the International Fire Code and all amendments thereto are hereby automatically adopted and incorporated into the City Code. Copies of said code are on file in the office of the chief of the fire department of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, at 800 Madison Street in the city, where they may be viewed Mondays through Fridays from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. except legal holidays. 
    Said Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code 2012 edition, as so amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and on and after the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia. 
(Ord. No. O-88-274, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. O-92-054, 2-11-92; Ord. No. O-94-090, 5-10-94; Ord. No. O-97-158, 8-12-97; Ord. No. O-03-200, 12-16-03, eff. 10-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-151, 11-22-05; Ord. No. O-06-031, 3-28-06; Ord. No. O-08-099, 7-8-08; Ord. No. O-11-031, 3-22-11; Ord. No. O-14-097, § 1, 8-12-14 ) 
Sec. 19-43. - Establishment and duties of the code official. 
(a)  The code official shall be the fire marshal for the City of Lynchburg. 
(b)  The code official shall be appointed by the chief of the fire department with the approval of the city manager. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department may empower the fire marshal to detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(d)  The code official shall also recommend any amendments to this chapter which may be desirable. 
(e)  The code official and deputy fire marshals shall, before entering upon their duties, take an oath before any officer authorized to administer oaths, to faithfully discharge the duties of their office. Such marshals, upon completing the course approved by the law-enforcement officers training standards commission for permanent law enforcement officers, shall be sworn as law enforcement officers. Such law enforcement officers shall continue to exercise such authority only upon satisfactory participation in in-service and advanced courses and programs approved by the commission. 
(Ord. No. O-8-274, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. O-08-099, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 19-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-06-031, adopted Mar. 28, 2006, repealed § 19-44. 
Sec. 19-45. - Ban on the use of fireworks. 
(a)  The city manager, or deputy city manager in the absence of the city manager, when requested by the fire marshal, is authorized to issue a ban on use of all fireworks as defined by subsection (b). A public announcement shall be made in order to issue the ban. The ban shall become effective at the time that shall be stated in the announcement. The ban shall remain in effect until a second public announcement is made rescinding the ban. 
(b)  The term "fireworks" shall mean any combustible or explosive composition, and any substance or combination of substances and articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation. The term "fireworks" shall not include automobile flares or other flares when used for an emergency situation, paper caps containing not more than an average of 0.25 grain (16 mg) of explosive content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns and other devices utilizing such caps. 
(c)  During the time the ban of fireworks is effective, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use, ignite or explode any fireworks. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 01-14-03, O-03-011) 
Secs. 19-46-19-46.16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-099, adopted July 8, 2008, repealed §§ 19-46-19-46.16. 
Sec. 19-47. - Amendments, additions, deletions and changes to the Virginia statewide fire prevention code. 
    The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code is hereby amended and changed pursuant to section 27-97 of the Code of Virginia, for applicability to the City of Lynchburg, as set forth in sections 19-47.1 through 19-47.18 of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.1. - Modifications. 
    The fire official shall have the power to modify any provision or requirement of this Code, upon written application by the owner, lessee, occupant or their legal representative, when there is practical difficulty in meeting the strict letter of the Code. However, in all cases of modification, the spirit and intent of the code shall be met to ensure the health, safety and welfare of persons protected. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.2. - Fees. 
Index Section 1 
Fire Prevention Fees and Permit Requirements Fee 108.1.1 Carnival, circus, festival and fairs (30 day permit) $50 108.1.1 Explosives: Blasting, each site or location $50 108.1.1 Explosives: Storage indoors (1 year permit) $50 108.1.1 Rendering a Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank Safe by Removal or Filling With Inert Material (per tank) $50 108.1.1 LP-Gas Retail Cylinder Exchange Location $50 108.1.1 Open Burning: Recreational Bonfire (5 day permit) $50 108.1.1 Place of Assembly - Occupant Load 50 or Greater $50 108.1.1 Pyrotechnics & Fireworks: Retail Sale (45 day permit) $50 108.1.1 Pyrotechnics & Fireworks: Outdoor Display (1 day Permit) $50 108.1.1 Tents, Canopies & Air Supported Structures 700+ Square Feet 
(30 day permit) $50  
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099; Ord. No. O-14-097, § 1, 8-12-14 ) 
Sec. 19-47.3. - Person, firm or corporation responsible. 
    A person, firm or corporation in charge of or responsible for any building, structure, vehicle, device, other property, substance, material, gas, liquid, chemical or condition regulated either by this Code or by an ordinance under the fire marshal's jurisdiction shall be responsible for compliance with all such code and ordinance provisions and regulations relating thereto. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.4. - Follow-up inspections resulting from noncompliance. 
    Where two or more follow-up inspections are required as a result of noncompliance with this Code, fees for the re-inspections may be assessed as listed under section 19-47.2. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.5. - Dead ends. 
    Dead end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning around fire apparatus. Approved areas for dead end fire apparatus road turnaround may be found in Table D103.4 and Figure D103.1 of Appendix D as found in the 2006 International Fire Code. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.6. - Specifications. 
    Where required by the fire official, fire apparatus access roads shall be marked with permanent NO PARKING FIRE LANE signs complying with section Subsection D103.6 and Figure D103.6 as found in Appendix D of the International Fire Code. Curbing shall be painted yellow within the limits of the fire lane. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.7. - Existing signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, remove, destroy or impair the usefulness of any posted fire lane sign installed under the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.8. - Penalties. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of Section 503.4, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons or warrant was parked in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where and for the time such violation occurred. In addition, any vehicle that is found to obstruct or interfere with the free ingress or egress of such designated and marked fire lane area, any officer discovering or having report of same may remove it or have it removed to the nearest storage garage for safekeeping and that fact shall be immediately reported to the division of motor vehicles or some officer or agent of said division and to the owner of such vehicle, as promptly as possible; and such owner, before obtaining the possession of such property, shall pay to the parties entitled thereto all reasonable and necessary costs incidental to the removal or storage of such property. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.9. - Carnival, circus, festival and fair access. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator or other person responsible for the establishment, erection or operation of any carnival, circus, festival or fair to establish, erect and operate such carnival, circus, festival or fair so that there is provided and maintained an access lane, at least 20 feet in width and capable of supporting fire and rescue apparatus in all weather conditions and so arranged as to afford access to within 50 feet of all booths, tents, rides and other equipment, buildings, and structures used as part of or in conjunction with the carnival or circus. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.10. - Fire flow. 
    Calculated fire flow requirements for all proposed new construction and/or change of use group shall be submitted as part of the city's technical review board committee (TRC) process to the fire marshal and director of utilities for review and approval. The estimated fire flow can be established using the Insurance Services Office (ISO) "Guide for Determination of Needed Fire Flow," latest revision, NFPA 291, or the current adoption of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code as amended by the City of Lynchburg to included Appendix B of the International Fire Code. Fire flows must also be analyzed under the maximum expected conditions in accordance with the City of Lynchburg - Manual of Specifications and Standard Details, latest revision. All TRC projects shall have fire flows calculated submitted to the fire marshal and director of utilities for approval during the TRC process. The calculations shall include calculations verifying the required fire flow and pressures can be achieved. All calculations shall be sealed by a professional engineer. Calculations for subdivisions shall be submitted during the RWS plan review process. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.11. - Where required. 
    Fire hydrant systems shall be located and installed as directed by the fire department. Fire hydrant systems shall conform to the written standards of the city and the fire department. Hydrants shall be of the type specified in the current City of Lynchburg Manual of Specifications and Standard Details, Water Details - Typical Fire Hydrant Connection Detail and shall [be] installed as directed. The location of private hydrants and hydrants on public rights-of-way shall be approved by the fire marshal and city engineer. The required backflow prevention device location for private hydrants shall be approved by the director of utilities. Private yard hydrants shall be painted red unless otherwise approved by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.12. - Clear space around fire hydrants. 
    No person shall plant, place or erect any obstruction within three feet of the circumference any fire hydrant. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.13. - Hydrant location in relation to Siamese connection. 
    A hydrant shall be placed on the supply side of the Siamese connection for standpipes and sprinkler systems no more than 50 feet from the Siamese connection to allow the fire suppression personnel to charge the closed system. The hydrant must be completely accessible for fire department apparatus connection. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.14. - Fire hydrant locations and distribution. 
    The required number and distribution of public and private fire hydrants shall be based on the fire flow calculation of the structure and Appendix C of the 2006 International Fire Code. The fire official may require additional hydrants based on special hazards or circumstances found in or on the premises. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.15. - Material to control spills. 
    Each service station shall stock a minimum of 200 pounds of inert absorbent material to control flammable and combustible spills by diking or absorbing such spills. Bulk, processing or industrial plants, refineries or other plants and distilleries having quantities of flammable and combustible liquids in containers exceeding 660 gallons shall maintain a minimum of 1,000 pounds of inert absorbent material to control spills of flammable or combustible liquids. The cost of any inert absorbent material furnished by the fire department as a result of a lack of the above set forth minimum amount shall be charged to and collected from the owner/operator of such business or firm. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.16. - Financial responsibility. 
    Before a permit is issued, as required by Section 3301.2 of the 2006 Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, the applicant shall furnish proof of liability insurance protection in the sum of $1,000,000.00 by the corporation counsel for the payment of all damages which may be caused either to a person or persons or to property by reason of the permitted activity, and arising from any acts of the permit applicant, the permit applicant's agents, employees or subcontractors. Such policy shall name the City of Lynchburg, its agents, employees and assignees as additional insured's, in such form, amount and coverage in each case to indemnify those named above against any damages arising from the permitted activity. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Sec. 19-47.17. - Fire marshals presence for fireworks displays. 
    Two fire marshals are required to be at all fireworks displays beginning at the time the operator arrives and begins to unload and set up. The operator shall not begin to unload or set up before the arrival of the fire marshal. The current fee for standby personnel is $30.00 per hour, per person for a minimum of three hours. The fire marshal may require additional standby personnel or equipment. The rate for standby equipment, if required will be based on the type and staffing of equipment required. 
    All required fees for standby personnel and equipment must be paid in full prior to the commencement of the function unless prior arrangements have been made. The fire marshal may require the employment of additional off-duty police officers for crowd control at the expense of the permit applicant. 
Sec. 19-47.18. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or any other person, firm, or corporation to violate any provisions of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code, or the City of Lynchburg Fire Prevention Code. Any such violation shall be deemed a Class 1 misdemeanor, and any owner, or any other person, firm, or corporation convicted of such violation shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.2-11 Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. of 7-8-08, No. O-08-099) 
Chapter 20 - FOOD AND FOOD PRODUCTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health department, § 2-349 et seq.; city market, Ch. 13; littering at fast food restaurants, § 21-4; license fee for restaurants, § 36-57; mobile restaurants, § 36-84. 
State Law reference- Sanitary requirements for food and food establishments, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-361 et seq.; milk and milk products, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-420 et seq.; restaurants and public eating places, Code of Virginia, § 35-25 et seq. 

Sec. 20-1. - Impure foods. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, offer for sale, sell or deliver from or in any place or vehicle within the city, from or in which food products, including all liquid and drinks, are sold or offered for sale, any tainted, unsound, filthy or partly decomposed fish, shellfish, vegetables, meat or other food product, or any food to which has been added borax, boric or salicylic acid, formaldehyde, saccharin or other additive prohibited by the national pure food laws. 
(Code 1959, § 14-1) 
Sec. 20-2. - Destruction of food offered for sale in violation of chapter. 
    Any food kept or offered for sale within the city in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be destroyed under the direction of the director of health. 
(Code 1959, § 14-6) 
Chapter 21 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-91-056, adopted Mar. 26, 1991, eff. Apr. 1, 1991, repealed Articles I-III, containing §§ 21-1-21-50. Former Arts. I-III pertained to In General, Collection regulations, and Commercial collection, respectively. 

ARTICLE I. - RESERVED 

Secs. 21-1-21-16. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 

Secs. 21-17-21-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 

Secs. 21-42-21-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INOPERATIVE VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles generally, Ch. 1; removal of unattended, abandoned, etc., vehicles, § 46.2-1200 et seq.; nuisances, Ch. 12. 

Sec. 21-61. - Keeping restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from view, on any property zoned for residential, business or agricultural purposes, any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer, or part thereof which is inoperative. As used in this article, an "inoperative motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle which is not in operating condition; or does not display valid license plates; or does not display an inspection decal that is valid or has expired no more than 60 days prior. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which is regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. As used in this section "shielded or screened from view" means kept within a fully enclosed building or structure or hidden from sight by plantings or fences so the motor vehicle is not visible by someone standing at ground level from outside the property on which the subject vehicle is located. Covering an inoperative vehicle by an auto cover, tarpaulin or similar device does not constitute "shielded or screened from view." Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, if the owner of an inoperative motor vehicle can demonstrate that he is actively restoring or repairing the vehicle, and if it is shielded or screened from view, the vehicle and one additional inoperative motor vehicle that is shielded or screened from view and being used for the restoration or repair may remain on the property. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, § 15.1-4; Ord. No. O-85-188, § 1, 8-13-85; Ord. No. O-87-073, § 1, 4-28-87; Ord. No. O-91-138, 6-25-91; Ord. No. O-05-112, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 21-62. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to a licensed business which on January 1, 1976, is regularly engaged in business as an automotive dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, § 15.1-4) 
Sec. 21-63. - Duty to remove. 
    The owners of property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes shall, upon ten days' written notice, remove any inoperative motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers that are not kept within a fully enclosed building or structure from such property. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, § 15.1-4; Ord. No. O-00-163, 8-8-00) 
Sec. 21-64. - Removal by city. 
    If after ten days' written notice, the owner of the premises has failed to remove any inoperative motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers, the city, through its agents or employees, may remove such inoperative motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, § 15.1-4; Ord. No. O-00-163, 8-8-00) 
Sec. 21-65. - Disposal. 
    In the event the city removes any inoperative motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer under the provisions of this article, after giving notice as beforesaid, it may dispose of such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers, after giving 15 days' written notice to the owner of the vehicles. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, § 15.1-4) 
Sec. 21-66. - Recovery of costs. 
    The cost of removal and disposal of inoperative vehicles under the provisions of this article shall be chargeable to the owner of vehicle or premises and may be collected by the city as taxes and levied are collected. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, § 15.1-4) 
Sec. 21-67. - Lien established. 
    Every cost authorized by this article with which the owner of the premises shall have been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such cost shall have been made to the city. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, § 15.1-4) 
Sec. 21-68. - Alternate procedure. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to restrict in any way the right of the city to follow the procedures set forth in Sections 46.2-1213 and 46.2-1200 through 46.2-1208, Code of Virginia (1950) as amended, relating to abandoned motor vehicles. 
(Ord. of 12-23-75, § 15.1-4; Ord. No. O-05-112, 9-13-05) 
Chapter 21.1 - LITTER CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Duty of customers not to litter, § 21-5. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 21.1-1. - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Lynchburg Litter Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85) 
Sec. 21.1-2. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to these words when used in this chapter: 
    Bulk waste means items of residential litter, including furniture, appliances, large cartons or similar materials which cannot be placed in containers in accordance with the regulations herein set forth. 
    Business waste means any item of litter which results from the production, storage or sale of merchandise, materials or services. 
    Construction hauler means any private person, partnership, corporation or association engaged in any aspect of the collection, transportation or disposal of any refuse within the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg. 
    Construction site means any residential, commercial, industrial or other area, lot or site, where construction of any type is conducted, including roads, buildings and all other places where construction, renovation or demolition, active or inactive, is underway. 
    Construction waste means any building material or litter resulting from erecting, repairing, remodeling or demolishing a structure. 
    Contractor means the owner or agent in charge of a construction, development or demolition site. 
    Demolition waste means any building material resulting from the removal or razing of a structure. 
    Hazardous waste means any material which the city deems to be potentially dangerous, including, but not limited to, materials which are explosive, combustible, toxic, disease-causing or radioactive. 
    Institution means any public or private establishment which educates, instructs, treats for health purposes, or otherwise performs a service or need for the community, region, state or nation. 
    Litter means all waste materials, odor-producing or nonodor-producing, including, but not limited to, bottles, glass, crockery, cans, scrap metal, paper, plastic, rubber, garbage, cigarettes and cigarette stubs including cigar butts, building materials, disposable packages or containers thrown or deposited as prohibited herein. 
    Litter receptacle means a container with the capacity of not less than ten gallons, constructed and placed for use as a depository for litter. 
    Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, firm, receiver, guardian, trustee, executor, administrator, fiduciary or representative or group of individuals or entities of any kind. 
    Private property means property owned by any person, as defined herein, including, but not limited to, yards, grounds, driveways, entrances or passageways, parking areas, storage areas, any body of water, vacant land and recreational facilities. 
    Public place means any area that is used or held out for use by the public whether owned or operated by public or private interests. 
    Public property means any area that is used or held out for use by the public, whether owned or operated by public or private interests, including, but not limited to, highways, streets, alleys, parks, recreation areas, sidewalks, medians, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds or other bodies of water. 
    Site clearance materials means any items such as boulders, rocks, tree trunks, stumps or limbs exceeding two inches in diameter. 
    Vehicle means every device capable of being moved upon a public highway or public waterway and then upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a public highway or public waterway. 
    Yard trimmings means any grass, woods, leaves, plant trimmings or similar matter which can be placed in containers in accordance with the regulations herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85; Ord. No. O-99-196, 8-10-99) 
ARTICLE II. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 21.1-3. - Littering prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, deposit, discard, throw, leave or otherwise dispose of litter in or upon any public or private property within the City of Lynchburg except in public receptacles, or in authorized private receptacles provided for public use, or in an area designated by the state department of health as a permitted disposal site. 
(b)  Whenever any public or private dumpster or other receptacle has been specifically designated by signs or markings for the disposal of recyclable materials only, it shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any litter, refuse, or waste in such dumpster or receptacle other than those recyclable materials that have been designated as appropriate for such dumpster or receptacle. 
(c)  When a violation of the provisions of this section has been observed by any person, and the litter dumped or disposed of in the highway, right-of-way, property adjacent to such highway or right-of-way, or private property has been ejected from a motor vehicle, the owner or operator of such motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the person ejecting such litter; provided, however, that such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. 
(d)  When any person is arrested for a violation of this section, and the matter alleged to have been dumped or disposed of on the street, highway, right-of-way, or public or private property has been ejected from a motor vehicle, the arresting officer may comply with the provisions of section 25-21 of this Code in making such arrest. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85; Ord. No. O-90-034, 2-13-90) 
ARTICLE III. - DUTY OF BUSINESS OWNERS, PROPERTY OWNERS, OCCUPANTS 

Sec. 21.1-4. - Commercial establishments and institutions. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be the duty of each owner, occupant, proprietor or operator of any business, industry or institution situated within the city at all times to keep his premises clean of litter thrown or left on the premises by customers or generated by the business's, industry's or institution's operation, and to take reasonable measures to prevent the same from drifting or blowing to adjoining premises. The premises include, but are not restricted to, public and private sidewalks, roads, street gutters, alleys, grounds, parking lots, loading and unloading areas and all vacant lots which are owned or leased by said establishment or institution or are adjacent thereto. 
(b)  Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the premises accessible to customers and employees of any business, industry or institution where articles of waste referred to in subsection (a) may be disposed of. 
(c)  Signs. Each and every business establishment, industry or institution shall place upon its premises in conspicuous places and in close proximity to the receptacles required by subsection (b) signs which shall, in essence, convey to its customers and employees a request that they use such receptacles for the disposal of waste material. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85; Ord. No. O-99-196, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 21.1-5. - Keeping the residential property clean. 
    It shall be the duty of each residential property owner and tenant to keep all exterior private property free of litter. These areas shall include, but shall not be restricted to, adjoining sidewalks, streets and alleys, yards and grounds, fences, walls and property lines, drainages and vacant lots in residential areas. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85) 
Sec. 21.1-6. - Keeping sidewalks clean. 
    Each owner, agent, occupant or lessee whose property adjoins the City of Lynchburg's sidewalks, or parkways between streets and sidewalks, shall be responsible for keeping said sidewalks and parkways free of litter. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85) 
Sec. 21.1-7. - Sweeping litter into the streets. 
    It shall be unlawful to sweep or push litter from sidewalks, yards or any other areas into the public streets, alleys or rights-of-way. Such litter shall be deposited in a proper receptacle which shall be covered to prevent scattering by wind and animals. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85) 
Sec. 21.1-8. - Construction and demolition sites. 
    The contractor in charge of a construction, development or demolition site shall furnish receptacles to collect and contain all construction, demolition or remodeling waste and litter that are generated by the work on the site and to prevent the scattering of construction, demolition or remodeling waste and litter, on a daily basis. It shall be the contractor's responsibility to make sure that all construction, demolition or remodeling waste and litter are disposed of in such receptacles in order to prevent the same from drifting or blowing onto adjoining properties. All construction, demolition or remodeling waste and litter, shall be removed from such site as often as necessary to prevent scattering, offensive odors and/or health hazards. The city's building commissioner or his designee shall have the authority to issue a stop work order to any construction, demolition or remodeling project where the construction, demolition or remodeling waste and litter are not being properly disposed of or contained. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the site is free from all construction, demolition or remodeling waste and litter. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85; Ord. No. O-04-056, 5-11-04) 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER RECEPTACLES 

Sec. 21.1-9. - Proper litter receptacles or solid waste containers. 
    Any receptacle or container which does not conform to the requirements of chapter 21, Garbage and Refuse, of the Lynchburg City Code, shall be replaced by the owner. Failure to do so within five days' written notice by the city shall constitute a violation of this section, and each day thereafter shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85) 
Sec. 21.1-10. - Use of receptacles. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit any item or items, except litter, in any receptacle placed for public use as a depository of litter. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85) 
Sec. 21.1-11. - Providing adequate litter receptacles. 
    It shall be the duty of any person owning or operating any establishment or public place to provide litter receptacles adequate to contain litter generated at said establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85) 
ARTICLE V. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 21.1-12. - Penalties. 
    Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as follows: 
(a)  For the first offense, a minimum fine of $50.00, but not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  For the second violation within one year, a minimum fine of $100.00, but not to exceed $500.00. 
(c)  For the third or subsequent violation within one year, a minimum fine of $500.00 with a ten-day jail sentence, but not to exceed $1,000.00 with a ten-day jail sentence. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85; Ord. No. O-90-234, 7-10-90) 
Sec. 21.1-13. - Severability clause. 
    If any of the provisions of this ordinance are held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 1, 5-28-85) 
Chapter 21.2 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-225 et seq.; health department, § 2-349 et seq.; city market, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Solid waste disposal, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1408.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21.2-1. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Lynchburg to promote public safety, health, welfare, and to promote the recovery of useful resources by establishing rules and regulations relating to solid waste collection and disposal. 
    The City of Lynchburg is a member of the Region 2000 Services Authority (RSA) which operates a regional landfill for the disposal of solid waste from the city and other member localities. A transfer station for the convenience of city residents is located on Concord Turnpike at the site of the former city landfill. The rules and regulations contained herein are applicable to both facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-2. - Administration and enforcement of chapter. 
    The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, and shall have the authority to establish reasonable rules and regulations, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, which will carry out the purposes and intent. The City of Lynchburg Police Department shall assist in the enforcement of this policy in cooperation with the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91) 
Sec. 21.2-3. - Definitions. 
    Wherever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears in the context, the following terms shall be given the following respective interpretations: 
    Agricultural waste: All solid waste produced from farming operations, or related commercial preparation of farm products for marketing. 
    Apartment: A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied by more than two families, and all living units of which are to be maintained under single ownership or management. This shall be interpreted to include all multi-family rental units. 
    Ash: The fly ash or bottom ash residual waste material produced from incineration or burning of solid waste or from any fuel combustion. 
    Bottom ash: Ash or slag remaining in a combustion unit after combustion. 
    Boxes: Includes corrugated boxes, paperboard boxes, and cardboard boxes. 
    Brush: Any yard or debris wastes tree trimmings no larger than three inches in diameter and eight feet in length which cannot be placed in containers in accordance with the regulations herein set forth. 
    Bulk waste: Items of residential waste, such as furniture, large cartons, white goods, or similar materials which cannot be placed in containers in accordance with the regulations herein set forth. Bulk waste does not include tires, household hazardous waste, construction and demolition materials. 
    Bundles: A number of things bound together for collection (such as brush, broken-down boxes and waste). Brush and yard waste bundles shall meet the requirements of section 21.2-4 for collection. Boxes shall be broken down and tied together. No bundle shall exceed 50 pounds in weight. 
    Collection: Removal or transportation of solid waste, ashes, recyclable material and yard waste, from its place of storage or collection point to its place of disposal. 
    Commercial establishment: Any retail or wholesale, restaurant, religious, government or nonresidential establishment at which trash or garbage may be generated. 
    Commercial waste: All solid waste generated by establishments engaged in business operations other than manufacturing or construction. This category includes, but is not limited to, solid waste resulting from the operation of stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants and shopping centers. 
    Compost: A stabilized organic product produced by a controlled aerobic decomposition process in such a manner that the product can be handled, stored, and/or applied to the land without adversely affecting public health or the environment. Composted sludge shall be as defined by the Virginia Sewerage Regulations. 
    Condominium: An apartment house or complex in which the apartments or dwelling units are individually owned. 
    Construction waste: Solid waste which is produced or generated during construction, remodeling, or repair of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Construction wastes include, but not limited to, lumber, wire, sheetrock, broken brick, asphalt, shingles, glass, pipes, concrete, paving materials and metal and plastics if the metal or plastics are a part of the materials of construction or empty containers for such materials. Paints, coatings, solvents, asbestos, any liquid, compressed gases or semi-liquids and garbage are not construction wastes. 
    Debris waste: Wastes resulting from land clearing operations. Debris wastes include, but are not limited to, stumps, wood, brush, leaves, soil, and road spoils. 
    Demolition waste: Any solid waste which is produced by the destruction of structures and their foundations and includes the same materials as construction waste. 
    Discard: To abandon, dispose of, burn, incinerate, accumulate, store or treat before or instead of being abandoned, disposed of, burned or incinerated. 
    Discarded material: A material which is: 
(a)  Abandoned by being: 
(1)  Disposed of, 
(2)  Burned or incinerated; or 
(3)  Accumulated, stored or treated (but not used, reused, or reclaimed) before or in lieu of being abandoned by being disposed of, burned or incinerated, 
(b)  Used, reused or reclaimed material as defined in this part, or 
(c)  Considered as solid waste as defined in section 3.2 of the Virginia Solid Waste Management Regulations (VR 672-72-10). 
    DEQ: The Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Disposal: The act of discharging, depositing, injecting, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that such solid waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters. 
    Disposal site: All land and structures, other appurtenances, and improvements thereon used for treating, storing, and disposing of solid waste. This term includes adjacent land within the property boundary used for the utility systems such as repair, storage, shipping or processing areas, or other areas incident to the management of solid waste. All solid waste disposal sites must be approved and/or permitted by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
    EPA: The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Fly ash: Ash particulate collected from air pollution attenuation devices on combustion units. 
    Garbage: Readily putrescible discarded materials composed of animal, vegetable or other organic matter. Hazardous waste: A "hazardous waste" as described by the Virginia Hazardous Waste Regulations (VR 672-10-1). 
    Household hazardous waste (HHW): The following are examples of what residents can bring on HHW collection days to the Region 2000 Services Authority (RSA) facility: acids/bases, aerosols, antifreeze, autostarter, brake fluids, batteries, cleaners/polishes, corrosives, drain openers, flammables, furniture stripper, herbicides, kerosene, lighter fluids, oven cleaners, oxidizers, oil based paints, pesticides, photo/pool chemicals, poisons, solvents/thinners, used motor oil, weed killers and wood preservatives. The RSA website maintains the current list of the types of waste that are accepted and not accepted. 
    Household waste: Any waste material, including garbage, trash and refuse, derived from households. Households include single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day-use recreation areas. Household wastes do not include sanitary waste in septic tanks (septage) which is regulated by state agencies other than DEQ's Division of Waste Management Programs. 
    Industrial waste: Any solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial process that is not a regulated hazardous waste. Such waste may include, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer/agriculture chemicals; food and related products/by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel manufacturing; leather and leather products; nonferrous metals manufacturing/foundries; organic chemicals; plastics and resins manufacturing; pulp and paper industry; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textile manufacturing; transportation equipment; and waste treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
    Inert waste: Solid waste which is physically, chemically and biologically stable from further degradation and considered to be non-reacting. Inert wastes include rubble, concrete, bricks, and blocks. 
    Institutional waste: All solid waste emanating from institutions such as, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, and public or private schools. It can include infectious waste from health care facilities and research facilities that must be managed as an infectious waste. No medical waste is accepted at the RSA facility. 
    Landfill: A sanitary landfill, an industrial waste landfill or a construction/debris landfill. 
    Landfill disposal area: The area within the property boundary or permitted for actual burial. 
    Litter: Any waste as defined in 21.1-2 (Litter Control - Definitions) of this Code. 
    Living units: One or more rooms in a residential building or in a mixed building which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use by one or more persons living together and maintaining a common household. 
    Medical waste: Any solid waste identified by health care professionals in charge as capable of producing infectious disease in humans. Any solid waste is regulated medical waste if it is one of the following: 
(a)  Discarded cultures, stocks, specimens, vaccines and associated items likely to have been contaminated by them are regulated medical wastes if they are likely to contain organisms likely to be pathogenic to healthy humans; 
(b)  Waste consisting of human blood, human blood products and items contaminated by human blood are regulated human wastes; 
(c)  All pathological wastes and all wastes that are human tissues, organs, body parts, or body fluids are regulated medical wastes; 
(d)  Used sharps (needles, syringes, etc.) likely to be contaminated with organisms that are pathogenic to healthy humans and all sharps used in patient care are regulated medical waste; 
(e)  Any residue or contaminated soil, water, or other debris resulting from the cleanup of a spill of any regulated medical waste is itself regulated medical waste; and 
(f)  Any solid waste contaminated by or mixed with regulated medical waste is itself regulated medical waste. 
    Motor vehicle: Every device, which is self-propelled or designed for self-propulsion, in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon the highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. Any structure designed, used, or maintained primarily to be loaded on or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling, sleeping place, office or commercial space, shall be considered a part of a motor vehicle. 
    Mover's trash: Solid waste generated due to person or persons moving-in to or moving-out of a residence. 
    Multi-family unit: A building, or any appurtenances thereof, designed for occupancy or occupied by two or more families, and all living units of which are to be maintained under single ownership or management. This shall be interpreted to include all, but not limited to apartments, condominiums and duplexes with two or more rental units. The owner(s) of a multi-family unit shall be responsible for ensuring that the residents of a multi-family unit comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Municipal solid waste: That waste which is normally composed of residential, commercial, and institutional solid waste. Medical waste is not accepted at the RSA facility. 
    Occupant: Any person occupying or residing on any lot, premises or parcel of land in the city and having, at the time, apparent possession or control thereof. 
    Owner: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(a)  Shall have all or part of legal title to any lot, premises or parcel of land in the city, not, at the time, in the actual or apparent possession or control of another, or; 
(b)  Shall have all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises, and the term shall include a mortgagee in possession, or; 
(c)  Shall have charge, care or control of any lot, premises or parcel of land in the city, as agent or representative of the owner, or as personal representative, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. 
    Person: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, a governmental body, a municipal corporation or any other legal entity. 
    Putrescible waste: Solid waste which contains organic material capable of being decomposed by micro-organisms and cause odors. 
    Recyclable material: Any material which retains useful properties that can be reclaimed after the production or consumption process. 
    Recycling center: A facility designed for the collection, separation and/or recycling of recyclable materials. 
    Refuse: All solid waste products having the character of solids rather than liquids and which are composed wholly or partially of materials such as garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, residues from clean up of spills or contamination, or other discarded materials. 
    Regulated medical waste: Solid wastes defined to be infectious by the Virginia Regulated Medical Waste Management Regulations (VR 672-40-01). 
    Residential waste: Any household waste. 
    RSA facility: a landfill, transfer station, recycling center or other operation managed by the Region 2000 Services Authority for the purpose of collecting and disposing of solid waste. 
    Rubbish: Combustible or slowly putrescible discarded materials which include but are not limited to trees, wood, leaves, trimmings from shrubs or trees, printed matter, plastic and paper products, grass, rags and other combustible or slowly putrescible materials not included under the term "garbage." 
    Scavenging: The unauthorized or uncontrolled collection or removal of waste or recyclable materials from a solid waste management facility, waste that has been placed on the curbside for city collection or recycling center. 
    Semitrailer: Every vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Single-family residence: a residential building or structure containing only one dwelling unit, which is arranged, designed, used or intended for use by one family (as defined by the city's zoning ordinance). The owner(s) of a single-family residence that is being occupied as rental property shall be responsible for ensuring that the occupant(s) of such single-family residence comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Site clearance materials: Any items such as boulders, rocks, tree trunks, stumps, or tree limbs. 
    Solid waste: Any of those materials defined as 'solid waste' in Part III of the Virginia Solid Waste Management Regulations (VR 672-20-10). 
    Solid waste management facility: A site used for planned treating, storing, or disposing of solid waste. A facility may consist of several treatment, storage, or disposal units. 
    Special wastes: Solid wastes that are difficult to handle, require special precautions because of hazardous properties or the nature of the waste creates waste management problems in normal operations. 
    Trailer court: Any lot, parcel or tract of land, together with open spaces, used, designed, maintained or held out to accommodate one or more mobile homes or trailers, including all buildings, structures, tents, vehicles, accessories or appurtenances used or intended as equipment of such mobile home or trailer court. A mobile home court provides for the permanent or long-term location of mobile homes. The owner(s) of the trailer court shall be responsible for ensuring that the residents of the trailer court comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Trash: Combustible and noncombustible discarded materials, and is used interchangeably with the term rubbish. 
    Waste container: City approved trash cart or approved prepaid plastic trash bag. 
    White goods: Any stoves, washers, hot water heaters and other large appliances. 
    Yard waste: That fraction of municipal solid waste that consists of grass clippings, leaves, brush and tree prunings arising from general landscape maintenance. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12; Ord. No. O-14-012, 1-28-14) 
Sec. 21.2-4. - Preparation of solid waste for curbside collection. 
(a)  Generally. All solid waste designated for collection by the city is to be bagged and kept in a covered approved container. Paper must be placed in an approved waste container or kept securely bundled in order to prevent being blown or scattered about the street. 
(b)  Ashes. Ashes shall be cool and dry before placing in an approved waste container. Ashes shall be kept separate from and not placed in containers with other solid waste. 
(c)  Sharp objects. Solid waste with sharp edges or points, including but not limited to broken glass and fluorescent tubes, shall be placed in an approved waste container meeting criteria set in section 21.2-6, but not including a plastic bag as described in section 21.2-7. Needles should be placed in a plastic or glass food container with a lid securely fastened with tape. 
(d)  Recyclable material. In an effort to reduce the flow of solid waste disposed of at the RSA facility and promote the recovery of useful resources, recyclable material should be taken to the proper recycling centers. Any recyclable material that is accepted pursuant to a city recycling program, whether publicly or privately administered, shall be separated from other solid waste for pickup in accordance with criteria to be established by the city manager or his designee. Such items include, but are not limited to, aluminum and steel cans, newspaper, glass, mixed paper and some plastics. Such recyclable materials should be separated for recycling. 
(e)  Yard waste. Yard waste collection by the city shall only be furnished to those residences regularly scheduled for the removal of solid waste by the city. All yard waste to be collected with normal residential waste shall be placed in approved containers or tied in bundles no larger than four feet in length, 15 inches in diameter and 50 pounds in weight. During special yard waste collection, all yard waste will be collected, provided no part is larger than three inches in diameter, and eight feet in length. Tree stumps and tree trunks will not be collected, nor will the waste resulting from topping or removal of a tree. Special yard waste collection is not offered to businesses. Any yard waste that is accepted pursuant to the city composting program shall be separated from other solid waste for pickup. 
(f)  Paperboard boxes. Paperboard boxes should be taken to recycling centers for recycling or broken down, bundled and securely tied, and tagged with the appropriate refuse disposal tag. 
(g)  Styrofoam packaging. Styrofoam packaging shall be placed in a securely tied plastic bag and tagged with the appropriate refuse disposal tag. 
(h)  Litter control bags. Litter control bags will be issued by the city to the neighborhood clean-up groups and individuals involved with adopt-a-street and adopt-a-spot clean-ups. The litter control bags shall be placed in the city right-of-way for collection after the individual(s) or group(s) have completed the clean-ups. 
(i)  Weight limitations. The total weight of a 32-gallon trash cart, including its contents, shall not exceed 100 pounds in weight. The total weight of a 64-gallon trash cart, including its contents, shall not exceed 200 pounds in weight. The total weight of any plastic bag, including its contents, shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-5. - Containers required. 
    Subject to the provisions of sections 21.2-6 through 21.2-10 of this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of all property owners to ensure waste containers comply with the specifications set forth by the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to place solid waste in containers other than those approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97) 
Sec. 21.2-6. - Approved waste containers-Generally. 
    Approved waste containers for city collection shall be city provided waste carts 32 gallons or 64 gallons in capacity. No container shall be filled to the point of overflowing. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03) 
Sec. 21.2-7. - Same-Approved prepaid plastic trash bags. 
    Approved prepaid plastic trash bags as described herein shall constitute an approved waste container, and when plastic bags are used for the disposal of solid waste, the same shall conform to the following specifications: 
(a)  Residents may purchase approved prepaid trash bags for use inside an approved waste container or for occasional extra refuse that does not fit in trash container. Bags can be purchased at various vendor locations approved by the city and will display the City of Lynchburg seal. Fees for approved prepaid trash bags will cover all disposal costs. 
(b)  Thirty-two-gallon bags shall not be filled to exceed 50 pounds in weight. 
(c)  Approved prepaid plastic trash bags containing solid waste shall be securely tied when placed outside for collection to prevent refuse from falling out. 
(d)  Approved prepaid plastic trash bags are for one time use only and will be collected and disposed of by city employees. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12; Ord. No. O-14-012, 1-28-14) 
Sec. 21.2-8. - Maintenance of containers. 
    Every waste container required by this article shall be maintained in as sanitary condition as possible in view of the use to which it is put, and shall be thoroughly cleansed as needed by washing, sanitizing or otherwise. All waste containers shall be kept in good condition, and solid waste shall not be placed in any container that is so constructed or is so defective that the contents leak or spill. Waste carts provided by the city are the property of the city and should remain at the address specified upon delivery. Waste carts may be changed to a different size once per year for an administrative waste cart change fee established by city. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-9. - Unacceptable containers. 
(a)  Any container other than the aforementioned approved containers shall not be used for the storage and collection of solid waste for city collection; this includes, but is not limited to, cardboard boxes, and barrels. 
(b)  Any unacceptable container will be tagged with a warning violation. Once tagged, these containers will be considered solid waste collected and disposed of by the city. Use of a waste container after it has been tagged with a warning of violation is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-10. - Sunken waste containers prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install a new waste container, the bottom of which is sunken or depressed below the abutting grade level. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03) 
Sec. 21.2-11. - Accumulation of solid waste. 
(a)  Each residence, small commercial establishment or person having solid waste will be provided with one city approved waste container adequate to contain the solid waste generated at said establishment which accumulates between periods of removal from the premises, and shall place and keep all solid waste therein until disposal. Residents and small commercial establishments requiring more than one trash cart may purchase from the city additional carts at cost. These carts become the property of the resident. Solid waste may not accumulate outside of the cart(s) unless in approved plastic bags. Household waste that a resident is storing to bring to the RSA facility or for other disposal must be stored in closed containers in such a manner so as to not attract animals, emit offending odors, or be a safety or health risk, and such waste may not be stored for a period of more than one month. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to throw or to cause to accumulate onto the streets, sidewalks or private property any solid waste or any other substance that will render the street or premises unclean or unsightly or unsafe to any person or vehicle using the streets or liable to injuriously affect the health or safety of the community. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Secs. 21.2-12-21.2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION GENERALLY 

Sec. 21.2-16. - Transporting refuse in vehicles. 
    No person shall transport any garbage, trash or any other waste or refuse substance upon the streets of the city in an open or uncovered vehicle, unless such solid waste is transported in a covered container within the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93) 
Sec. 21.2-17. - Substances not collected. 
    Any substance prohibited from disposal in an RSA facility pursuant to section 21.2-59(b) will not be collected for disposal by the city if identified by the city in the course of collection. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-18. - Unauthorized removal. 
    Once placed on the edge of the streets of the city, it shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove solid waste from or otherwise interfere with waste containers or the contents thereof. Any persons other than designated city employees must obtain prior authorization from the property owner, city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97) 
Sec. 21.2-19. - Special collections-Generally. 
    Special collections by the city shall only be furnished to residential customers and neighborhood cleanup programs. Special collection services are not offered to businesses. Special collections shall be scheduled by the resident, or neighborhood group in advance of placing the material out for collection. 
    Special collections shall include bulk waste collection, yard waste (brush and leaf) collection and a one-time mover's trash collection of solid waste. No fee will be charged for the collection of designated waste during special collection. Bagged leaves, yard waste, and appropriately bundled brush will be subject to the disposal fee when put out with refuse at other times in accordance with the provisions of section 21.2-16 through 21.2-18. Brush collection restrictions include tree trimming sizes not exceeding three inches in diameter and eight feet in length. As of July 1, 2012, segregated loads of brush and bulk may be brought to the RSA facility at no charge. Residents will be allowed an unlimited number of trips for segregated brush and bulk material. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-20. - Same-Bulk waste and white goods. 
    The city will remove bulk wastes and white goods which have been placed on the edge of the street. White goods that would normally contain compressors with freon must have the compressor and relating tubing fully in tact unless said white good is accompanied by a certification from an appropriate person stating that all contained freon has been captured and recycled. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Secs. 21.2-21-21.2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION-CITY COLLECTION 

Sec. 21.2-26. - Collection. 
(a)  The city shall collect refuse from eligible residential and small commercial establishments abutting a public street and certain multi-family units. If solid waste is placed curbside on the day of city waste collection for that property, it is assumed that property desires city waste collection services. Owners or operators of multi-family units (to include, but not limited to apartments, condominiums, duplexes and town homes) and trailer courts with two or more rental units and non-manufacturing businesses accept the fee-related responsibility for associated disposal charges and are responsible for displaying an official annual trash disposal decal or using approved prepaid plastic trash bags for city curbside collection. Owners of all properties not eligible or desiring of city collection shall be responsible for the proper storage and disposal of all refuse; said refuse may not be placed curbside on the day the city is scheduled to provide collection services. Those properties not eligible for city collection include, but are not limited to: properties of five or more living units and manufacturing businesses and those commercial establishments and multi-family properties with four or less living units that put out more than four containers per collection. 
(b)  House trailers shall be treated as single family units only if they front on a public street and reside upon individually platted lots. House trailers which do not front on a public street and reside upon individually platted lots shall be treated as multi-family dwellings. 
(c)  If the waste containers put out by the occupants of a multi-family unit or trailer court do not display annual decals, or if approved prepaid plastic trash bags are not used, a duly designated officer of the city will issue violation notice(s) to the owner(s) or operator(s) of the multi-family unit or trailer court. It shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) or operator(s) to take appropriate action to make sure the occupants of the multi-family unit or trailer court place annual decals on their waste containers or use approved prepaid plastic trash bags. If after giving reasonable notice to the owner(s) or occupant(s) the waste containers of a multi-family unit or trailer court still do not display annual decals, or use approved prepaid trash bags, the city may discontinue refuse collection from such multi-family unit or trailer court until the owner(s) or operator(s) satisfies the following: 
(1)  Pay all applicable service fee(s); or 
(2)  Owner(s) or Operator(s) shall make arrangements with a commercial refuse collector for the collection and disposal of the solid waste generated by the multi-family unit or trailer court. 
(d)  If waste containers put out by the occupants of a single-family residence that is being occupied as rental property do not display annual decals or if approved prepaid plastic trash bags are not used, a duly designated officer of the city will issue violation notice(s) to the owner(s) or occupant(s) of the single-family residence. It shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) to take appropriate action to make sure the occupants of the single-family residence place annual decals on their waste containers or use approved prepaid plastic trash bags. If after giving reasonable notice(s) to the owner(s) or occupant(s) the waste containers still do not display annual decals, and approved prepaid plastic trash bags are not used, the city may discontinue refuse collection from such single-family residence and the owner(s) resident satisfies the following: 
(1)  Pay all applicable service fee(s); or 
(2)  Owner(s) or operator(s) shall make arrangements with a commercial refuse collector for the collection and disposal of the solid waste generated by such single-family residence. 
(e)  If the waste containers put out by the occupants of a multi-family unit, trailer court, or single-family residence being occupied as rental property do not display annual decals or if approved prepaid trash bags are not used, in order to prevent the waste in the containers from being scattered upon public or private property, the city, at its option, may remove the waste and bill the owner of the multi-family unit, trailer court or single family residence a service fee. In the event the owner of the multi-family unit, trailer court or single-family residence fails to pay the service fee, the city may discontinue refuse collection from such multi-family unit, trailer court or single-family residence and the owner(s), operator(s) or residents shall make arrangements with a commercial refuse collector for the collection and disposal of the solid waste generated by such multi-family unit, trailer court, single-family residence. 
(f)  When refuse from commercial establishments exceeds four containers per collection the operator of such business is required to remove and dispose of such excess at the expense of the operator. 
(g)  When refuse from a multi-family property with four or less living units exceeds four containers per collection the owner or managing agent of such property is required to remove and dispose of such excess at their expense and is not eligible for city trash collection service. 
(h)  Whenever a person places refuse or other waste material for collection by the city without complying with all the provisions of this article, in addition to or in lieu of prosecution of such person for a Class I misdemeanor violation, the city may also do one of the following: 
(1)  The city may collect the refuse or material notwithstanding the fact that its placement or packaging does not comply with the provisions of this article. In such cases, the city shall after reasonable notice discontinue refuse collection service and assess a service fee against the owner of the property in front of which such waste material was placed. Such service fee(s) shall be in accordance with the following to resume city collection services: 
A service fee as determined appropriate by the city manager or his designee. 
This service fee shall be billed to the owner or manager of the violating property. Fees authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property. 
(2)  The city may choose not to collect the refuse or material after reasonable notice. In such case, the city shall affix a violation to the rejected container(s), refuse or material explaining the reason for the rejection. A similar notice may be issued to the property owner of the property in front of which such uncollected refuse or material was placed. The latter notice may be verbal or written and shall be provided as soon as is feasible after the rejection. 
Where the city has not collected refuse or other material from curbside or elsewhere because such refuse or other materials was not placed or prepared in accordance with this article, the persons responsible for such placement shall remove that refuse or other material as soon as practical after the city has refused collection, and in any event, by the end of the designated collection day. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12; Ord. No. O-14-012, 1-28-14) 
Sec. 21.2-27. - Entry on private property. 
    Municipal vehicles and personnel will not enter private property for the purpose of removing solid waste. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93) 
Sec. 21.2-28. - Placement for collection. 
(a)  Bundles or approved waste containers containing solid waste which are to be collected by the city shall be placed at the edge of the street no earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the previous day and not later than 7:00 a.m. on the appropriate collection day. Approved waste containers shall be removed from the streets as soon as possible, but not later than 7:00 p.m. of that same day. 
(b)  Containers for solid waste set out for collection and disposal by the city shall be placed so as not to hinder, block, retard or endanger those using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or walkways of the city and so as to be reasonably accessible to the employees of the city. 
(c)  In any prosecution charging the failure to display an annual decal on a waste container or use an approved prepaid plastic trash bag, proof that a waste container was placed in front of a residence in violation of this chapter with proof that the defendant was at the time of the violation the occupant of the residence shall constitute in evidence a permissible inference that the occupant of the residence was the person who committed the violation. 
(d)  In any prosecution charging the failure to display an annual decal on a waste container or use an approved prepaid plastic trash bag, proof that an examination of the waste container in question revealed material that identifies the generator of the solid waste, shall constitute in evidence a permissible inference that the generator of the waste was the person who committed the violation. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-14-012, 1-28-14) 
Sec. 21.2-29. - Collection frequency. 
(a)  Curbside collection of solid waste will be provided by the city once each week. Solid waste collection in the Central Business District will be provided two times a week for those businesses not having exterior space for a commercial dumpster. A schedule of days for those collections performed by the city will be available at the waste public works department, and information with reference thereto will be available to the public upon request. 
(b)  Holidays shall include New Year's Day, Fourth of July, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. One collection per week will be made regardless of holidays - collection dates will be advertised. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-30. - Collection by other than city personnel. 
    No person, other than designated city employees, may place solid waste in the city collection vehicles. Subject to the conditions and limitations of this chapter and other applicable regulations, the city or its agents, shall have the sole right to collect solid waste and refuse from single-family residences within the city limits unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-31. - Disposal fees. 
(a)  Refuse collected pursuant to section 21.2-26 of this Code must be contained within (i) an approved prepaid plastic trash bag displaying the official city logo, or (ii) an approved container displaying a valid city decal. Approved prepaid plastic trash bags shall be available for purchase at those locations designated by the city manager or his designee. A list of the currently designated locations for the purchase of approved prepaid plastic trash bags will be available for review at the city collections division or public works department during regular business hours. Decals will be sold at the collections division windows of city hall during regular business hours and through the mail pursuant to a system approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Approved prepaid plastic trash bags shall cover the cost of the disposal and the cost of the bag and shall be determined by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  Annual decals for once per week pickup for reusable trash carts with a volume of up to 32 gallons shall cost $40.00 each. Annual decals for once per week pickup for reusable trash carts with a volume of 64 gallons shall cost $80.00 each. Such decals shall be valid for a 12-month period beginning October 1 through September 30 of each year. The cost for an annual decal will be prorated on a monthly basis by paying the following percentages of the annual decal: 
Period Percentage of Full Price September 1 - October 31 100% November 1 - November 30 92% December 1 - December 31 84% January 1 - January 31 76% February 1 - February 28 68% March 1 - March 31 60% April 1 - April 30 52% May 1 - May 31 44% June 1 - June 30 36% July 1 - July 31 28% August 1 - August 31 20%  
    Such decals are transferable from one address to another upon the approval of the city manager or his designee. All such decals shall prominently display the year of the decal and street address of the location of the trash container. In the event the person purchasing a decal moves outside the city or goes out of business, the purchaser shall be entitled to receive a prorated refund on a monthly basis for that portion of the year the decal will not be used. A request for a refund must be made no later than 30 days after the end of the year for which the decal was issued. Before issuing a refund the director of finance may require satisfactory evidence that a decal for which the refund is sought has been destroyed. For purposes of proration, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of less than one-half of a month shall not be counted. 
(d)  Approved prepaid plastic trash bags with a volume up to 32 gallons include the costs of disposal of waste material. 
(e)  In certain areas designated by the city manager or his designee for twice per week pickup, annual decals for twice per week pickup for reusable trash carts with a volume of up to 32 gallons shall cost $80.00 each. In those same areas, annual decals for twice per week pickup for reusable trash carts with a volume of 64 gallons shall cost $160.00. Such decals shall be valid for a 12-month period beginning October 1 through September 30 of each year. The cost for an annual decal will be prorated on a monthly basis by paying the following percentages of the annual decal: 
Period Percentage of Full Price September 1 - October 31 100% November 1 - November 30 92% December 1 - December 31 84% January 1 - January 31 76% February 1 - February 28 68% March 1 - March 31 60% April 1 - April 30 52% May 1 - May 31 44% June 1 - June 30 36% July 1 - July 31 28% August 1 - August 31 20%  
    In the event the person purchasing a decal moves outside the city or goes out of business, the purchaser shall be entitled to receive a prorated refund on a monthly basis for that portion of the year the decal will not be used. A request for a refund must be made no later than 30 days after the end of the year for which the decal was issued. Before issuing a refund the director of finance may require satisfactory evidence that a decal for which the refund is sought has been destroyed. For purposes of proration, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of less than one-half of a month shall not be counted. Such decals are transferable from one address to another upon the approval of the city manager or his designee. All such decals shall prominently display the year of the decal and street address of the location of the trash container. 
(f)  The owner or operator of any location designated to sell approved prepaid plastic trash bags shall be compensated for accounting and remitting the fee levied for the purchase of the approved prepaid plastic trash bags. Such compensation shall be a deduction of three percent of the amount of the fee from the sale of such approved prepaid plastic trash bags. The deduction shall be accounted for in the accounting report submitted to the city with the fees from the sale of the approved prepaid plastic trash bags provided that the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. The city manager or his designee shall establish criteria for the designation of locations and the accounting and payment procedures by the owners and operators of the designated locations. The fees collected from the sale of approved prepaid plastic trash bags are public funds and shall be held in trust for the city by the person collecting the same. It shall be a criminal offense for the person holding such fees to use them for any purpose whatsoever. 
(g)  Beginning October 1, 2012, the city manager or his designee shall have the authority to issue 64-gallon annual decals at no cost to disadvantaged citizens or families and to elderly or permanently and totally disabled citizens who qualify for the tax relief, who own and occupy an existing dwelling as of July 1, 2012, pursuant to section 36-175 of the City Code upon criteria to be developed by the city manager or his designee. Disadvantaged citizens or families and elderly or permanently and totally disabled citizens who live in multi-family dwellings and trailer courts that do utilize the city's refuse collection services shall not be entitled to a free annual decal. 
(h)  Except as allowed in this chapter, no refunds in whole or in part shall be allowed for approved prepaid plastic trash bags which are unused, lost, destroyed or stolen. Except as allowed in this chapter, no refuse disposal fees shall be discounted, waived or suspended. 
(i)  In the event any annual decal issued under this chapter shall be lost, stolen or destroyed, the person to whom the decal was issued may make application to the collections division or public works department and obtain a duplicate decal upon furnishing information of such fact, by affidavit or other evidence that is satisfactory to the director of finance/director of human services. Any person providing false or intentionally misleading information to the collections division/social services division under this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and the collections division/social services division shall revoke any duplicate decal issued as a result of such false or intentionally misleading information. 
(j)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to provide for refuse collection and disposal on a limited basis at no cost for city sponsored specific community clean-up or litter reduction efforts. The city manager or his designee shall use color-coded plastic bags or approved containers, or other special arrangements which are necessary or appropriate for the administration of such cleanup or litter reduction efforts. 
(k)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to adjust or suspend fees due to natural disasters such as fires, floods and severe storms pursuant to criteria to be developed by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-95-016, 1-10-95; Ord. No. O-95-256, 9-12-95; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-98-213, 9-22-98; Ord. No. O-99-044, 3-9-99; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-05-163, 12-13-05, eff. 1-1-06; Ord. No. O-07-075, 5-8-07, eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12; Ord. No. O-14-012, 1-28-14) 
Sec. 21.2-32. - Administration, prohibition. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for overseeing and employing reasonable discretion in the design, implementation and administration of the variable fee-based disposal system. Any interpretation of sections 21.2-26 through 21.2-32 shall be the responsibility of the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to designate one or more persons to perform all or part of his duties and exercise his rights granted under this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to steal, copy, or counterfeit an approved prepaid plastic trash bag or to steal, copy, counterfeit, alter, or deface any official decal issued pursuant to section 21.2-31 of this chapter. 
(d)  The director of public works, with the approval of the city manager, shall have the authority to adopt an appeals process for customers who believe the provisions of this chapter have been applied in error. All appeals shall be in accordance with the process adopted by the director of public works. A copy of the appeals process shall be kept in office of the director of the department of public works and in the city manager's office, and shall be available for review upon request. 
(Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-14-012, 1-28-14) 
Secs. 21.2-33-21.2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION-COMMERCIAL COLLECTION 

Sec. 21.2-36. - Authority to make or revise regulations. 
    The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to make or revise such regulations concerning commercial collection and disposal as deemed necessary; provided, that such regulations shall not be contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91) 
Sec. 21.2-37. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposal of solid waste without a business license for said business which is to be obtained from the appropriate city office. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91) 
Sec. 21.2-38. - Compliance with code. 
    The commercial collector shall conform to the applicable provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city, as well as all other applicable regulations and policies. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91) 
Sec. 21.2-39. - Placement for collection. 
(a)  All solid waste collections made by commercial collectors shall be made directly from the premises of the owner, and any empty containers shall be returned directly to said premises. 
(b)  No person shall place any commercial container on public property or in public right-of-way without written permission of the city manager or his designee, nor shall any person place such container on private property in such a way that collection of solid waste will obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic or otherwise create a safety hazard for traffic. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure all commercial containers and the immediate area around them shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times. Solid waste shall be completely contained within such container, and all doors of the unit shall be kept closed. Containers shall conform to all state and federal regulations regarding storm water run-off. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97) 
Sec. 21.2-40. - Container requirements. 
    All solid waste containers to be collected by commercial collector shall conform to the specifications therefor established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93) 
Sec. 21.2-41. - Vehicle regulations. 
(a)  All vehicles used in the collection of solid waste shall be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent spillage of the solid waste to be collected therein. 
(b)  All vehicles transporting solid waste shall be watertight and completely enclosed. 
(c)  All vehicles two tons gross in weight (G.P.W.) or more to be used to dispose of solid waste at the RSA facility shall be equipped with suitable hoisting or ejection equipment. 
(d)  All vehicles to be used to dispose of solid waste at the RSA facility shall be rated with their volume capacity. 
(e)  No vehicle used in the collection of solid waste shall be parked on a city street overnight. 
(f)  No vehicle shall be parked in violation of the City Code relating to parking of trucks and commercial vehicles in a residential district. 
(g)  All vehicles shall transport solid waste in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or adversely affect public health, nor create any unnecessary noise. 
(h)  All vehicles used in the collection of solid waste shall meet all federal and state safety requirements for commercial vehicles. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Secs. 21.2-42-21.2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 21.2-46. - Dumping regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of solid waste upon the premises or in the container of another or in any public place or on any public road, street or highway, in any manner, except in approved waste containers provided for such purposes other than in a manner provided by this Code. 
(b)  When a violation of the provisions of this section has been observed by any person, or if the solid waste is dumped or disposed of in the highway, right-of-way, street, road, property adjacent to public way, or private property, and examination of the solid waste reveals material that identifies the generator of the solid waste, the generator shall be presumed to be the person dumping such solid waste; provided, however, that such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-47. - Penalty for violation of this chapter. 
    Except as provided in section 21.2-51, violations of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as follows: 
(a)  For a first offense within one year, a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  For a second offense within one year, a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(c)  For a third and all subsequent offenses within one year, a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any person who unlawfully dumps trash, garbage or litter on public or private property may have his or her driving privileges suspended and may be ordered to perform community service as provided in Section 33.1-346 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97); Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03 
Sec. 21.2-47.1. - Payment of service fees. 
    For failure to display an official annual decal on a waste container or for failure to use an approved prepaid trash bag, the person in violation shall be assessed a service fee established by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-14-012, 1-28-14) 
Sec. 21.2-48. - Solid waste generated outside the city. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or business to bring into the city any solid waste accumulated outside the city and deposit the same at a RSA facility or at any other place within the city, unless approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-49. - Placing or removing solid waste in or from public containers, or bins or containers for recyclable materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of in any public solid waste container, in the city, placed at various locations in the city to prevent littering on the public ways, any solid waste generated incident to the ordinary conduct of a household, place of business or industrial establishment or any other solid waste prohibited from disposal in a RSA facility pursuant to section 21.2-59(b). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any unauthorized solid waste into or around recycling bins or containers which are part of a city recycling program, whether publicly or privately administered, except for such specific recyclable materials for which such bins or containers are designated. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any recyclable materials from a recycling bin or container that is part of a city recycling program, once the recyclable materials have been placed in or around the recycling bin or container. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-50. - Repeated violations of chapter. 
    Any person who violates this chapter, two or more times during a one-year period may be prohibited from future use of any recycling and RSA facility by the city manager or his designee. 
    Upon request, a hearing shall be held before a designated officer of the city on such prohibition. The hearing shall be an informal administrative proceeding other than a judicial-type of proceeding and the rules of evidence shall not apply. The decision of the designated officer shall be final and not subject to appeal. 
(Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-51. - Illegal possession or usage of approved prepaid plastic trash bags. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell or use an approved prepaid plastic trash bag or annual decal that the person did not purchase at face value, receive from a person who purchased the approved prepaid plastic trash bag or annual decal at face value or receive from an authorized city agency. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or the operator of any business, other than a business that has been properly designated to sell approved prepaid plastic trash bags or annual decals as provided in section 21-2.31 of this chapter, to possess approved prepaid plastic trash bags or annual decals or to sell approved prepaid plastic trash bags or annual decals to any person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any business that has been properly designated to sell approved prepaid plastic trash bags or annual decals as provided in section 21.2-31 of this chapter, to possess or to sell any approved prepaid plastic trash bag or annual decal that was not issued to the business by the city. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each incident of possession, sale or use of an approved prepaid plastic trash bags in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12; Ord. No. O-14-012, 1-28-14) 
Sec. 21.2-52. - Removal of personal property from right-of-way. 
    When personal property is removed from any leased or rented commercial or residential premises pursuant to an action of unlawful detainer or ejectment, or pursuant to any other action in which personal property is removed from the premises in order to restore such premises to the person entitled thereto, and the personal property is placed in the public right-of-way the tenant shall have the right to remove his personal property from the public right-of-way during the 24-hour period after eviction. Upon the expiration of the 24-hour period after eviction, the landlord of the leased or rented commercial or residential premises shall remove, or dispose of, any such personal property remaining in the public right-of-way. If the landlord fails to remove the remaining personal property from the public right of way within a 48-hour period, the city shall remove the personal property and the costs or expenses incurred by the city in removing the personal property shall be chargeable to and paid by the landlord. The charges authorized by this section which are charged to the landlord and which remain unpaid shall constitute a lien against the property from which the personal property was removed, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes and may be collected by the city in the same manner in which delinquent taxes are collected. 
(Ord. of 12-14-10, No. O-10-150) 
Secs. 21.2-53-21.2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL-REGION 2000 SERVICES AUTHORITY PROVISIONS 

Sec. 21.2-56. - Administration. 
    The RSA board of directors is authorized to adopt appropriate rules and regulations and to establish policies to administer the operation of RSA facilities. Any rules or regulations adopted or policies established pursuant to this section shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter. A violation of any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-57. - Operating procedures. 
    The RSA director may adopt rules and regulations and establish policies for the operating procedures of any RSA facility. Such facility shall be regulated by the RSA director in accordance with such operating procedures and with any rules and regulations adopted and policies established by the RSA board of directors for the administration of the operation of the facility. Any rules or regulations adopted or policies established pursuant to this section shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter. A violation of any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-58. - Region 2000 Services Authority facility. 
(a)  Solid waste which is generated within the city may be deposited at a RSA facility. Upon the request of a RSA facility attendant, any person delivering solid waste for disposal at a RSA facility shall provide verification to such employee that the solid waste proposed for disposal was generated in the city. 
(b)  No scavenging or salvaging at a RSA facility shall be permitted except as may be contracted by the RSA. No person, except as specifically authorized by the RSA, shall dispose of any solid waste in a RSA facility, except during the hours of operation as established by the RSA and posted at the entrance to the facility. 
(c)  City residents are allowed an unlimited number of free trips up to 500 pounds to the RSA facility per calendar month from the house in which they reside. Residents must show proof of their Lynchburg address to the RSA facility attendant each time they come to the RSA facility. If a resident's driver's license (or I.D. card) does not show their correct and current address, they must also bring a current utility bill showing their address of the origin of the load. If a resident has someone else bring in a load for them, they must give the hauler either a driver's license or a current utility bill from their address. In addition, the hauler must show their driver's license. If a resident's free trip goes over 500 pounds and/or if the resident makes other trips to the RSA facility during the calendar month after utilizing their free trip, the resident must pay by cash or check at the posted tipping fee. 
    As of July 1, 2012, residents are allowed an unlimited number of free trips of segregated brush and bulk materials. These trips do not count towards a resident's free monthly trip to the RSA facility. Any mixed loads of brush, bulk and trash will count towards the resident's one free trip per month. 
    Tires are not included as part of a resident's free trip. There is a surcharge for disposal of tires. Tire disposal rates are posted at the RSA facility. 
    Rental property is considered a business. Landlords, who do not have a charge account with the RSA facility, must pay by cash or check at the posted tipping fee rate when bringing a load from property they own but do not reside in. If a business, church (or other charitable organization) does not have a charge account with the RSA facility, they must also pay by cash or check at the posted tipping fee rate. 
    Household hazardous waste collection is a service for Lynchburg residents only, businesses are excluded. Household hazardous waste collection days are announced yearly. City residents must show a picture identification for proof of their Lynchburg address. Following are examples of what residents can bring to the RSA facility on the household hazardous waste collection day: acids/bases, aerosols, antifreeze, autostarter, brake fluids, batteries, cleaners/polishes, corrosives, drain openers, flammables, furniture stripper, herbicides, kerosene, lighter fluids, oven cleaners, oxidizers, oil based paints, pesticides, photo/pool chemicals, poisons, solvents/thinners, used motor oil, weed killers and wood preservatives. For more information, guidelines and restrictions are posted on the RSA website. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-59. - Substance regulations. 
(a)  Generally. No solid waste of any sort shall be removed from private premises and deposited for disposal within the city at any location other than those approved by the city manager or his designee provided that the materials approved for disposal are consistent with the federal and state regulations for the disposal of such solid waste and this chapter. 
(b)  Prohibited solid waste. Solid waste prohibited from disposal in the RSA's facilities are as follows: 
(1)  Free liquids. 
a.  Bulk or non-containerized liquid waste unless the waste is leachate or gas condensate derived from the RSA facility itself and the facility is designed with a composite liner and leachate collection system as described in sections 5.1.B.9. and 5.5.B. of the Virginia Solid Waste Management Regulations (VR 672-20-10), or 
b.  Containers holding liquid waste, unless: 
1.  The container is a small container similar in size and total quantity to that normally found in household waste; 
2.  The container is designed to hold liquids for use other than for storage; or 
(2)  Regulated hazardous wastes. 
(3)  Solid waste, residue or soil containing dioxins as regulated within the Virginia Solid Waste Management Regulations (VR 672-20-20), and as prohibited by rules or regulations adopted or policies established by the RSA. 
(4)  Solid waste, residue or soil containing polychlorinated biphyenols (PCBs) as regulated within the Virginia Solid Waste Management Regulations (VR 672-20-10), and as prohibited by rules or regulations adopted or policies established by the RSA. 
(5)  Unstabilized sewage sludge or sludges and combustion residue (ash) as regulated within the Virginia Solid Waste Management Regulations (VR 672-20-10), and as prohibited by rules or regulations adopted or policies established by the RSA. 
(6)  Pesticide containers that have not been triple rinsed and crushed. 
(7)  Drums and barrels that are not empty, properly cleaned and opened with both ends cut out. 
(8)  Waste oil, with the exception being used motor oil accepted from Lynchburg residents on household hazardous waste collection days. 
(9)  Contaminated soil as regulated within the Virginia Solid Waste Management Regulations (VR 672-20-10), and as prohibited by rules or regulations adopted or policies established by the RSA. 
(10)  Asbestos containing material as prohibited by rules or regulations adopted or policies established by the RSA. 
(11)  Regulated infectious wastes. 
(12)  Large animal carcasses. 
(13)  Any solid waste otherwise prohibited under this chapter or by rules or regulations adopted or policies established by the RSA. 
(c)  Permitted solid waste. Solid waste not listed in subsection 21.2-59(b) may be accepted for disposal at a RSA facility. Such solid waste that generally will be accepted, subject to RSA facility operating procedures, for disposal in a RSA facility includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the following: 
(1)  Garbage. 
(2)  Household waste. 
(3)  Inert waste. 
(4)  Refuse. 
(5)  Rubbish. 
(6)  Debris and yard waste. 
(7)  White goods. 
(8)  Wood, debris and yard waste. Any wood, debris and yard waste delivered to a RSA facility for disposal shall be separated from other solid waste being delivered to the facility. 
(d)  Any person who delivers to a RSA facility any solid waste prohibited from disposal in the facility under subsection 21.2-59(b), shall promptly upon notification from the RSA remove such prohibited wastes from the facility. Failure to remove such prohibited waste constitutes a violation of this chapter. The RSA may choose to sample, test, store, transport and haul any such prohibited waste for appropriate disposal and charge the person delivering said waste for all incurred city and contractual costs. 
(e)  Any person who delivers to a RSA facility any non-household waste, either entirely or in part, must participate in an inspection of that delivered waste upon request by authorized employees and according to solid waste management facility procedures. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-97-201, 9-23-97, eff. 10-1-97; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Sec. 21.2-60. - Region 2000 Services Authority (RSA) facility fees. 
(a)  Fees for solid waste delivered to a RSA facility shall be periodically reviewed and determined by the RSA board of directors as specified and posted at the RSA facility. 
(b)  Payments will be collected at the RSA facility. 
(Ord. No. O-91-056, 3-26-91, eff. 4-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-246, 9-14-93, eff. 10-1-93; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-12-098, 9-11-12) 
Chapter 22 - HOUSING AND HYGIENE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09-015, adopted March 24, 2009, repealed §§ 22-1-22-7. 
Sec. 22-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-86-278, § 2, adopted Nov. 25, 1986, repealed § 22-8, which pertained to appeals from notices of violation of this chapter, and derived from § 18-3(e), (f) of the city's 1959 Code. 
Secs. 22-9-22-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09-015, adopted March 24, 2009, repealed §§ 22-9-22-15. 
Secs. 22-16-22-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-86-278, § 2, adopted Nov. 25, 1986, amended the Code by repealing §§ 22-27-22-49, which sections were the substantive provisions of Art. II of Ch. 22. Said §§ 22-27-22-49 pertained to the board of housing and hygiene and were derived from § 18-3(f) of the city's 1959 Code. 

Secs. 22-27-22-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. O-86-278, § 2, adopted Nov. 25, 1986, amended Ch. 22 by repealing §§ 22-50, 22-57-22-67, 22-74-22-77, 22-87-22-95, and 22-102-22-108, which sections constituted the entire substantive provisions of Art. III of said chapter. Said Art. III contained the minimum standards for housing and hygiene and was derived from Code 1959, §§ 18-5(18-5(a)-(j)), 18-6(18-6(d)-(g)), 18-7(18-7(a)-(h)), 18-8(18-8(a)-(f)), and 18-9, and from an ordinance enacted Aug. 8, 1978. 

Secs. 22-50-22-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ROOMING HOUSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-120, 22-121. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09-015, adopted March 24, 2009, repealed §§ 22-120 and 22-121. 
Sec. 22-122. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-86-278, § 2, adopted Nov. 25, 1986, repealed § 22-122 which pertained to sanitary facilities for rooming houses and was derived from Code 1959, § 18-10(f). 
Sec. 22-123. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09-015 adopted March 24, 2009, repealed § 22-123. 
Secs. 22-124-22-127. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-86-278, § 2, adopted Nov. 25, 1986, repealed §§ 22-124-22-127, which contained general provisions relative to rooming houses, and which derived from §§ 18-10(h)-(k) of the city's 1959 Code. 
Secs. 22-128-22-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Secs. 22-134-22-143. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09-015, adopted March 24, 2009, repealed §§ 22-134-22-143. 
Secs. 22-144-22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED 

Secs. 22-151-22-156. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. O-86-278, § 2, adopted Nov. 25, 1986, amended the Code by repealing §§ 22-151-22-156, which sections constituted the substantive provisions of Art. V of Ch. 22 in their entirety. Said Art. V pertained to paint and other substances containing lead and was derived from §§ 18.1-1-18.1-6 of the city's 1959 Code and from an ordinance of Sept. 11, 1979. 

Secs. 22-157-22-160. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09-015, adopted March 24, 2009, repealed §§ 22-157-22-160. 
Chapter 22.1 - REGULATIONS OF SMOKING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Air pollution generally, Ch. 4; smoking on intraurban buses prohibited, § 12-40. 

Sec. 22.1-1. - Legislative purpose and intent. 
    Based on a substantial body of scientific and medical evidence and on the 1986 Report of the Surgeon General entitled "The Health Consequences of Involuntary Smoking", the City of Lynchburg hereby acknowledges that passively inhaled tobacco smoke poses a potential health hazard to persons exposed thereto. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating the smoking of tobacco in designated public places and places of employment in a manner that recognizes the competing interests of smokers and non-smokers, and the burdens hereby imposed on persons in control of the places regulated or places of employment to implement more stringent standards applicable to the particular establishment of place of employment. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases shall, for purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Bar or lounge area shall mean an area or a room utilized primarily for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the sale of food is merely incidental to the sale of alcoholic beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar or lounge area, the term "bar" or "lounge area" shall not be construed to encompass an entire restaurant or any dining area. 
    Child care facility shall mean any facility which regularly keeps more than five non-related children or keeps five or less non-related children in a non-residential setting, whether public or private. 
    Food store shall mean any supermarket or grocery store which is designed and arranged to display food products and which has as its primary business purpose the sale of food products to consumers for consumption off the premises, and not for resale. 
    Health care facility shall mean any office or institution providing individual care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical, physiological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, offices of any physician, dentist, psychologist, psychiatrist, physiologist, podiatrist, optometrist, chiropractor or optician. 
    Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Public meeting or hearing shall mean any meeting, assembly or hearing held in a public building or building leased for a public purpose which is open to the public for the conduct of the affairs of, and the transaction of business by, any legislative, administrative or advisory body or agency of the city, including boards, commissions, authorities, committees, and any other subordinate groups thereof, receiving or expending, and supported in whole or in part by, public funds. 
    Public place shall mean an enclosed area available for use by, or accessible to, the general public during the normal course of business, conducted by either private or public entities. 
    Restaurant shall mean any building, structure, or area used as, maintained as, advertised as, or held out to the public to be an establishment where food is made available to be consumed on the premises. Restaurants shall also include any cafeteria area or other area in any private place of employment, industry or other place of employment that has been set aside or designated for the consumption of food by employees. 
    Retail or service establishment shall mean any establishment which offers goods or services for sale to the general public. 
    Shared work area shall mean any enclosed area on the premises of a place of employment (1) in which two or more employees are assigned to work for most of their work day, (2) where such employees must share common work spaces, equipment or facilities, and (3) where each such employee is aware of or readily available to observe the activities of others taking place in his or her work area. 
    Smoke or smoking shall mean the carrying or holding of a lighted or smoldering pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting, inhaling or exhaling of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
    Theater shall mean any indoor facility or auditorium, open to the public, which is primarily used for, or designed for, the purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage production, musical recital, dance, lecture or other similar performance. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-3. - Smoking prohibited in certain public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any of the following public places: 
(1)  Elevators, regardless of capacity, except in an elevator located in a single-family dwelling. 
(2)  Retail, wholesale, discount and service establishments and financial institutions serving the general public, including, but not limited to, department stores, grocery stores, convenience stores, drug stores, clothing stores, shoe stores, hardware stores, banks, savings and loan institutions, hair salons and barber shops. 
(3)  Indoor service lines, cashier areas, and counter service areas. 
(4)  Public restrooms. 
(5)  Health care facilities, regardless of capacity. 
(6)  Rooms in which a public meeting or hearing is being held. 
(7)  Places of entertainment, including, but not limited to, theaters, concert halls, gymnasiums, auditoriums, or other enclosed arenas; except smoking by performers as part of the production. 
(8)  Art galleries, libraries, museums, and similar cultural facilities. 
(9)  Educational facilities, whether public or private, in common areas such as classrooms, offices, hallways, libraries, auditoriums, and public meeting rooms. 
(10)  Child care facilities, whether public or private. 
(11)  Indoor facilities used for recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, bingo halls, bowling centers, and skating rinks. 
(12)  Any part of a restaurant designated a "no smoking" area pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(13)  Buildings owned or leased by the city or the school board used for public purpose with the exception of lawfully designated smoking areas. 
(14)  Meeting houses, community centers, and similar facilities open to the public at large. 
(15)  Vehicles owned or leased by the city and vehicles owned or leased by other persons and used regularly for public transportation including, but not limited to, transit buses and school buses. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-4. - Regulation of smoking in certain private places of employment. 
    Any employer who owns and operates a business within the city limits and who employs five or more employees, who regularly work on the business premises during common hours, shall have the responsibility to provide, to the extent reasonably practicable, smoke-free work areas for nonsmoking employees who work in a shared work area or space. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-5. - Designated no-smoking areas in restaurants. 
(a)  Any restaurant having a seating capacity for 40 or more persons shall have a designated no-smoking area sufficient to meet customer demand and comprising at least 25 percent of the seating capacity of such restaurant. The designated no-smoking area shall be located in a separate room if one is available in the restaurant or, if no separate room is available, it shall be located in a compact and contiguous area as far removed from areas where smoking is permitted, and closest to the best source of ventilation, as is reasonably possible under applicable building code and fire regulations. In determining whether the designated non-smoking area is of sufficient size to comply with this ordinance, seats in any room or area which is closed for business at the time of determination shall not be counted. 
(b)  In determining whether a restaurant is subject to the provisions of paragraph (a), the following shall not be included: 
(1)  Seats in the bar or lounge area of a restaurant. 
(2)  Seats in any separate room of a restaurant which is used exclusively for private functions. 
(3)  Seats located out-of-doors. 
(c)  Any restaurant required to have a designated no smoking area shall post signs in accordance with the provisions of section 22.1-8 at each entrance to the establishment indicating that a no smoking area is available. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-6. - Exceptions to this chapter. 
    The prohibitions of this chapter shall not apply within the following areas: 
(a)  Lawfully designated smoking areas which meet the conditions set forth below in section 22.1-7. 
(b)  An area of a theater commonly referred to as a lobby if physically separated from the spectator area. Theaters are encouraged to provide separate areas in lobby areas for both smokers and nonsmokers. 
(c)  Office or work areas which are not shared work areas and which are not entered by the public in the normal course of business or use of the premises. For purposes of this ordinance an office must be a totally enclosed area, areas that have been divided into separate work areas by partitions shall not be considered offices and shall constitute shared work areas if other employees are located adjacent to such partitions. 
(d)  Bars and lounge areas. 
(e)  Any tobacco shop or store primarily concerned with selling tobacco and smoking implements. 
(f)  Those health care facilities or portions thereof which engage primarily in the treatment of patients suffering from alcohol and other chemical dependency or abuse, or psychiatric disorders or illnesses when implementation of the smoking prohibitions contained in this ordinance would, in the written opinion of attending physicians, produce a significant risk of worsening a patient's mental health. 
(g)  Buildings owned or leased by the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the federal government and its agencies. 
(h)  Restaurants, conference or meeting rooms, ballrooms, and public or private assembly rooms while these places are being used exclusively for private functions. The fact that tickets to such functions may be offered for sale to the public or guests may be invited to such functions does not prevent the functions from being private functions. 
(i)  Office or work areas which are not shared work areas and which are not entered by the public in the normal course of business or use of the premises. 
(j)  Areas of enclosed shopping centers or malls that are external to the retail stores and are used by customers as a route of travel from one store to another, and that consist primarily of walkways and seating accommodations. 
(k)  In the in-patient sleeping quarters of any health care facility, except hospitals. Each facility shall make a reasonable effort to assign patients to sleeping rooms according to the patient's individual nonsmoking preference. 
(l)  The sleeping quarters of nonambulatory hospital patients, when the physician writes an order in the patient's record allowing that patient to smoke. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-7. - Designated smoking areas. 
    The owner or person in charge of any building, structure, space, place or area in which smoking is prohibited may designate separate rooms or areas in which smoking is permitted, provided that: 
(1)  The designated smoking area should preferably be limited to 25 percent, but in any event shall not exceed 50 percent of that portion of the building, structure, space, place or area open to the general public. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the 50 percent limitation, the designated smoking areas may not encompass any area outlined in section 22.1-3, subsections (a)(1), (3), (4), (6), (12) and (15). 
(3)  Designated smoking areas shall be separate to the extent reasonably practicable from those rooms or areas entered by the public in the normal course of use of the particular business or institution. 
(4)  In designated smoking areas, existing ventilation systems and existing physical barriers shall be used when reasonably practical to minimize the toxic effect of smoke and the permeation of smoke into no smoking areas. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-8. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  Any person who owns, manages or otherwise controls any building or area in which smoking is regulated by this chapter shall post in an appropriate place in a clear, conspicuous, and sufficient manner "Smoking Permitted" signs or "No Smoking" signs (or a sign displaying the international "No Smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representative of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). Print on such signs shall be at least one inch in height and the international symbol, if used, shall have a circle of at least four inches in diameter. 
(b)  Every restaurant regulated by this chapter shall post at or near its entrance a sign stating that a no smoking section is available. 
(c)  "No Smoking" signs may, but are not required to, contain language that smoking is prohibited by city ordinance and that violation of the no smoking prohibition is a Class 4 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $100.00. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-9. - Structural modifications. 
    Persons regulated by the provisions of this chapter are encouraged to make such structural modifications to their respective buildings or structures as may be necessary to prevent or reduce the permeation of smoke from smoking areas into no smoking areas; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring any such person to make such modifications. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-10. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the prohibitions or restrictions of this chapter to fail to comply with its provisions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area prohibited or restricted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and each day of violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-11. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the director of health of the city or his/her duly authorized representatives. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the director of health of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-12. - Severability. 
    If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such judicial decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 22.1-13. - Other applicable laws and policies. 
    This chapter does not in any way restrict the right of property owners to adopt more restrictive smoking policies, including the prohibition of smoking, and shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited or restricted by other applicable statutes and ordinances, or the policies of individual establishments. 
(Ord. No. O-89-173, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Chapter 23 - JUNK, SECONDHAND ARTICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate junk dealers, § 38(3). 
Cross reference- License fee for junk dealers, § 36-61. 

Sec. 23-1. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the word "junk" shall be held to mean and include any kind of secondhand articles, rags, rag cullings, bones, bottles, puer, scrap, metals, metal drosses, steel, iron, old lead pipe, automobile parts or accessories, old bathroom fixtures, old rubber, old clothes, shoes and any other item commonly known as junk. 
Sec. 23-2. - Purchase from minor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any junk dealer, or his agent or employee, or any junk collector, to buy or receive, either directly or indirectly, from any minor, any junk without written permission from the legal parent or guardian of such minor. 
(Code 1959, § 19-1) 
Sec. 23-3. - Register of purchases-Required. 
    Every junk dealer and every junk collector shall keep a register, which shall contain the name of the person from whom any junk is purchased or received, the date when received, and when purchased, the residence or place of business of such person from whom such goods are bought or received, and a full description of such articles or materials so purchased or received. (Code 1959, § 19-2) 
Sec. 23-4. - Same-Inspection by police. 
    Every junk dealer and junk collector shall allow any officer of the police department of the city to examine and inspect his register of purchases at any time. 
(Code 1959, § 19-3) 
Sec. 23-5. - Inspection of goods, etc. 
    If sufficient information cannot be gained from inspection of the register of purchases by any officer of the police department of the city, the junk dealer or junk collector required to keep such register, or his agent, shall, upon request of any officer of the police department, permit and allow such officer to examine and inspect any and all goods, wares, merchandise or materials belonging to or temporarily left in charge of such junk dealer or junk collector. 
(Code 1959, § 19-6) 
Sec. 23-6. - Special records. 
(a)  Dealers in the following articles and items shall prepare a record of all such goods acquired by him from other than a licensed dealer: 
(1)  Wearing apparel of any nature. 
(2)  Automobile tires, parts, accessories or equipment of any kind of character. 
(3)  Furniture, rugs, curtains, shades, pictures or other furnishings of a similar character. 
(b)  Such records shall contain a brief description of each article so acquired, when the same was acquired and the name, race and address of the person from whom the same was acquired. 
(c)  Any such dealer may be required to document all such sales or acquisitions to the police department upon their request, and such records shall be made available for inspection by any officer of the police department upon request. 
(Code 1959, §§ 9-7-9-9) 
Sec. 23-7. - Pawnbrokers. 
    Sections 54-4000 through 54-4014, Code of Virginia, regulating and controlling pawnbrokers are hereby adopted by reference and shall be enforced within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-98-226, 10-27-98) 
Cross reference- License fee for pawnbrokers, § 36-69. 
Chapter 23.1 - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; city market, Ch. 13; junk and secondhand articles, § 23-1 et seq.; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 29; tax code, Ch. 36; licenses for antique shows and sales, § 36-60; junk dealer's license, § 36-61; precious metals dealer's license, § 36-78; classified business and professional licenses, § 36-113 et seq. 

Sec. 23.1-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Coin means any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape, weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money. 
    Dealer means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of: 
(i)  Purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems; 
(ii)  Removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by such person, firm, partnership, or corporation; or 
(iii)  Buying, acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from such manufactured articles. "Dealer" shall mean all employers and principals on whose behalf a purchase is made, and any employee or agent who makes any such purchase for or on behalf of his employer or principal. 
This definition shall not be construed so as to include persons engaged in the following: 
(a)  Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories, provided the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Purchases of precious metals or gems from a duly qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of the estate being administered by such fudiciary in the administration of an estate. 
(c)  Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by such retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in. 
(d)  Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such activities are within his normal course of business. 
(e)  Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers or by mail originating outside the City of Lynchburg. 
(f)  Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a by-product. 
    Gems means any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry. 
    Precious metals means any item except coins composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or platinum alloys. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 23.1-2. - Records to be kept; copy furnished to local authorities; inspection of records. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record, in English, of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each such purchase shall be retained by the dealer for not less than 24 months. These records shall set forth the following: 
(1)  A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or carat of any gem, and the price paid for each item; 
(2)  The date and time of receiving the items purchased; and, 
(3)  The name, address, age, sex, race, driver's license number or Social Security number, and signature of the seller. 
(b)  The information required by paragraph (a) of section 23.1-2 shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer, and a copy shall be mailed or delivered within 24 hours of the time of purchase to the chief of police of the City of Lynchburg. 
(c)  Every dealer shall admit to his premises during regular business hours the chief of police of the City of Lynchburg, or his sworn designee, or any law enforcement official of the state or federal governments, and shall permit such law enforcement officer to examine all records required by this chapter, and to examine any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer of official to be missing or stolen. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 23.1-3. - Credentials required from seller. 
    No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identification issued by a governmental agency with a photograph of the seller thereon, and at least one other corroborating means of identification. The type of identification used by the seller shall be noted in the records required to be kept by dealers pursuant to section 23.1-2 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 23.1-4. - Prohibited purchases. 
(a)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of 18. 
(b)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 23.1-5. - Dealer to retain purchases. 
(a)  The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of ten business days from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the chief of police of the City of Lynchburg. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter, or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the Lynchburg City Limits. 
(b)  If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of ten business days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 23.1-6. - Record of disposition. 
    Each dealer shall keep and maintain for at least 24 months an accurate and legible record of the name and address of the person, firm, or corporation to which he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required by section 23.1-5. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased such item. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 23.1-7. - Bond or letter of credit required of dealers when permit obtained. 
(a)  Every dealer shall secure a permit as required by section 23.1-9, and each dealer at the time of obtaining such permit shall enter into a recognizance to the City of Lynchburg, secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia, in the penal sum of $10,000.00 conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this chapter. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia a letter of credit in favor of the City of Lynchburg in the sum of $10,000.00. 
(b)  A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of credit issued to cover all employees and all transactions occurring at a single location. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 23.1-8. - Private action on bond or letter of credit. 
    If any person shall be aggrieved by the misconduct of any dealer who has violated the provisions of this chapter, he may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against such dealer and his surety; provided, that recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment, if any, which is unsatisfied by the dealer. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 23.1-9. - Permit required; method of obtaining permit; no convictions of certain crimes; approval of weighing devices; renewal; permanent location required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the activities of a dealer as defined in section 23.1-1 without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police of the City of Lynchburg. 
(b)  To obtain a permit, the dealer shall file with the chief of police an application form which shall include the dealer's full name, any aliases, address, age, sex and fingerprints; the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if any; and the location of the dealer's place of business. Upon filing this application and the payment of a $200.00 application fee, not prorated, the dealer shall be issued a permit by the chief of police or his designee; provided, that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven years prior to the date of application. The permit shall be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under any ordinance similar in substance to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Before a permit may be issued, the dealer must have all weighing devices used in his business inspected and approved by local or state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the chief of police. 
(d)  This permit shall be valid for one year from the date issued and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained with an annual permit fee of $200.00, not prorated. No permit shall be transferable. 
(e)  If the business of the dealer is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays, Sundays, and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the chief of police of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 23.1-10. - Exemptions from chapter. 
    The chief of police for the City of Lynchburg, or his designee, may waive by written notice implementation of any one or more of the provisions of this chapter, except section 23.1-4, for particular numismatic, gem, or antique exhibitions or craft shows sponsored by nonprofit organizations; provided, that the purpose of the exhibitions is nonprofit in nature, notwithstanding the fact that there may be casual purchases and trades made at such exhibitions. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 23.1-11. - Penalties; first and subsequent offenses. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction by any court of a dealer for violation of any provision of this chapter, the chief of police may revoke his permit to engage in business as a dealer under this chapter for a period of one full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory upon a second conviction. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 23.1-12. - Coins exempt. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale or purchase of coins. 
(Ord. No. O-83-023, § 1, 2-8-83; Ord. No. O-83-169, 8-9-83) 
Sec. 23.1-13. - Itinerant dealers in precious metals and gems. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to itinerant dealers in precious metals and gems that do not maintain an established place of business within the city that is regularly open to the public. Because itinerant dealers in precious metals and gems do not have an established place of business within the city some of the provisions of this chapter may not be applicable to them. Therefore, the chief of police or his designee may modify or waive by written notice any of the provisions of this chapter that the chief of police or his designee do not believe can be reasonably applied to itinerant dealers in precious metals and gems; provided, the spirit and intent of this chapter are observed and the regulation of itinerant dealers in precious metals and gems is not compromised. 
(b)  No itinerant dealer in precious metals and gems shall do any business within the city until such itinerant dealer has applied to the commissioner of the revenue for a business license as required by section 36-126.6 of the City Code and paid any business license taxes that may be assessed by the commissioner of the revenue. No permit to deal in precious metals and gems shall be issued by the police department without the itinerant dealer providing proof that he has obtained a business license from the commissioner of the revenue's office. 
(Ord. of 11-12-02, Ord. No. O-02-209; Ord. No. O-07-156, 11-27-07) 
Chapter 24 - LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Museum advisory board, § 2-275 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-1. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a department of libraries and museums for the purpose of operating the Lynchburg Public Libraries and the Lynchburg Museum System. 
(Code 1959, § 2-57.3; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81; Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 24-2. - Personnel. 
    The city manager shall appoint, on recommendation of the director of libraries and museums, such staff member and employees as may be authorized from time to time to carry out effectively the work of the department of libraries and museums. 
(Code 1959, § 2-57.5; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81; Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Secs. 24-3-24-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-89-185, § 2, adopted June 27, 1989, repealed §§ 24-3-24-6. Said sections contained provisions relative to the Lynchburg Public Library and were derived from §§ 2-57.4, 2-57.6 and 2-57.7 of the 1959 Code; from Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, adopted May 26, 1981; and from Ord. No. O-88-062, § 1, adopted March 22, 1988, effective July 1, 1988. 
ARTICLE II. - DIRECTOR 

Sec. 24-7. - Control. 
    The department of libraries and museums shall be under the control of a director. 
(Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 24-8. - Appointment, terms. 
    The director of libraries and museums shall be appointed by the city manager and whose term of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 24-9. - Duties. 
    The director of libraries and museums shall have general supervision of all city libraries and museums and shall be charged with enforcement of all ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to this department adopted for the regulation thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, 6-27-89) 
ARTICLE III. - LIBRARIES 

Sec. 24-10. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a division of libraries within the department of libraries and museums. 
(Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 24-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed § 24-11. 
Sec. 24-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-05-082, adopted June 28, 2005, repealed § 24-12. 
Sec. 24-13. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city manager shall have the right to prescribe reasonable rules, regulations and charges for the use, by the public, of the books, documents writings and other library property in and outside of the library quarters so that the public shall receive the largest use thereof and greatest benefit therefrom consistent with the proper protection and preservation of the library and the increase and expansion thereof. Such rules, regulations and charges shall be valid and binding unless and until otherwise directed by council who shall promptly be furnished with a copy of such rules, regulations and charges and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 24-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-14-083, § 1, adopted July 8, 2014 , repealed § 24-14, which pertained to library fees and derived from Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, adopted June 27, 1989. 
Sec. 24-15. - Public law library support and maintenance fees. 
    That beginning July 1, 1989, and continuing thereafter until changed by council, there is hereby assessed, pursuant to the provision of section 42.1-70 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, the sum of $4.00 as part of the costs of each civil action filed in the circuit court and the general district court of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, said assessment to be used for the support and maintenance of said law library which is open to the public. 
    That the assessments hereby levied shall be collected by the clerks of the respective courts in which the action is filed, and shall be remitted to the finance department and be held by said finance department subject to disbursements by council for the maintenance of said public law library. 
(Ord. No. O-12-137, 11-27-12) 
Secs. 24-16-24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUSEUMS 

Sec. 24-21. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established within the department of libraries and museums an office of the Lynchburg museum system under the control of an administrator for the purpose of operating the Lynchburg Museum System of Living History (hereinafter called "museum") and for such other cultural pursuits deemed desirable. 
(Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 24-22. - Appointment and duties of administrator. 
    The administrator shall be appointed by the city manager on the recommendation of the director of libraries and museums, with the approval of the Lynchburg Museum System Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The duties of the administrator shall include planning, organizing, directing and coordinating all museum activities under general policies determined by the Lynchburg Museum System Board and administrative policies fixed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 24-23. - Staff. 
    The director of libraries and museums shall appoint, on recommendation of the administrator, such staff members and employees as may be authorized from time to time to carry out effectively the work of this office. 
(Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 24-24. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city manager shall have the right to prescribe reasonable rules, regulations and charges for the use by the public of the museum, so that the public shall receive the largest use thereof and greatest benefit therefrom consistent with the proper protection and preservation of the museum and its property and the increase and expansion thereof. Such rules, regulations and charges shall be valid and binding unless and until otherwise directed by city council who shall promptly be furnished with a copy thereof as well as all amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. O-89-185, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Sec. 24-24.1. - Museum advisory board-Established. 
    There is hereby established in and for the city a museum board which shall be known as the Lynchburg Museum Advisory Board. 
(Ord. No. O-95-155, 6-13-95, eff. 6-1-95) 
Sec. 24-24.2. - Same-Composition. 
    The museum board shall be composed of 15 members. Twelve of the members shall be residents of the city and three of the members may be appointed at large. The Trust Company of Virginia, shall have the right to submit a list of names to the city for consideration for appointment to the museum board and the city shall appoint three persons from the list as members of the board for an initial three-year term. The city shall maintain the same numbers of members on the museum advisory board as there are members on the Lynchburg Museum Foundation, a 501(c)(3) organization, which was created to conduct activities to support and assist the growth and development of the Lynchburg Museum System. The same persons shall be appointed to serve on both the museum advisory board and the board of the Lynchburg Museum Foundation. 
(Ord. No. O-95-155, 6-13-95, eff. 6-1-95; Ord. No. O-08-019, 2-12-08; Ord. No. O-15-017, § 1, 3-10-15 ) 
Sec. 24-24.3. - Same-Appointment. 
    The members of the museum board shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-95-155, 6-13-95, eff. 6-1-95) 
Sec. 24-24.4. - Same-Terms. 
    Initially, five board members shall serve for a one-year term, five board members shall serve for a two-year term and five board members shall serve for a three-year term. The three board members who are appointed from the list of persons submitted by the Trust Company of Virginia, shall serve three-year terms. Upon expiration of the terms of each of the original board members, all appointments to the board shall be for terms of three years. No member shall serve more than three consecutive full terms. 
    The members of the museum advisory board serve at the pleasure of city council and may be removed by council for poor attendance or for any other reason council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. O-95-155, 6-13-95, eff. 6-1-95; Ord. No. O-08-019, 2-12-08; Ord. No. O-15-017, § 1, 3-10-15 ) 
Sec. 24-24.5. - Filling vacancies of board. 
    Vacancies occurring in the membership of the museum board shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired terms in the same manner as appointments are made. If any of the members of the museum board that were appointed from the list submitted by the Trust Company of Virginia, are unable to serve their initial three year term, the Trust Company shall have the right to submit a list of names to the city to fill the vacancy and the city shall appoint someone from the list to fill the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. O-95-155, 6-13-95, eff. 6-1-95; Ord. No. O-08-019, 2-12-08; Ord. No. O-15-017, § 1, 3-10-15 ) 
Sec. 24-24.6. - Meetings of board. 
    The museum board shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as may be agreed upon. 
(Ord. No. O-95-155, 6-13-95, eff. 6-1-95) 
Sec. 24-24.7. - Officers of board. 
    The museum board shall elect from its membership a chairman, and the administrator of the office of the museum system shall serve as secretary to the board and shall attend all meetings of the board. 
(Ord. No. O-95-155, 6-13-95, eff. 6-1-95) 
Sec. 24-24.8. - Function of board. 
    It shall be the duty of the museum board to act in an advisory capacity to the museum director, the city manager and the city council on matters concerning the museum system and to help plan and execute activities for the Lynchburg Museum System and Point of Honor. The board shall assist and advise on the programs of the museum within the funds appropriated by city council and from whatever other sources the board may obtain. The museum advisory board will coordinate all fund-raising activities via the Lynchburg Museum Foundation on behalf of the Lynchburg Museum System and Point of Honor. 
(Ord. No. O-95-155, 6-13-95, eff. 6-1-95) 
Chapter 24.1 - SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE 
ARTICLE I. - EFFECT OF ORDINANCE 

Sec. 24.1-1. - Subdivision regulations. 
    The following regulations are hereby adopted for the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg and from and after the effective date of this ordinance, every subdivider of any tract of land to which these regulations apply who subdivides such tract as provided in these regulations shall cause a plat of such subdivision developed and prepared in accordance with these regulations, with reference to known or permanent monuments, to be made and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court, within deeds conveying such land are required by law to be recorded. A copy of said plat shall also be filed in the office of the city assessor. For any subdivision plat recorded prior to the adoption of this ordinance for which construction contracts for required improvements have not been signed, the subdivider shall be required to submit final plat documentation for approval by the city planner before such contracts are signed and sale or development of lots may be undertaken. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE AND TITLE 

Sec. 24.1-2. - Title. 
    This ordinance is known and shall be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Lynchburg." 
Sec. 24.1-3. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to establish certain subdivision standards and procedures for the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, and such of its environs as come under the jurisdiction of the governing body as provided for by the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
    These are part of a long-range plan to guide and facilitate the orderly beneficial growth and restoration of the community, and to promote the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. More specifically, the purposes of these standards and procedures are to provide a guide for the change that occurs when land and acreage become urban in character as a result of development for residential and non-residential purposes; to encourage the redevelopment of the central city; to provide assurance that the purchasers of lots are buying a commodity that is suitable for development and use; and to make possible the provision of public services in a safe, adequate and efficient manner. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-10-034, adopted Apr. 27, 2010, eff. July 1, 2010, repealed § 24.1-4. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 24.1-5. - Words and terms. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words and terms used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise; the word "lot" includes the word "parcel"; the word "shall" is mandatory; the word "approve" shall be considered to be followed by the words "or disapprove"; any reference to this ordinance includes all ordinances amending or supplementing the same; all distances and areas refer to measurement in a horizontal plane. 
    Alley: A permanent service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
    Arterial road: A moderate or high-capacity road which carries large volumes of traffic between areas in urban centers. Arterial roads are designated on the Virginia Department of Transportation's Virginia Highway Functional Classification map for the City of Lynchburg. 
    Block: An area of land containing two or more lots and bounded by streets providing access to such lots. 
    Building line: A line set with respect to the frontage of a lot of land which is fixed by statute, ordinance, deed or contract and beyond which the owner of the land may not build. 
    Building setback: The minimum distance that a building must be set back from the street line on which the lot abuts. 
    Collector road: A moderate-capacity road which leads traffic from local roads or sections of neighborhoods to activity areas within the city. Collector roads are designated on the Virginia Department of Transportation's Virginia Highway Functional Classification map for the City of Lynchburg. 
    Commission: The planning commission of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia. 
    Cul-de-sac: A street with only one outlet and having an appropriate turnaround for a safe and convenient reverse traffic movement. 
    Dedicate(tion): An appropriation of land to some public use, made by the subdivider, and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public. 
    Driveway: The means of access to the building on a lot, connecting the building to the street on which the lot has frontage. 
    Easement: A grant by a property subdivider of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes. 
    Flag lot: A lot which has less than the usual required street frontage and which meets the requirements of section 24.1-28.1, Flag lots. Lots fronting on a cul-de-sac are not considered flag lots and are regulated by section 35.1-22. Buildings, uses and lots. 
    Governing body: The city council of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia. 
    Health official: The director of the Central Virginia Health District of the Virginia Department of Health. 
    Jurisdiction: The area or territory subject to the legislative control of the governing body. 
    Lot: A tract or parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership, use or improvement. 
    Lot, double frontage: A lot, the opposite ends of which abut on streets. 
    Lot of record: A lot, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court. 
    Lynchburg comprehensive plan: The comprehensive plan of the City of Lynchburg as adopted and amended by the city council. 
    Monuments: Visible marks or indications left on natural or other objects indicating the lines and boundaries of a survey. 
    Plat: Includes the terms: map, plan, plot, replat or replot; a map or plan of a tract or parcel of land which is to be, or which has been, subdivided. When used as a verb "plat" is synonymous with "subdivide." 
    Property: Any tract, lot, parcel or several of the same collected together for the purpose of subdividing. 
    Public water or sewer: A water or sewer system designed to accommodate more than two-family residences, whether owned by the City of Lynchburg or by a private individual. This definition shall not apply to nonresidential subdivisions. 
    Sight distance: A straight line with unobstructed view measured between a point three feet above the finished grade of a road, at the center line of each traffic lane, and a point at a given minimum distance away from the first point, located six inches above finished grade at a center line of the same traffic lane. 
    Street, private: An improved access road which has been approved by the City of Lynchburg as part of a planned unit development, cluster commercial development, or townhouse development, where an owners' association owns and maintains the access road. Also an improved access road which by a plat, deed or agreement recorded on or before September 12, 1989, has established joint usage rights and maintenance responsibilities among the owners of properties fronting on said improved access road. 
    Street, public: An improved dedicated right-of-way, or an improved road which has become public by right of use, for access use by the public, usually having a minimum pavement width of thirty feet and a minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet unless the regulations of the City of Lynchburg require otherwise. 
    Street, width: The total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel, including roadway, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and planting strips. 
    Subdivision: Division of any tract, parcel or lot of land into two or more part. For the purposes of this ordinance, the alternation or reconfiguration of existing lot lines involving more than two lots is also considered to be a subdivision. 
a.  The term "subdivision" shall not include the division of land into ten acres or more for agricultural purposes, provided no new streets are required. 
b.  The city planner may, however, permit the separation of one parcel from a tract of land without complying with all requirements of this ordinance if it is (1) not in conflict with the general meaning and purpose of the ordinance, and (2) no new streets are required to serve the parcel. 
    Subdivider: Any owner of a tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided or their legal representative executing the legal requirements of the subdivision. 
    Technical review committee (TRC): A committee for review and recommendation to the city manager, planning commission, and city council, consisting of the city planner, city engineer, city traffic engineer, building official, director of utilities, urban forester and fire marshal or their designees and other city staff as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. O-78-323, 11-14-78; Ord. No. O-89-248, § 1, 9-12-89; Ord. No. O-00-190, 9-12-00; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 24.1-6. - City planner, or designee. 
    This ordinance shall be administered by the city planner, or designee, in collaboration with the technical review committee who shall jointly determine compliance with the regulations contained herein. The city planner shall administer these regulations contained herein. The city planner shall not approve any subdivision requiring a new street or street extension until the right-of-way has been accepted and the street name approved by the city manager after review by the technical review committee with comment from the planning commission. In so acting, the city planner shall be considered the agent of the governing body, and approval or disapproval by the city planner shall constitute approval or disapproval as though it were given by the governing body. An appeal of right from any decision of the city planner shall lie to the commission, thence to city council, thence to the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg. 
(Ord. No. O-78-323, 11-14-78; Ord. No. O-89-248, § 1, 9-12-89; Ord. No. O-90-169, 6-12-90; Ord. No. O-00-190, 9-12-00; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-7. - Duties. 
    The city planner shall perform his or her duties in accordance with this ordinance and Chapter 22, Article 6, Sections 15.2-2240 through 15.2-2276, and other applicable sections of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(Ord. No. O-78-323, 11-14-78; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-10-034, adopted Apr. 27, 2010, eff. July 1, 2010, repealed § 24.1-8. 
ARTICLE V. - PROCEDURE FOR PREPARING AND RECORDING PLATS 

Sec. 24.1-9. - Platting and recording required. 
    Any subdivider of any tract of land situated within the City of Lynchburg shall cause a plat of such subdivision, with reference to known or permanent monuments, to be made and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg. No such plat of subdivision shall be recorded unless and until it shall have been submitted, approved and certified by the city planner in accordance with the regulations set forth in this ordinance. No lot shall be sold in the subdivision before the plat shall have been recorded. Before any permits are issued to begin construction, the subdivider shall submit a notarized letter, or a copy of the plat with the clerk of courts' seal and signature, to the city planner certifying that the plat has been recorded with the clerk of the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. O-89-248, § 1, 9-12-89; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-10. - Draw and certify. 
    Every such plat shall be prepared by a licensed professional surveyor or other persons appropriately licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia, who shall endorse upon each plat a certificate, setting forth: (1) the source of the title of the land subdivided; and (2) the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon the plat, within an insert block, or by means of a dotted boundary line. 
(Ord. No. O-80-007, § 1, 1-8-80; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-11. - Subdivider's statement. 
    Every such plat, or the deed of dedication to which the plat is attached, shall contain in addition to the surveyor's certificate a statement to the effect that "the above and foregoing" subdivision of (here insert correct description of the land subdivided) as appears in this plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, which shall be signed by the owners, and shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgements of deeds, and when thus executed and approved, as herein specified, shall be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, and indexed under the names of the landowners signing such statement and under the name of the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-12. - No land exempt. 
    No tract of land shall be subdivided unless it conforms with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-13. - Private contracts. 
    This ordinance bears no relation to any private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction, nor is the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction implied herein by any public official. When this ordinance calls for more restrictive standards than are required by private contract, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
Sec. 24.1-14. - Necessary changes. 
    No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat, nor any accompanying data sheets after approval of the agent has been endorsed in writing on the plat or sheets, unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the agent. 
Sec. 24.1-15. - Fees. 
    There shall be a charge for the examination and approval or disapproval of every plat reviewed by the agent. At the time of filing the plat, the subdivider shall deposit with the agent a check payable to the City of Lynchburg in the amount set forth in the fee schedule adopted by city council. 
(Ord. No. O-78-323, 11-14-78; Ord. No. O-88-097, § 1, 5-10-88, eff. 7-1-88; Ord. No. O-95-206, 7-11-95, eff. 9-1-95; Ord. No. O-95-253, 9-12-95; Ord. No. O-98-124, 6-9-98) 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 24.1-16. - Flooding. 
    Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life, or property, or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional flooding or shall not produce conditions contrary to public welfare. 
Sec. 24.1-16.1. - Possible flood plain. 
    To ensure that owners will have sufficient land upon which to build a structure which is flood free, compliance with floodway widths and the 100-year flood elevations contained within the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance study (FIS) is mandatory. The city planner may require the subdivider to provide elevation and flood profiles based on a 100-year flood plain (which means a flood of a magnitude likely to happen, on the average, only once every century) sufficient to demonstrate the land to be completely free of the danger of flood water at an elevation of at least three feet below any probable floor level of any building for human occupancy. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-16.2. - Flood control and drainage. 
    The subdivider shall provide that information necessary to determine what improvements are required to develop the subject property, including topography, drainage plans and flood control devices. The plans for such improvements shall include a statement from a licensed professional engineer or other persons appropriately licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia, that such improvements when installed will be adequate for development. In subdivisions where the streets are dedicated to public use, the city engineer shall either approve or disapprove the plans. 
(Ord. of 4-27-10, Ord. No. O-10-034, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-17. - Building site and setback. 
    The site and setback of buildings within a subdivision shall comply with the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 24.1-17.1. - Building line. 
    The building line shall comply with subdivision plat restrictions. This line shall not be closer to the street than the required building setback in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-18. - Lot sizes. 
    Lot sizes shall be in accordance with minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance, or the following subsections, whichever is more restrictive: 
(1)  Lot size, public water and sewer: Lots served by both public water and sewer systems shall be in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The following statement shall be shown on the plat when sewer and water lines are available, but not in place: 
"The subdivider agrees to construct a public water and sanitary sewer system within the boundaries of the subdivision to meet the policies, regulations, and standards of the city." 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-19. - Lot size, public water or sewer. 
(a)  Residential subdivisions of five lots or less may be served by private wells or septic tanks provided, that water and/or sewer are not available as defined by subsection 24.1-31(c) and that no new roads are required and that lots served by only one of water or sewer shall be 20,000 square feet or more in area and the following statement shall be shown on the plat: 
"The subdivider agrees to construct a water or a sanitary sewer system to meet the policies, regulations, and standards of the city and/or Virginia Department of Health. Before the construction of any dwelling can begin the health official shall approve the proper location of the water or the sanitary sewer system in relation to the location of the dwellings." 
(b)  Non-residential lots served by only one of public water or sewer system shall meet the requirements of the health official and the city. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-20. - Lot size, neither public water nor sewer available. 
(a)  Residential subdivisions of five lots or less may be served by both private wells and septic tanks provided no new roads are required and lots served by neither public water nor sewer systems shall be 25,000 square feet or more in area and the following statement shall be shown on the plat: 
"The subdivider does not agree to construct either a public water or a sanitary sewer system. Before the construction of any dwelling can begin the city and the health official shall approve the proper location of the water and sewer systems in relation to the location of the proposed dwellings." 
(b)  Nonresidential lots served by neither public water nor sewer systems shall meet the requirements of the health official and the city. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-21. - Septic tanks. 
    The city planner shall not approve any subdivision where sanitary sewers are not provided unless the subdivision is of five lots or less and the city planner receives in writing from the health official, a statement to the effect that the area contained in the subdivision is satisfactory for the installation of septic tanks, and that they will not, so far as can be determined, create hazards to public health. Final approval as to site suitability will be made prior to approval of the plat. 
(a)  Greater lot areas may be required or certain lots may be disapproved where individual septic tanks or individual wells are to be used, if the health official determines that there are factors such as drainage, soil condition, or other conditions to cause potential health problems. Drainfield location shall be approved by the health official. 
(b)  Public water and sewer required: The city planner shall not approve any subdivision of more than five lots unless the subdivision is served by the city ("public") water and sewer system. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-21.1. - Development of large lots generally. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, subdivisions without public sewer service may be approved by the city council when the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each proposed lot must have at least one acre in area. 
(b)  The large lot development must have a minimum size of six lots. 
(c)  City sewer service is not reasonably available and economically feasible to extend, as defined in subsection 24.1-31(c) of the subdivision ordinance, and sewer service extension is not planned in the city's current capital improvements program. 
(d)  The subdivision plat must include all standard sewer service easements requested by the city, in order that the development can be readily connected to city sewer service in the future. 
(e)  The health official must approve each of the requested large lots as having sufficient area to accommodate two septic disposal fields prior to subdivision approval by the city. 
(f)  All other city land development regulations must be met. 
(g)  The city council may disapprove any large lot development if it believes the development will be detrimental to the orderly development of the area or the efficient provision of public services. 
(Ord. No. O-85-141, § 1, 6-11-85; Ord. No. O-89-248, § 1, 9-12-89; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-10-034, adopted Apr. 27, 2010, eff. July 1, 2010, repealed § 24.1-22. 
Sec. 24.1-23. - Easements. 
    Easements of 20 feet minimum width shall be provided for water, sewer and storm drainage in the subdivision. Such easements shall be kept free of permanent structures and whenever possible shall be located adjacent to property lines. Such easements shall be laid out so as to ensure continuity of the utilities from block to block and to adjacent property. In situations when pipes exceeding 36 inches in diameter and or pipes exceeding eight feet in depth are necessary, an additional ten feet of easement width may be required. 
    Easements shall be provided for electric, telephone, cable television and natural gas of sufficient width and location as determined by the appropriate utility company. 
    Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the placement of public utilities within dedicated rights-of-way. Placement of private water and sewer lines is prohibited in the public right-of-way. The city planner may require that easements for drainage through adjoining property be provided by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-24. - Fire protection. 
    The installation of adequate fire hydrants and mains in a subdivision may be required by the city at locations approved by the City of Lynchburg, provided necessary public water is available. Fire protection shall meet the requirements of the applicable sections of the City of Lynchburg Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-25. - Bond. 
    Every subdivider shall provide to the city a guarantee of performance prior to the acceptance of dedication for public use of any right-of-way located within any subdivision or section thereof in which any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, bicycle trail, drainage or sewer system, water line site-related improvements required by local ordinances for vehicular ingress and egress, traffic signalization and control, structures necessary to ensure stability of critical slopes, stormwater management facilities, or other improvement dedicated for public use that is to be constructed in whole or in part by private funds and is to be maintained by the city. To guarantee such performance the subdivider shall: (i) certify to the city engineer that the construction costs have been paid to the person constructing such facilities; (ii) furnish to the city engineer a certified check, a financial institution's letter of credit, a cash escrow account, or a personal, corporate or property bond, with surety satisfactory to the city, hereinafter referred to as the "performance guarantee", in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of such facilities, or a contract for the construction of such facilities, and a contractor's bond, with like surety, in like amount, and so conditioned, or (iii) furnish to the city engineer a financial institution's letter of credit on certain designated funds satisfactory to the city engineer as to the financial institution, the amount and the form. The amount of such performance guarantee shall equal the total estimated cost of construction based on unit prices for new construction in the city plus a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs, inflation, and potential damage to existing roads or utilities, which shall not exceed 25 percent of the estimated construction costs. "Such facilities," as used in this section, means those facilities specifically provided for in this section. 
    If a subdivider records a final plat which may be a section of a subdivision as shown on an approved preliminary subdivision plat and furnishes to the city a performance guarantee as defined above for facilities to be dedicated for public use and to be maintained by the city within said section, the developer shall have the right to record the remaining sections shown on the preliminary subdivision plat for a period of five years from the recordation date of the first section subject to engineering and construction standards and zoning requirements in effect at the time that each remaining section is recorded. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, and provided the subdivider and the city have agreed on the delineation of sections within a proposed development, the subdivider shall not be required to furnish to the city a performance guarantee for the estimated cost of construction of facilities to be dedicated for public use within each section of the development until such time as construction plans are submitted for the section in which such facilities are to be located. 
(Ord. No. O-80-007, § 1, 1-8-80; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-25.1. - Partial and final release of certain performance guarantees. 
(a)  The city shall provide for the periodic partial and final complete release of any performance guarantee required by the city under this article within 30 days after receipt of written notice by the subdivider of completion of part or all of any required public facilities unless the city engineer notifies the subdivider in writing of nonreceipt of approval, or of any specified defects or deficiencies in construction and suggested corrective measures prior to the expiration of the 30-day period. Any inspection of such public facilities shall be based solely upon conformance with the Manual of Specification and Standard Details and the approved design plan for the facilities for which the performance guarantee is applicable, and shall not include the approval of any person other than an employee of the city or a person who has contracted with the city. 
(b)  If no such action is taken by the city within the time specified above, the request shall be deemed approved, and a partial release shall be granted to the subdivider. No final release shall be granted until after expiration of such 30-day period and there is an additional request in writing sent by certified mail return receipt to the city manager. The city engineer shall act within ten working days of receipt of the request; then if no action is taken, the request shall be deemed approved and final release granted to the subdivider. 
(c)  After receipt of the written notices required above, if the city takes no action within the times specified above and the subdivider files suit in the local circuit court to obtain partial or final release of a performance guarantee, the circuit court, upon finding the city was without good cause in failing to act, shall award such subdivider his reasonable costs and attorney's fees. 
(d)  The city shall not refuse to make a periodic partial or final release of a performance guarantee for any reason not directly related to the specified defects or deficiencies in construction of the public facilities covered by said performance guarantee. 
(e)  Upon the completion of at least 30 percent of the public facilities covered by any performance guarantee, and upon written request by the subdivider, the city shall make periodic partial releases of such performance guarantee in a cumulative amount equal to no less than 90 percent of the original amount of the completed work for which the performance guarantee was taken. The city shall not be required to execute more than three periodic partial releases in any 12-month period. Upon final completion and acceptance of the public facilities, the city shall release any remaining performance guarantee to the subdivider. For the purpose of final release, the term "acceptance" means: when he public facility is accepted by and taken over for operation and maintenance by the state agency, local government department or agency, or other public authority which is responsible for maintaining and operating such public facility upon acceptance. 
(Ord. of 4-27-10, Ord. No. O-10-034, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-26. - Improvements. 
    Minimum improvements and construction standards required of all subdivisions are set forth in these regulations and in the applicable design standards and specifications of the City of Lynchburg Manual of Specifications and Standard Details for construction. Prior to beginning any subdivision construction improvements, the subdivider shall have a professional civil engineer or other persons appropriately licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia prepare for the city's approval, a complete set of engineering plans and specifications. The city shall approve, or notify the subdivider of those plans and specifications which are not satisfactory, in writing within 15 days of official submittal of such plans and specifications and provided the final plat has been approved by the city planner. These processes may run concurrently, however, any changes required to the plat shall be at the expense of the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-27. - City obligation. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed as creating an obligation upon the city to pay for grading or paving, or for sidewalks, sewers, curb and gutter improvements or construction or any other costs in connection therewith, other than that which has been specified elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-28. - Lots. 
    Lots platted shall be in conformance with the following: 
(a)  Shape: The lot arrangement, design and shape shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings, and be properly related to topography, and conform to requirements of this ordinance. Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations solely to provide necessary square footage of area which would be unusable. 
(b)  Location: 
(1)  Each lot shall have frontage on a public street or an existing private street, as defined in section 24.1-5. Words and terms, reflected on the subdivision plat, or on a street which has become public by right of use, except lots in planned unit developments, cluster commercial developments, and townhouse developments. 
(2)  Lots in planned unit developments, cluster commercial developments, and townhouse developments may front on private common drives and/or easements within the development which have access to an improved public street. Responsibility for maintenance of said private streets shall be with the association charged with management and ownership of common open space, property and facilities and shall be so stated on the plat. 
(c)  Corner lots: Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for maintenance of required building lines on both streets as required by the zoning or subdivision ordinance, whichever is more restrictive. 
(d)  Side lines: Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles, or radial to the street line and be marked plainly before inspection by the city. 
(e)  Remnants: All remnants of lots below minimum size, as required in the zoning ordinance, left over after subdividing of a tract must be added to adjacent lots. 
(f)  Separate ownership: Where the land covered by a subdivision includes two or more parcels in separate ownership, and lot arrangement is such that a property ownership line divides one or more lots, a signed statement with free consent by all owners, proprietors and trustees shall accompany the final plat and lot sizes and arrangement shall meet the requirements of this ordinance. Said statement is to be deposited with the city planner and held with the final plat until the subdivider is ready to record same, and they both shall then be recorded together. 
(g)  House numbers and street names: House numbering and street naming shall be in accordance with the city street naming/house numbering ordinance. 
(h)  Standards for cluster housing developments: All units for sale in cluster housing developments must meet minimum standards specified in section 35.1-56 of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-79-330, § 1, 11-13-79; Ord. No. O-89-248, § 1, 9-12-89; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-28.1. - Flag lots. 
    The creation of flag lots will only be considered in those instances where severe topographic constraints or unusual existing lot lines make this type of lot arrangement the only feasible way to develop the tract. In such cases the proposed subdivision may be approved by the city planner when the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Each flag lot shall have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a street, public or private as defined in section 24.1-5. Words and terms, except for a lot on a cul-de-sac which shall have a minimum street frontage of 30 feet. 
(b)  The required minimum lot area shall meet the zoning ordinance requirement of the district in which it is located and shall not include the area of the long narrow "flagpole" portion. 
(c)  Not more than two adjacent flag lots shall be created. 
(d)  The development of one flag lot behind another flag lot shall be prohibited. 
(e)  A flag lot shall not be further subdivided until a public street to serve the proposed lot(s) is dedicated and constructed with a minimum right-of-way of fifty (50) feet, or unless a planned unit development, cluster commercial development, or townhouse development is approved for the property, and a note to this effect shall be placed on each subdivision plat which contains a flag lot. 
(f)  A note shall be placed on the final subdivision plat stating that public services such as refuse collection, snow removal, and street maintenance will only be provided to the point where the flag lot meets the public street right-of-way. 
(g)  Flag lots with flagpole access strips greater than 200 feet in length shall provide, at the subdivider's expense, a driveway which is capable of supporting emergency vehicles and which is at least ten feet in width for the front half closest to the street and at least 20 feet in width for the rear half to allow for the pass-by of vehicles. 
(h)  The maximum length for the flagpole access strip shall be 700 feet in order to provide adequate fire protection. 
(i)  The house on a flag lot must have a setback of at least 50 feet from all property lines. 
(j)  A driveway on a residential flag lot shall be located a minimum of five feet from all lot lines, unless approval has been obtained from a shared driveway with one of the adjacent lots. 
(Ord. No. O-89-248, § 2, 9-12-89; Ord. No. O-00-190, 9-12-00; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-29. - Blocks. 
(a)  Residential: Residential blocks shall be in conformance with the following: 
(1)  Length: The maximum length of blocks generally shall be 1,200 feet and the minimum length of blocks upon which lots have frontage shall be 500 feet unless topographic conditions prohibit the same. 
(2)  Width: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth, unless prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property. Where the parcel fronts on a major thoroughfare, the city may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
(3)  Orientation: Where a subdivision adjoins a major thoroughfare, the city may require that the lesser dimension of the block shall front or back upon such major thoroughfare to avoid unnecessary ingress or egress. 
(b)  Nonresidential: Blocks intended for nonresidential use shall be designed specifically for such purposes with adequate space set aside for off-street parking and delivery facilities in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 24.1-30. - Streets. 
(a)  (1)  Residential: In residential subdivisions where the streets are dedicated to public use, all street and drainage improvements, shall be installed by the subdivider. The subdivider shall clear and grade every street to the full width of the right-of-way with provisions for mowable three to one or flatter slopes on private property, except where topography prohibits. Specifications and requirements shall be in accordance with the standards established in the City of Lynchburg, Manual of Specifications and Standard Details. 
(2)  Nonresidential: In nonresidential subdivisions where the streets are dedicated to public use, the cost and installation of all streets and drainage improvements shall be in accordance with current city policy, as established by city council. 
(b)  Alignment and layout: The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of existing, proposed and future streets in adjoining areas. The street arrangement must be such as to cause no unnecessary hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. In residential and commercial subdivisions, street segments of 600 feet in length or greater shall have right-of-way dedicated to provide street connections at each end. Street segments of 1,200 feet in length or greater shall have right of way dedicated to provide street connections at each end and at least one potential connection to the left and one potential connection to the right adjoining properties. Not withstanding other requirements of this section, connections shall not be required to any adjoining parcel of less than three acres in size. Whenever possible, streets should intersect at right angles. In all hillside areas, streets running with contours shall be required to intersect at angles of not less than 60 degrees, unless approved by the city. Where topographical features are prohibitive, no dedication for street continuation shall be required. 

  

(c)  Improvements required: The subdivider shall improve right-of-way 100 feet beyond the beginning of the furthest parcel or the end of the furthest driveway location, whichever is farther. This improvement shall include a turnaround facility as detailed by the Manual of Specifications and Standard Details. The subdivider shall improve the full length of any right-of-way within the subdivision that connects to an existing or proposed street. 
(d)  Improvements not required: Except where specifically required by paragraph (c) above, whenever right-of-way is dedicated solely to provide required connections to adjoining property, the subdivider shall only be required to dedicate an unimproved right-of-way. 
(e)  Service drives: Whenever a proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited access highway or expressway, where adequate access is not provided, provision shall be made for a service drive or marginal street approximately parallel to such right-of-way at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the land between such highway or expressway and the proposed subdivision. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for ingress and egress to the limited access highway or expressway. The right-of-way of any major highway or street projected across any railroad, limited access highway or expressway shall be of adequate width to provide for the cuts or fills required for any future separation of grades. 
(f)  Approach angle: Streets shall approach the major or collector streets at an angle of not less than 80 degrees, unless the engineer shall approve a lesser angle of approach for reasons of contour, terrain or matching of existing patterns. 
(g)  Minimum widths: The minimum width of proposed streets, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be in accordance with regulations established by the City of Lynchburg, Manual of Specifications and Standard Details. Street widths are typically but not always 50 feet in width. The street width shall be based on the post development average daily traffic and shall be of sufficient width to accommodate the typical street cross section designated therein. If an existing street is to be utilized for access and such street is not of sufficient width per the criteria of the City of Lynchburg Manual of Specifications and Standard Details and the subdivider owns property on both sides of the street, then provisions shall be made on the plat to widen the street to accommodate the standard street width. Should the subdivider abut on only one side of an existing street, then provisions shall be made on the plat to widen one-half of the street to accommodate the standard street width as measured from the centerline of the existing street. 
    Alleys for vehicular access, if permitted, shall be not less than 14 feet in width for one way traffic nor more than 28 feet in width for two-way traffic. 
(h)  Grading and paving widths: Grading and paving of all streets dedicated to public use shall be in accordance with regulations established by the City of Lynchburg, Manual of Specifications and Standard Details. 
(i)  Grades: The grades of streets shall be in accordance with specifications established by the city, and such grades as submitted on subdivision plats shall be approved by the city prior to final action by the city planner. Maximum allowable street grades should not exceed ten percent unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(j)  Cul-de-sacs: Terminal streets (cul-de-sacs), designed to have one end permanently closed, shall be terminated by a permanent or temporary turnaround per the Manual of Specifications and Standard Details. 
(k)  Curbs, gutters and sidewalks: Curbs and gutters are required in accordance with regulations established by the City of Lynchburg, Manual of Specifications and Standard Details. Except where pedestrian traffic is explicitly prohibited, sidewalks are required (i) on at least one side of all streets, (ii) on both sides of streets with a post-development traffic count of greater than 6,000 vehicles per day. The cost of said curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be borne 50 percent by the city and 50 percent by the subdivider. Reimbursements shall be in accordance with regulations established by the City of Lynchburg, Manual of Specifications and Standard Details, per the year of origination of the subdivision. 
(l)  Alleys: Deadend alleys, if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities as determined by the city. 
(m)  Identification signs: Street name signs shall be installed by the city at cost to the subdivider. 
(n)  Street lighting: Where the subdivider desires street lighting, no installation cost shall be borne by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-98-013, 2-10-98; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-31. - Public water supply and sanitary sewer system required. 
    Subdivisions of more than five lots shall be served by the city ("public") water and sewer systems. 
(a)  Sewer and/or water available: Where a public water supply and/or a public sanitary sewer system are (reasonably accessible as defined in subsection 24.1-31(c)) the said water supply and/or sanitary sewer system shall be designed and extended to adequately serve all lots within the subdivision, according to the design standards issued by the city. All plans are to be approved by the city. 
The cost of installing the sanitary sewer and water system including all appurtenances, except connections and meters, within the subdivision boundaries shall be paid 100 percent by the subdivider for the size mains needed to serve the subdivision. The minimum size main shall be as determined by the city. If larger mains are required by the city to serve other areas, then the difference in cost, based on the city's annual bid prices, shall be paid by the city. The city will extend and pay 100 percent of the cost to provide water and/or sewer lines to the subdivision boundary according to subsection 24.1-31(c). 
Service connections for both water and/or sanitary sewer shall be constructed to each lot within the subdivision. Reimbursements shall be in accordance with regulations established by the City of Lynchburg, Manual of Specifications and Standard Details, per the year of origination of the subdivision. The subdivision plat will contain a notation to the effect that appropriate sewer/water connection and availability fees will be charged by the city at the time of connection to the system. 
(b)  Sewer and/or water not available: Where a public water supply and/or a public sanitary sewer system are not reasonably accessible as defined in subsection 24.1-31(c)., the extension of these systems by the subdivider will not be required; however, where the subdivider desires the extension of such systems which exceeds the ratio stated in subsection 24.1-31(c) and agrees to pay the additional cost of the extension to the subdivision boundary, then the city shall extend the lines in accordance with subsection 24.1-31(a). 
(c)  Water/sewer lines availability defined: Reasonably available water and/or sewer lines are defined as those lines which are economically feasible to extend from water and sewer lines mandated by the 1976 annexation decree and/or other lines previously constructed. 
To be economically feasible in a residential subdivision, there must be at least one lot for each 100 feet of utility line construction. The following are examples of feasibility ratios: 
Feet of water/sewer line construction Required number of lots 5,000 50 3,000 30 1,000 10 500 5  
For extensions to multi-family subdivisions the feasibility ratio would require two dwelling units per 100 feet of extension. Thus: 
Feet of water/sewer line construction Required number of dwelling units 5,000 100 3,000 60 1,000 20 500 10  
(d)  Lots in cluster developments including townhouses and condominium: Public water and sewer systems shall serve each individual lot in all cluster developments including townhouses and condominium. The public system shall be brought to an appropriate location(s) on the property line of the development adjacent to a public right-of-way or through a public easement. 
(e)  In cases where an obstacle (such as a stream, railroad, or highway crossing, etc.) increases the construction cost beyond 20 percent of the normal distance to dollar ratios, based on the city's annual contract pricing, the subdivider may be required to pay a larger share of the sewer and water facility construction costs as determined by the city's physical development committee. 
(Ord. No. O-79-330, § 1, 11-13-79; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-32. - Storm drainage. 
    A storm drainage system shall be required to adequately provide for drainage of the subdivision. The subdivider shall pay the cost of this system. The subdivider may be required to pay the pro rata share of sewer and drainage facilities outside the subdivision property limits which are necessitated by the construction or improvement of the subdivision or development. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-33. - Monuments. 
(a)  Visible for inspection: Upon completion of subdivision streets, sewers and other improvements, the subdivider shall make certain that all monuments required by the city are clearly visible for inspection and use. Such monuments shall be inspected and approved by the city before any improvements are accepted by the governing body. All monuments shall be set by a surveyor licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(b)  Location-concrete: Two permanent reinforced monuments as prescribed by the city shall be placed on the longest street tangent intervisible. Such permanent monuments shall be as specified in the City of Lynchburg, Manual of Specifications and Standard Details. 
(c)  Location-iron: All other lot corners shall be marked with pipe or solid iron not less than one-half-inch in diameter and 15 inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. When rock is encountered, surveyor shall determine a suitable method for providing a permanent marker. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-34. - Reservation of land for public purposes. 
    The city may require subdividers of residential subdivisions to set aside land for parks, playgrounds, schools, libraries, municipal buildings and similar public uses, subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Subdividers shall not be required to reserve land for public purposes other than streets and drainage, except on a reimbursement basis. The subdivider shall be reimbursed by the jurisdiction or agency requiring the land. The city shall be required to obtain an option upon the property involved for a negotiated period following the recording of the plat for such purchase. If the land is not purchased within the said negotiated period by the city and the subdivider, it may be sold as lots for the same purpose for which the subdivision was platted. To facilitate such possible eventual sale of reserved land as separate lots, the subdivider shall show on the final plat, by dotted lines and dotted numbers, the sizes and dimensions of lots to be created within the boundaries of any such reserved land, and may sell such lots, after the expiration date of the reservation, by lot number, without filing an amended plat. 
(b)  The city shall make certain that lands so reserved are divisible in the same manner as the remainder of the subdivision so that the subdivider will not be required to reserve an unusable portion of the subdivision. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be construed to mean that land may be set aside for commercial purposes in a residential district, without the land so required for commercial use being zoned appropriately in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-78-323, 11-14-78; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-34.1. - Vacation or alteration of boundary lines. 
(a)  The city planner may approve the vacation, relocation, or alteration of boundary lines of any lot or parcel of land shown on a valid and properly recorded plat of a subdivision or re-subdivision approved as provided for in this subdivision ordinance and executed by the owner or owners of such land, as provided in section 24.1-42. Such approval may be given provided that the vacation, relocation, or alteration of a lot line does not involve the relocation or alteration of streets, alleys, easements for public passage, or other public areas; and, provided further, that no easements or utility rights-of-way shall be relocated or altered without the express consent of all persons holding an interest therein. 
(b)  The city planner may approve a plat altering or relocating the boundary line between no more than two lots or parcels provided that all monuments necessary to alter or relocate the boundary line and at least one lot corner are indicated on the plat. All other information may be indicated by providing reference to and as shown on a valid and properly recorded subdivision plat. 
(c)  The city planner may allow the vacating of lot lines by recordation of a deed providing that no easements or utility rights-of-way located along any lot lines to be vacated shall be extinguished or altered without the express consent of all persons holding any interest therein. The deed shall be approved in writing, on its face, by the city planner. The deed shall reference the recorded plat by which the lot line was originally created. 
(Ord. No. O-90-283, 9-11-90; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
ARTICLE VII. - APPROVAL OF PLATS 

Sec. 24.1-35. - Approval required before construction and sale. 
    Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, and before any permit for the erection of a structure shall be granted, the subdivider shall comply with the following requirements regarding approval of plats. 
(Ord. No. O-78-323, 11-14-78) 
Sec. 24.1-36. - Preliminary sketch (not required). 
    The subdivider may submit a preliminary sketch of the proposed subdivision to the planning division prior to preparing an engineering preliminary and/or final plat. Submission of the preliminary plat shall not constitute the official filing of a proposed subdivision. The purpose of such preliminary sketch is to permit the planning division to advise the subdivider whether his plans, in general, are in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. The planning division, upon submission of any preliminary sketch, shall study it, and advise the subdivider within 15 days whether it appears that changes would be necessary. The planning division may mark the preliminary sketch indicating necessary changes and any such marked sketch should be returned to the planning division with the preliminary plat. The preliminary sketch shall be as follows: 
    The preliminary sketch may be drawn on white paper, or on a print of a topographic map of the property. It shall be drawn to scale. It shall show the name, location and dimensions of all streets entering the property, adjacent to the property or terminating at the boundary of the property to be subdivided. It shall show the location of all proposed streets, lots, parks, playgrounds and other proposed uses of the land to be subdivided and shall include the approximate dimensions. 
(Ord. No. O-78-323, 11-14-78; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-37. - Preliminary plat. 
    The subdivider shall present to the planning division the appropriate number, as the city planner determines are needed, of copies of a preliminary layout at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch and on sheets having a maximum size of 17 inches by 22 inches as a preliminary plat and the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by plan and profile sheets at a scale of 50 feet to the inch horizontal and ten feet to the inch vertical. 
    The preliminary plat shall include the following information: 
(a)  Name of subdivision, owner, subdivider, surveyor or engineer, date of drawing, number of sheets, true and/or magnetic north point and scale. 
(b)  Location of proposed subdivision by an insert map with a north arrow and scale at a scale of not less than two inches equal one mile showing adjoining roads, their name and number, counties, subdivisions and other landmarks. 
(c)  The boundary survey or existing survey of record provided such survey shows a closure with an accuracy of not less than one in 5,000, total acreage, acreage of subdivided area, number and approximate area and frontage of all building lots, existing buildings within the boundaries of the tract, names of owners and their property lines within the boundaries of the tract, delineation of flood plain districts, and names of owners and their property lines adjoining such boundaries. 
(d)  All existing platted streets, including alleyways, and all proposed streets, their names and widths; existing and proposed utility or other easements, public areas and parking spaces, culverts, drains and water courses, their names and other pertinent data. 
(e)  All parcels of land to be dedicated for public use and the conditions of such dedication. 
(f)  Topography at maximum intervals of five feet. 
(g)  Elevations of existing and proposed ground surface at all street intersections and at points of major grade change along the center line of streets together with proposed grade lines connecting therewith, or as necessary for the city to reasonably interpret the intention of the subdivider. Major grade changes shall be indexed to profile sheets. 
(h)  Proposed connections with existing sanitary sewers and existing water supply or alternate means of sewage disposal and water supply. 
(i)  Provisions for collecting and discharging surface drainage and preliminary descriptions of any structures that may be required. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-38. - Procedure. 
    The city planner or his appointed representative shall discuss the preliminary plat with the subdivider in order to determine whether or not the preliminary plat generally conforms to the requirements of the subdivision ordinance. 
    The subdivider shall then be advised in writing within 15 days, which may be by formal letter or by meaningful markings or descriptions on the copy of the preliminary plat, concerning any additional data that may be required, the character and extent of public improvements that will have to be made, and an estimate of the cost of construction or improvements and the amount of the surety bond which will be required as a prerequisite to approval of the final subdivision plat. In determining the cost of required improvements and the amount of the surety bond, the city engineer may require the subdivider to furnish a bona fide estimate of the cost of improvements to assist the city engineer in determining the amount of surety bond. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-39. - Preliminary plat approval as final plat. 
    The preliminary plat may be submitted as the final plat where approved by the city planner and provided no change, erasure or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat nor on accompanying data sheets after approval of the city planner has been endorsed in writing on the plat or sheets, unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the city planner. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-40. - No guarantee. 
    Approval by the agent of the preliminary plat does not constitute a guarantee of approval of the final plat. 
Sec. 24.1-41. - Twelve months' limit. 
    The subdivider shall have not more than 12 months after receiving official notification concerning the preliminary plat to file with the city a final subdivision plat in accordance with this ordinance. Failure to do so shall make preliminary approval null and void. The agent may, on written request and with good cause shown by the subdivider, grant an extension of this time limit. 
Sec. 24.1-42. - Final plat. 
    The submission of a final plat shall constitute the official filing of a proposed subdivision. The appropriate number, as the city planner determines are needed, of copies of the final plat shall be submitted to the city for final approval and subsequent recording. Blue or black line prints (surveyor's copies) shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch on sheets having a maximum size of 17 inches by 22 inches. 
    For any subdivision of five lots or more the digital data associated with the creation of the subdivision plat shall be provided to the city planner in a format approved by the city. The digital data shall be "georeferenced" to the State Plane Coordinate System, North American Datum 1983, Virginia South Zone #4502. The data shall be certified by a licensed surveyor or other persons appropriately licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia for accuracy and correctness. Where the subdivider can show that the subdivision plat was not created using computer aided design (CAD) software, or adherence to these requirements would produce unnecessary hardships the city planner may grant an exception in whole or in part to the requirements for digital data submission. 
    The final plat shall include the following information and all information which is required on the preliminary plat shall be provided on the final plat: 
(a)  Name of subdivision, city, state, owner, true and/or magnetic north point and scale of drawing and number of sheets. If shown on more than one sheet, matched lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. A space shall be reserved for the signature of the city engineer and the city planner if no new streets are dedicated. If the plat includes the acceptance of right-of-way, a space shall be reserved for the signature of the city engineer and the city manager. 
(b)  Location of proposed subdivision by an insert map with north arrow and scale at a scale of not less than two inches equal one mile indicating adjoining roads, their names and numbers, counties, subdivisions and other landmarks. 
(c)  A boundary survey with an error of closure within the limits of one in 5,000 related to the magnetic meridian and showing the location of all monuments and their type of material within the boundary of the subdivision. The survey may be related to the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey state grid north if the coordinate of two adjacent corners of the subdivision are shown. 
(d)  The source of title of the owners of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. 
(e)  A statement to the effect that the subdivision as it appears on this plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, which shall be signed by the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgments to deeds. 
(f)  When the subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one (1) source of title the outlines of the various tracts shall be indicated by dotted lines and identification of the respective tracts shall be placed on the plat. 
(g)  The accurate location and dimensions by bearings and distances with all curve data on all lots and street lines, boundaries of all proposed or existing easements and utilities, existing parks, school sites or other public areas, the number and area of all building lots, all existing public and private streets, their names, numbers and widths, water courses and their names, if any, delineation of flood plain zones, names of owners and their property lines within the boundary of the subdivision and the names of owners and their property lines adjoining said boundaries. 
(h)  All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot to the closest two decimal points, all bearings shall be shown in degrees and minutes to the nearest minute. 
(i)  The data of all curves along the street frontages shall be shown in detail at the curve or in a curve data table containing the following; delta angle, radius, arc, tangent, chord and chord bearings. 
(j)  Any restrictions imposed by the subdivider shall be shown on the plat, or on attached sheet(s) in which case it shall be stated on the plat that deed restrictions are on the said attached sheet(s) or as filed in plat cabinet number (identify number) of the office of the clerk of the circuit court. 
(k)  Where public water and or sewer systems are to be provided it shall be indicated on the plat and shall reflect whether such facilities will be owned by the City of Lynchburg or privately owned, indicating the name or title of the owner. 
(l)  A statement as to whether utilities will be placed overhead or underground. 
(m)  All other applicable minimum standards for surveys as defined within Chapter 20 of the Virginia Administrative Code. 
    A house number shall be assigned to each lot created by the subdivision as provided in section 35-114 and chapter 35, article VII of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. O-78-323, 11-14-78; Ord. No. O-02-225, 12-10-02; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-43. - Conditions. 
    The plat shall not be approved until the subdivider has complied with the general requirements and minimum standards of design in accordance with this ordinance and has made satisfactory arrangements of surety bond to cover the cost of necessary improvements to the satisfaction of the city. 
Sec. 24.1-44. - Approval. 
    The city planner shall not approve the final plat until receipt of a written statement from the health official that the subject property is suitable for the proposed development; nor shall the plat be approved when city public water and/or sewer is to be provided until the city planner receives in writing that the system has been approved and accepted by the City of Lynchburg or the subdivider has the required surety in place. Where a subdivision has been approved administratively by the city planner, no additional subdivision of the new lots or of the residue tract shall be approved within a period of two years from the date of approval, unless the land is industrially-zoned or the two-year time limit is waived by the city planner. 
(a)  Approval of the final plat shall be written on the face of the plat by the city engineer and city planner if no new streets are dedicated. Approval of the final plat that includes acceptance of right-of-way shall be written on the face of the plat by the city engineer and city manager; all copies shall be retained by the city planner until the subdivider is ready to record same. (See also subsection 24.1-28(g)) The city planner shall notify the subdivider in writing when the plat is approved and the subdivider shall record the plat within six months after final approval. The city planner may, on written request of the subdivider, grant an extension of this time, otherwise he shall mark the plat void and return same to the subdivider. 
(b)  The city council, commission or city planner shall render a decision on the right-of-way within 60 days after it has been submitted for approval by either approving or disapproving such plat in writing, and giving with the latter specific reasons therefore. 
    Specific reasons for disapproval may be contained in a separate document or may be written on the plat itself, and shall relate in general terms such modifications or corrections as will permit approval of the plat. 
    If the city council, commission or city planner fails to approve or disapprove the plat within 60 days after it has been officially submitted for approval, the subdivider, after ten days' written notice to the commission or city planner, may petition the circuit court of the city to decide whether the plat should or should not be approved. The court shall hear the matter and make and enter such order with respect thereto as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the plat. 
    If the city council, commission or city planner disapproves a plat and the subdivider contends that such disapproval was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, he may appeal to the circuit court having jurisdiction. 
    The time requirements contained in this section shall not apply to the submission of any preliminary subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
ARTICLE VIII. - EFFECTUAL CLAUSES 

Sec. 24.1-45. - Exceptions. 
    Where the subdivider can show that a provision of these standards would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, or where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the city planner a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the city planner may authorize an exception. When the city planner or subdivider desires, the matter shall be referred first to the commission and thence to city council for review. Any exceptions authorized under the provisions of this section shall be stated in writing on the plat, by the city planner, commission or city council with the reasoning set forth on which the departure was justified. 
(Code, 1981; Ord. No. O-05-111, 9-13-05; Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-46. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall not be granted a building permit or extended public utilities and any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each lot or parcel of land subdivided, transferred or sold and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. If the violation is uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with the zoning ordinance, within a time period established by the court. Failure to remove or abate a zoning violation within the specified time period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and any such failure during any succeeding ten-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each ten-day period punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,500.00. 
(b)  Any violation or attempted violation of this chapter, or of any regulation adopted hereunder may be restrained, corrected, or abated as the case may be by injunction or other appropriate proceeding. At any time after the filing of an injunction or other appropriate proceeding to restrain, correct, or abate a zoning ordinance violation and where the owner of the real property is a party to such proceeding, the zoning administrator may record a memorandum of lis pendens pursuant to Section 8.01-268 of the Code of Virginia. Any memorandum of lis pendens admitted to record in an action to enforce a zoning ordinance shall expire after 180 days. If the city has initiated an enforcement proceeding against the owner of the real property and such owner subsequently transfers the ownership of the real property to an entity in which the owner holds an ownership interest greater than 50 percent, the pending enforcement proceeding shall continue to be enforced against the owner. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-47. - Validity. 
    Should any section, subsection or provision of this subdivision ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not effect the validity or constitutionality of such subdivision ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 24.1-48. - Repeal. 
    Where any ordinance or portion of any ordinance is in conflict with this ordinance, that provision which is more restictive or imposes higher standards or requirements shall apply. 
Sec. 24.1-49. - Amendments. 
    This ordinance may be amended in whole or in part. The commission on its own initiative may, or at the request of the city council shall, prepare and recommend amendments to this ordinance. The procedure for such amendment shall be the same as for the preparation and recommendation and approval and adoption of the original ordinance; provided, that no such amendment shall be adopted by the governing body without a reference of the proposed amendment to the commission for recommendation, nor until 60 days after such reference, if no recommendation is made by the commission. Provided, further, that the provisions of Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, regarding advertisement and public hearings have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. O-10-034, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 24.1-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-10-034, adopted Apr. 27, 2010, eff. July 1, 2010, repealed § 24.1-50. 
Chapter 25 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-225 et seq.; inoperative vehicles, § 21-61 et seq.; advertising on vehicles, § 36-45; motor vehicle licenses, § 36-127 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique motor vehicle. Every motor vehicle which was actually manufactured or designated by the manufacturer as a model manufactured in a calendar year not less than 25 years prior to January first of each calendar year and is owned solely as a collectors item, and is used for participation in club activities, exhibits, tours, parades and similar uses, but in no event used for general transportation, may be classified by the commissioner as an antique motor vehicle. 
    Bicycle. As defined in section 10-1 of this Code. 
    Business district. The territory contiguous to a highway where 75 percentum or more of the property contiguous to a highway, on either side of the highway, for a distance of 300 feet or more along the highway is occupied by land and buildings actually in use and operation for business purposes. 
    Chauffeur. Every person employed for the principal purpose of operating a motor vehicle and every person who drives a motor vehicle while in use as a public or common carrier of persons or property. 
    Commission. The state corporation commission. 
    Commissioner. The commissioner of the division of motor vehicles of this state. 
    Crosswalk. 
(a)  That portion of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(b)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Dealer. Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers in this city and who has an established place of business for such purpose in this city at which place of business the books and records of such dealer are kept and at which a substantial part of the business of such dealer is conducted. 
    Division. The division of motor vehicles of this state. 
    Essential parts. All integral parts and body parts, the removal, alteration or substitution of which will tend to conceal the identity of a vehicle. 
    Farm tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used as a farm, agricultural or horticultural implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other farm, agricultural or horticultural machinery and implements including self-propelled mowers designed and used for mowing lawns. 
    Highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place of whatsoever nature open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in this city, including the streets, alleys and publicly maintained parking lots in the city. 
    Intersection. 
(a)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(b)  Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Metal tires. All tires the surface of which in contact with the highway is wholly or partly of metal or other hard, nonresilient material. 
    Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and any four wheeled vehicle weighing less than 500 pounds and equipped with an engine of less than six horsepower, except any such vehicle as may be included within the term "farm tractor," as defined in this section. 
    Motor vehicle. Every vehicle as herein defined which is self-propelled or designed for self-propulsion except that the definition contained in section 46.1-389(d) of the Code of Virginia shall apply for the purposes of section 46.1-388 et seq. of state law. Any structure designed, used or maintained primarily to be loaded on or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling, sleeping place, office or commercial space shall be considered a part of a motor vehicle. For the purposes of this chapter, any device herein defined as a bicycle shall be deemed not to be a motor vehicle. 
    Nonresident. Every person who is not domiciled in this state, except: 
(a)  Any foreign corporation which is authorized to do business in this state by the state corporation commission shall be deemed a resident of this state for the purposes of this chapter; provided, however, that in the case of corporations incorporated in this state but doing business without the state, only such principal place of business or branches located within this state shall be dealt with as residents of this state. 
(b)  A person who becomes engaged in a gainful occupation in this state for a period exceeding 60 days shall be deemed a resident for the purposes of this chapter. 
(c)  A person, other than a nonresident student, who has actually resided in this state for a period of six months, whether employed or not, or who has registered a motor vehicle, listing an address within this state in the application for registration, shall be deemed a resident for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Operator. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a highway or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
    Owner. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or, in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter, except that in all such instances when the rent paid by the lessee includes charges for services of any nature or when the lease does not provide that title shall pass to the lessee upon payment of the rent stipulated, the lessor shall be regarded as the owner of such vehicle and the vehicle shall be subject to such requirements of this chapter as are applicable to vehicles operated for compensation; provided, however, that a "truck lessor" shall be regarded as the owner, and his vehicles shall be subject to such requirements of this chapter as are applicable to vehicles of private carriers. 
    Peace or police officer. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Person. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
    Pneumatic tires. All tires inflated with compressed air. 
    Private road or driveway. Every way in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Reconstructed vehicle. Every vehicle of a type required to be registered hereunder materially altered from its original construction by the removal, addition or substitution of essential parts new or used. 
    Residential district. The territory contiguous to a highway, not comprising a business district, where 75 percentum or more of the property contiguous to such highway, on either side of the highway, for a distance of 300 feet or more along the highway is occupied by dwellings and land improved for dwelling purposes, or by dwellings, land improved for dwelling purposes and land or buildings in use for business purposes. 
    Road tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Roadway. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. A highway may include two or more roadways if divided by a physical barrier or unpaved area. 
    Safety zone. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    Semitrailer. Every vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Shoulder. That part of a highway between the portion regularly traveled by vehicular traffic and the lateral curbline or ditch. 
    Solid rubber tire. Every tire made of rubber other than a pneumatic tire. 
    Specially constructed vehicle. Any vehicle which shall not have been originally constructed under a distinctive name, make, model or type by a generally recognized manufacturer of vehicles and not a reconstructed vehicle. 
    Superintendent. The superintendent of the department of state police of this state. 
    Tractor truck. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the load and weight of the vehicle attached thereto. 
    Traffic lane or lane. That portion of a roadway designed or designated to accommodate the forward movement of a single line of vehicles. 
    Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and except any vehicle as may be included within the term "bicycle." 
(Code 1959, § 20-2) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
Sec. 25-1.1. - References to state code. 
    Due to the recodification of Title 46.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950) as amended, into Title 46.2, it is hereby provided, pursuant to the provisions of Section 46.2-1313 of the Code of Virginia, that whenever any section of the Code of the City of Lynchburg makes reference to or incorporates a section or sections of the Code of Virginia formerly contained in Title 46.1 such section of the City Code shall be deemed to and shall refer to or incorporate the corresponding section or sections of Title 46.2 of the state code. 
(Ord. No. O-89-267, § 1, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 25-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 25-2, Compliance with chapter, was repealed by Ord. No. O-93-312, adopted Dec. 14, 1993, the penalties were inconsistent with the Code of Virginia. 
Sec. 25-3. - Penalty for violations. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as follows: 
(a)  Violations of this chapter shall constitute traffic infractions punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(b)  Fines for traffic infractions which do not result in accidents may be paid in accordance with the provisions of Rule 3(B):2, Uniform Fine Schedule of the Rules of Virginia Supreme Court and all of the provisions and requirements of Rule 3(B):2, Uniform Fine Schedule of the Rules of Virginia Supreme Court, as amended, are hereby fully adopted and made a part of this section and chapter as fully as though set out and are hereby made applicable within the city. 
(c)  As provided in the Code of Virginia, § 1-13.39:2, any future amendments to the Uniform Fine Schedule shall be incorporated by reference and become a part of section (b). 
(Code 1959, § 20-38; Ord. No. O-88-283, § 1, 10-25-88; Ord. No. O-92-201, 6-23-92, eff. 7-1-92; Ord. No. O-96-028, 2-13-96) 
Sec. 25-4. - Applicability to vehicles regardless of ownership. 
    The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles, regardless of ownership, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 20-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-801. 
Sec. 25-5. - Size, weight of vehicles. 
    The length, width, height and weight of vehicles operated within the city shall be in conformity with the provisions of state law. 
(Code 1959, §§ 20-220-20-234, 20-237) 
State Law reference- Size and weight of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1101 et seq. 
Sec. 25-6. - Permits for vehicles of excessive size and weight-Generally. 
    The chief of police may, in his discretion, upon application in writing and good cause being shown therefor issue a special permit, in writing, authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle upon the streets and highways in the city of a size or weight exceeding the maximum specified in this article in accordance with the provisions of Section 46.1-343, Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1959, § 20-235; Ord. No. O-83-018, § 1, 1-25-83) 
Sec. 25-7. - Same-Display, etc. 
    Every permit required by section 25-6 shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer, and any person violating any of the terms or conditions of such special permit shall be punished as provided in section 25-3. 
(Code 1959, § 20-236) 
Sec. 25-8. - Persons riding bicycles or animals or driving animals. 
    Every person riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal thereon shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1959, § 20-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800. 
Sec. 25-9. - Injuring, tampering or interfering generally with vehicles. 
(a)  Any person who shall individually or in association with one or more others willfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part of any vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or who shall in any other manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, climb into or upon such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto; or who, while a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting crank or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set into motion such vehicle, aircraft, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with the intent to cause any crime, malicious mischief, or injury thereto, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, except that the foregoing provision shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or the performance of any other official duty. 
(Code 1959, § 20-18; Ord. No. O-87-053, § 1, 3-24-87) 
Sec. 25-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. O-82-233, § 2, adopted Oct. 26, 1982, repealed § 25-10, prohibiting the washing, polishing or greasing of vehicles upon highways or sidewalks. Former § 25-10 was derived from Code 1959, § 20-19. 
Sec. 25-10.1. - Repairing or maintaining vehicles on public streets, highways or sidewalks prohibited. 
    No person shall perform any repair or maintenance work, except of an emergency nature, upon any vehicle situated upon a public street, highway or sidewalk, while such vehicle or portion thereof is lifted off such street, highway or sidewalk by any means. 
(Ord. No. O-82-233, § 1, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 25-11. - Authority of fire department officials to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the fire department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of a fire, and while so acting, shall have all the authority of peace officers. 
(Code 1959, § 20-20) 
Sec. 25-12. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1959, § 20-26) 
Sec. 25-13. - Unlawful riding. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1959, § 20-27) 
Sec. 25-14. - Unlawfully permitting another to drive. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven by any person who has no legal right to do so or in violation of Code of Virginia, Chapter 5, Title 46.1. Violation of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-28; Ord. No. O-93-312, 12-14-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-349. 
Sec. 25-15. - Persons operating and riding upon motorcycles. 
(a)  A person operating a motorcycle, excluding four-wheeled and three-wheeled vehicles, shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached to the motorcycle, and such operator shall not carry any other person, and no other person shall ride a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the seat for the operator. If such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, it shall also be equipped with a footrest for the use of such passenger. 
(b)  A person operating a motorcycle shall wear a face shield, safety glasses or goggles or have his motorcycle equipped with safety glass or a windshield at all times while operating said vehicle, and operators and passengers thereon, if any, shall wear protective helmets. 
(Code 1959, § 20-29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-909 and 46.2-910. 
Sec. 25-16. - Unnecessary noise in the operation of motor vehicles. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be loaded with materials likely to create loud noises by striking together, without using every reasonable effort to deaden the noise. 
(b)  The use in, upon or attached to any motor vehicle operating on any street of the city, of any radio, phonograph, musical instrument, bell, whistle, loudspeaker, amplifier or device of any kind whatsoever whereby sound therefrom is broadcast from such vehicle is prohibited. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to motor vehicles driven in a duly authorized parade or to law enforcement or emergency vehicles. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person in operating a motor vehicle within the city to create in the operation thereof any unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise. In operating a motor vehicle the following acts, among others, are declared to create loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  The use of a motor vehicle so out of repair as to cause thereby loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or any of such noises, or any other unnecessary noise. 
(2)  The practice of unnecessarily racing the motor of a motor vehicle while standing or moving thereby causing unnecessary noise from such motor. 
(3)  The practice of unnecessarily retarding the spark to the motor and thereby causing unnecessary, loud and explosive noise from the motor. 
(4)  In starting off a motor vehicle from a standing position, the practice of gaining speed unnecessarily quickly and thereby causing unnecessary and loud noise from the motor. 
(5)  The practice of coming to an unreasonably quick stop with a motor vehicle and thereby causing unnecessary grinding of brakes and screeching of tires, or either of such noises. 
(Code 1959, § 20-30) 
Sec. 25-17. - Blocking highways with railway trains. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or any receiver or trustee operating a railroad, to obstruct for a longer period than five minutes the free passage on any street or road by standing cars or trains across the same, except a passenger train while receiving or discharging passengers, but a passway shall be kept open to allow normal flow of traffic; nor shall it be lawful to stand any wagon or other vehicle on the track of any railroad which will hinder or endanger a moving train; provided, that when a train has been uncoupled, so as to make a passway, the time necessarily required, not exceeding three minutes, to pump up the air after the train has been recoupled shall not be included in considering the time such cars or trains were standing across such street or road. Any such railroad company, receiver or trustee, or driver of any such wagon or vehicle, violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $20.00. 
(Code 1959, § 20-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-412.1. 
Sec. 25-18. - Railroad warning signals must be obeyed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to fail to obey a clearly visible or audible crossing signal at a highway and railway grade crossing, which signal gives warning of the immediate approach of a railway train. 
(Code 1959, § 20-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-884. 
Sec. 25-19. - Driving through, etc., closed, etc., crossing gates. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1959, § 20-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-885). 
Sec. 25-20. - Putting glass, etc., on street prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street or highway. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street or highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street or highway from such vehicle. 
(d)  The violation of the provisions of this section shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-35) 
Cross reference- Littering, § 21-3. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324. 
Sec. 25-21. - Arrest for misdemeanors; release on summons and promise to appear. 
(a)  Whenever any person is arrested, including an arrest on a warrant, for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the arresting officer shall, except as otherwise provided in section 25-24, or any other section of this chapter, take the name and address of such person and the license number of his motor vehicle and issue a summons or otherwise notify him in writing to appear at a time and place to be specified in such summons or notice, such time to be at least five days after such arrest, unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing, and such person shall, if he so desires, have a right to an immediate hearing or a hearing within 24 hours at a convenient hour, and before a court having jurisdiction. Such officer shall thereupon and upon the giving by such person of his written promise to appear at such time and place, forthwith release him from custody. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), if prior general approval has been granted for the use of this section by the court having jurisdiction as provided in this chapter, the arresting officer may appear before a justice of the peace or other issuing authority of the county or city in which the violation occurred and make an oath as to the offense and request the issuance of a warrant at any time prior to the return date of the summons or notice. A warrant for the violation shall then be issued by the justice of the peace or other issuing authority and forwarded forthwith to the court in which said offense is to be tried. 
(c)  Any person refusing to give such written promise to appear shall be taken immediately by the arresting or other police officer before the nearest or most accessible judicial officer or other person qualified to admit to bail having jurisdiction under this chapter. 
(d)  Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear, given in accordance with this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of, and in addition to, the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(e)  Any officer violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office and subject to removal therefrom upon complaint filed by any person in a court of competent jurisdiction. This section shall not be construed to limit the removal of a police officer for other misconduct in office. 
(Code 1959, § 20-36) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936. 
Sec. 25-22. - Authority of police officers to issue subpoenas. 
(a)  Any police officer, in the course of his duties in the investigation of an accident involving a motor vehicle or vehicles, may, at the scene of any such accident, issue a subpoena to any witness to appear in court and testify with respect to any criminal charge brought against any person as a result of such accident. A subpoena so issued shall have the same force and effect as if issued by the court. 
(b)  Any person failing to appear in response to a subpoena issued as provided in paragraph (a) hereof shall be punished as provided by law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-939. 
Sec. 25-23. - Issuance of warrant upon failure to comply with summons; suspension of licenses for failure to appear. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any person to comply with the terms of a summons or notice as provided in section 25-21, the court may direct the arresting officer or the clerk of the court to obtain a warrant for his arrest or for the violation of his written promise to appear given in accordance with section 25-21 and serve, or cause to be served, or attempt, or cause to be attempted, to serve such warrant on the person. The warrant shall be returnable to the court having jurisdiction of the offense and shall be accompanied by a report by the arresting officer which shall clearly identify the person arrested, specifying the section of the Code of Virginia or ordinance violated, the location of the offense, a description of the motor vehicle and its registration or license number. 
(b)  If the warrant is returned to the court with the notation "not found" or the person named in the warrant does not appear on the return date thereof, the court shall forward a certificate of the fact of nonservice or nonappearance, with a copy of the report specified in subsection (a) hereof, to the commissioner of the division of motor vehicles, who shall forthwith suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of such person. The order of suspension shall specify the reason for the suspension. Such suspension shall continue until such time as the court has notified the commissioner that the defendant has appeared before the court under the terms of the summons or notice, and the warrant. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-938. 
Sec. 25-24. - When arresting officer shall take person before judicial officer. 
    If any person is: (1) believed by the arresting officer to have committed a felony; (2) believed by the arresting officer to be likely to disregard a summons issued under section 25-21; the arresting officer shall take such person forthwith before the nearest or most accessible judicial officer or other person qualified to admit to bail in lieu of issuing the summons required by section 25-21, who shall determine whether or not probable cause exists that such person is likely to disregard a summons, and may issue either a summons or warrant as he shall determine proper. 
(Code 1959, § 20-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-940. 
Sec. 25-25. - Conditions precedent to issuance of warrant for violation of parking ordinance. 
    Before any warrant shall issue for the prosecution of a violation of an ordinance of this city regulating parking, the violator shall have been first notified by mail at his last-known address or at the address shown for such violator on the records of the division of motor vehicles, that he may pay the fine, provided by law for such violation, within five days of receipt of such notice, and the officer issuing such warrant shall be notified that the violator has failed to pay such fine within such time. The notice to the violator, required by the provisions of this section, shall be contained in an envelope bearing the words "Law Enforcement Notice" stamped or printed on the face thereof in type at least one-half-inch in height. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-941. 
Sec. 25-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-99-225, adopted Oct. 12, 1999, eff. Jan. 1, 2000, repealed § 25-26. 
Secs. 25-27-25-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Department of public safety, § 2-189 et seq.; department of public works, § 2-225 et seq. 

Sec. 25-37. - Powers of city manager-Generally. 
    The city manager shall have general supervision and control of the management and direction of all vehicular and pedestrian traffic and of the parking and routing of vehicles in the interest of the public safety, comfort and convenience not inconsistent with the provisions of Code of Virginia, Title 46.2. The city manager may cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained, designating residence and business districts, school, hospital and safety zones, highways and railway crossings, arterial streets, arterial stops, turns at intersections, traffic lanes and such other signs as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall have power to regulate the traffic by means of traffic officers or semaphores or other signaling devices on any portion of the highway where traffic is heavy or continuous, or where in his judgment conditions may require, and may prohibit other than one-way traffic upon certain highways, and may regulate the use of the highways by processions and assemblages. The city manager shall have the power to regulate the parking and stopping of vehicles on the public streets including the power to establish restricted parking areas. The city manager may adopt any such regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter which shall be deemed advisable and necessary, including the repeal, amendment or modification of any such regulations; provided, however, that such regulations, laws or rules shall not be deemed to be violated, if at the time of the alleged violation any sign or designation required under the terms of this chapter is missing, effaced, mutilated or defaced so that an ordinarily observant person under the same circumstances would not be apprised of or aware of the existence of such rule. 
(Code 1959, § 20-3; Ord. No. O-95-242, 12-12-95) 
Cross reference- Manager, § 2-96 et seq. 
State Law reference- Powers of local authorities generally, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq. 
Sec. 25-38. - Same-Duties as traffic engineer. 
    It shall be the general duty of the traffic engineer, to plan and determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signs; to plan and direct the operation of traffic on the streets of the city, including municipal parking areas; to conduct investigations of traffic conditions; to cooperate with other municipal and state officials and make recommendations for the improvement of traffic movement and conditions, including improvements in streets; and, to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the city, or as may be directed by the city council and the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 20-6) 
Sec. 25-39. - Enforcement generally. 
(a)  Every police officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter; provided, that such officer shall be uniformed at the time of such enforcement or shall display his badge or other sign of authority; and, provided further, that all officers making arrests incident to the enforcement of this chapter shall be paid fixed and determined salaries for their services and shall have no interest in, nor be permitted by law to accept the benefit of, any fine or fee resulting from the arrest or conviction of an offender against any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  With the consent of the landowner, any such officer may patrol the landowner's property to enforce state, county or city motor vehicle registration and licensing requirements. 
(c)  Any such officer may patrol the streets and roads within subdivisions of real property or within land submitted to a horizontal property regime pursuant to Chapter 4.1 (§ 55-79.1 et seq.) or Chapter 4.2 (§ 55-79.39 et seq.) of Title 55 of the Code of Virginia, which streets and roads are maintained by the owners of the lots or parcels of land within any such subdivision or the owners of condominium units within any such horizontal property regime or any association of such owners, upon the request or with the consent of such owners or association of such owners, to enforce the provisions of chapters 1 through 4 (§ 46.1-1 through 46.1-347) of Title 46.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1959, § 20-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-102. 
Sec. 25-40. - Fees not allowed police officers. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, section 19-75, no court in this city shall in any case in which a fine is assessed for the violation of any law of this city, or any subdivision thereof, assess as a part of the cost of the case any fee for arrest, or as a witness, for the benefit of any police officer of the city; nor shall any such police officer receive any such fee. Any such police officer who accepts or receives any such fee shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and in addition the city manager may remove him therefor. But such officers are not prohibited from accepting or receiving rewards. 
(Code 1959, § 20-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-218. 
Sec. 25-41. - Stopping vehicles for inspection or to secure information. 
    Any police officer who shall be in uniform or who shall exhibit his badge or other sign of authority shall have the right to stop any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, upon request or signal, for the purpose of inspecting the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as to its equipment and operation, its manufacturer's serial or engine number or its contents or load, if such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is a property-carrying vehicle or for the purpose of securing such other information as may be necessary. 
(Code 1959, § 20-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-103. 
Sec. 25-42. - Right to inspect vehicles in garages, etc. 
    Any police officer who shall be in uniform or shall exhibit a badge or other sign of authority shall have the right to inspect any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in any public garage or repair shop for the purpose of locating stolen motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers and for investigating the title and registration of motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers. For such purpose the owner of any such garage or repair shop shall permit any such police officer without let or hindrance to make investigation as herein authorized. 
(Code 1959, § 20-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-110. 
Sec. 25-43. - Reports by garages, parking places, etc. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle that shows evidence of having been struck by a bullet shall report to the nearest police station, within 24 hours after the motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration number, serial number or identification number, and the name and address of the owner or operator of the vehicle, if known. 
(Code 1959, § 20-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-109. 
Sec. 25-44. - Records required of persons renting motor vehicles without drivers; inspections, insurance. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of renting motor vehicles without drivers who shall rent any such vehicle without a driver, otherwise than as a part of a bona fide transaction involving the sale of such motor vehicle, shall maintain a record of the identity of the person to whom the vehicle is rented and the exact time the vehicle is the subject of such rental or in possession of the person renting and having the use of the vehicle. Every such record shall be a public record and shall be open to inspection by any person damaged as to his person or property by the operation of the vehicle or by any member of the police department in the discharge of his duty. Any person who has been damaged as to his person or property may require a production of such written record in person or by his duly authorized agent or attorney. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be rented for a period in excess of 30 days, the owner or his agent shall furnish the commissioner with a record of the name and address of the person to whom such vehicle is rented and the date on which such rental is to terminate. A like record shall be furnished to the commissioner on each renewal of any such rental. 
(b)  It shall be a misdemeanor for any such person who shall rent a motor vehicle as herein provided to fail to make or have in possession or to refuse an inspection of the record required in this section. 
(c)  The commissioner shall prescribe a form for the keeping of the record provided in this section and the owner shall use such form. 
(d)  No person engaged in the business of renting automobiles and trucks without drivers shall rent any such vehicle without a driver unless such vehicle is an insured motor vehicle. A violation of this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-108. 
Secs. 25-45-25-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ACCIDENTS 

Secs. 25-56-25-78. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-02-107, adopted May 28, 2002, repealed §§ 25-56-25-67 relating to hit and run accidents. 
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSING AND REGISTRATION GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicle license, § 36-127 et seq. 
State Law reference- Registration and licensing generally, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300 et seq. 

Sec. 25-79. - Signing and possession; exhibiting; failure to carry license or registration card. 
(a)  The operator of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, while such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is operated upon the highways of the city, shall have in his possession the registration card issued by the department of motor vehicles or the registration card issued by the state or county in which the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is registered, and his driver's license, learner's permit, or temporary driver's permit. 
(b)  The owner or operator of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall stop upon the signal of any police officer or other law enforcement officer who shall be in uniform or who shall show his badge or other sign of authority, and shall upon request exhibit his registration card, driver's license, learner's permit, or temporary driver's permit and shall write his name in the presence of such police officer or other law enforcement officer if so required, for the purpose of establishing his identity. 
(c)  Every person licensed by the department of motor vehicles as a driver or issued a learner's or temporary driver's permit who fails to carry his license or permit and the registration card for the vehicle which he operates shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction punished by a fine of $10.00; provided, however, that if any person, when summoned to appear before a court for failure to display his license, permit or the registration card, upon such demand being made of him, shall present to the officer issuing the summons or a city magistrate, before the return date of the summons a proper license or permit duly issued to him prior to the time of such demand or a proper registration card, as the case may be, or shall appear pursuant to such summons and produce before the court a proper license or permit duly issued to him prior to the time of such demand or a proper registration card, as the case may be, he shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 20-44; Ord. No. O-90-328; 11-13-90; Ord. No. O-91-001, 1-8-91) 
Sec. 25-80. - Registration and certificate of title required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or for the owner thereof to knowingly permit the operation of, upon a highway within the city, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is not registered or for which a certificate of title has not been issued, whenever such registration or certificate of title is required by state law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-613. 
Sec. 25-81. - Attachment, display of state license plates generally. 
(a)  License plates assigned to a motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, tractor truck, trailer or semitrailer, or to persons licensed as motor vehicle dealers or transporters of unladen vehicles, shall be attached to the front and the rear of the vehicle. The license plate assigned to a motorcycle, trailer, or semitrailer shall be attached to the rear of the vehicle. The license plate assigned to a tractor truck shall be attached to the front of the vehicle. The license plates issued to licensed motor vehicle dealers and to persons licensed as transporters of unladen vehicles shall consist of one plate for each set issued and shall be attached to the rear of the vehicle to which it is assigned. 
(b)  Every such license plate shall be securely fastened to the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to which it is assigned so as to prevent the plate from swinging and at a height not less than 12 inches from the ground, measuring from the bottom of such plate, in a position to be clearly visible and shall be maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition to be clearly legible. 
(Code 1959, § 20-46; Ord. No. O-00-137, 6-27-00) 
State Law reference- Attachment and display of license plates generally, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-613, 46.2-715. 
Sec. 25-82. - Offenses relating to registration, licensing, and certificates of title; penalty. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Operate or permit the operation of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by him to be operated on a public street unless (i) it is registered, (ii) a certificate of title therefor has been issued, and (iii) it has displayed on it the license plate or plates and decal or decals, if any, assigned to it by the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles for the current registration period, subject to the exemptions mentioned in Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(2)  Display, cause or permit to be displayed, or have in possession any registration card, certificate of title, or license plate or decal which he knows is fictitious or which he knows has been canceled, revoked, suspended, or altered; or display or cause or permit to be displayed on any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer any license plate or decal that he knows is currently issued for another vehicle. 
(3)  Lend or knowingly permit the use of any registration card, license plate, or decal by anyone not entitled to it. 
(4)  Fail or refuse to surrender to a law enforcement office, on demand, any certificate of title, registration card, or license plate or decal which has been suspended, canceled, or revoked. 
(5)  Use a false name or address in any application for the registration of any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer or for a certificate of title or for any renewal or duplicate certificate, or knowingly to make a false statement of a material fact or to conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in any registration application. 
(Code 1959, § 20-47; Ord. No. O-00-137, 6-27-00) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-613). 
Sec. 25-83. - Operation of foreign dealer's license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or for the owner thereof to permit the operation of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in the city on a foreign dealer's license, unless the operation of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer on such license is specifically authorized by the commissioner. 
(Code 1959, § 20-48) 
Sec. 25-84. - Certain information to appear on "for-hire" vehicles; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, or to permit the operation of, a "for-hire" vehicle, except those falling within the gross weight group of 10,000 pounds and less as shown by section 46.1-154 of the Code of Virginia, over or on the highways of the city, unless the name and address of the owner of such vehicle plainly appears on both sides of such vehicle in letters not less than three inches in height; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any motor vehicle the use of which is restricted to wedding, ambulance or funeral services, nor to any motor vehicle rented without chauffeur and operated under a valid lease agreement which provides that the lessee of such vehicle shall have exclusive control thereof, but this exemption shall include motor vehicles leased to common or contract carriers of persons or property which operate or should operate under certificates or permits issued by the state corporation commission or the interstate commerce commission. 
(Code 1959, § 20-49) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1076. 
Sec. 25-85. - When unlawful to have in possession certificate of title issued to another. 
    It shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor for any person in this city to have in his possession a certificate of title issued by the commissioner to a person other than the holder thereof, unless and until the certificate of title has been duly assigned to the holder and acknowledged before a party authorized to administer oaths as provided by law. This section shall not apply to lienors who legally hold such certificates of title. 
(Code 1959, § 20-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-618. 
Sec. 25-86. - Removing, altering, etc., serial or identification numbers without consent of division. 
    Any person who shall individually or in association with one or more others remove, change, alter or conceal any motor number, serial or other identification number, without the consent of the division, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 25-3. 
(Code 1959, § 20-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1074. 
Sec. 25-87. - Possession of vehicle with changed number. 
    Any person who shall knowingly have in his possession a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, the motor number, serial number or identification number of which has been removed, changed or altered, without the consent of the state division of motor vehicles, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-52) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1075. 
Sec. 25-88. - Prohibited operation of certain vehicles not designed for transportation of passengers; checking on weights. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or to permit the operation of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer for which the fee for registration and license plates is prescribed by Code of Virginia, Section 46.1-154, on any highway of this city, under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Without first having paid the required registration and license plate fee; 
(2)  Without having painted on each side thereof, if such marking is required by Code of Virginia, Section 46.1-158.1, the empty weight of such vehicle and the gross weight on the basis of which it is registered and licensed; or, 
(3)  If, at the time of any such operation, the gross weight of the vehicle, or of the combination of vehicles of which it is a part, is in excess of the gross weight on the basis of which it is registered and licensed. 
(b)  Any officer authorized to enforce the motor vehicle laws, having reason to believe that the gross weight of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer being operated on any highway of this city exceeds that on the basis of which such vehicle is registered and licensed, is authorized to weigh the same by such means as the superintendent may prescribe and the operator, or other person in possession of such vehicle, shall permit such weighing whenever requested by such officer. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this section or who operates or permits the operation of a trailer or semitrailer designed for the use of human beings as living quarters, upon the highways of this city without having first paid to the commissioner the fee prescribed in Code of Virginia, Section 46.1-149(4), is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00, or by confinement in jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1959, § 20-53) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-704. 
Sec. 25-89. - Operation of vehicle without serial or identification number; requirements for stamping, cutting or embossing numbers. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell, or to operate upon any highway in this city, any motor vehicle which does not have stamped upon or cut into the motor thereof the motor number or which does not bear a permanent serial or other identification number assigned thereto by the manufacturer or by the commissioner, or any trailer or semitrailer which does not bear a permanent serial or other identification number assigned thereto by the manufacturer thereof or by the commissioner. Such number shall be stamped, cut, embossed or attached in such a manner that it cannot be changed, altered or removed without plainly showing evidence which would be readily detachable or which would destroy the attached plate. Such number shall be die stamped, cut or embossed into or attached to a permanent part of the vehicle which is easily accessible for checking or verification, with the exception that nonresident owners who are permitted to operate motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers without registration, under the registration provision relating to nonresidents contained in Code of Virginia, Sections 46.1-131 through 46.1-139 shall not be required to comply with the provisions of this section before operating a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer upon the highways of this city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-54) 
Sec. 25-90. - Sale, etc., of vehicle without having certificate of title. 
    Any person who shall sell, trade, exchange or barter a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in this city without first having secured a certificate of title therefor or without legally having in his possession a certificate of title therefor issued to the owner thereof, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 25-3. 
(Code 1959, § 20-55) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-61.7. 
Sec. 25-91. - Operation for hire of certain vehicles displaying not-for-hire plates. 
    If a vehicle of over 1,800 pounds gross weight displaying license plates entitling it to be operated exclusively not for hire is operated for hire, the licensee thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined an amount not to exceed $100.00, which penalty shall be in addition to the penalty prescribed by section 25-88. 
(Code 1959, § 20-56) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-724. 
Sec. 25-92. - Definition of "gross weight." 
    As used in section 25-88, the term "gross weight" means the aggregate weight of a vehicle or combination of vehicles and its load. 
(Code 1959, § 20-57) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 46.2-100. 
Sec. 25-93. - Driving without license, prohibited; penalties. 
(a)  No person, except those expressly exempted in Sections 46.2-303 through 46.2-309 of the Code of Virginia shall drive any motor vehicle on any highway in this city until such person shall have made application for a driver's license and satisfactorily passed the examination required by Section 46.2-325 of the Code of Virginia and obtained a driver's license, nor unless such license issued to such person is valid. 
(b)  A conviction of a violation of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-61; Ord. No. O-92-075, 3-24-92, eff. 4-28-92) 
State Law reference- Driving without license, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300. 
Sec. 25-94. - Driving while operator's etc., license suspended or revoked. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalty provided by this section, any motor vehicle administratively impounded or immobilized under the provisions of section 46.2-301.1 of the state code may, in the discretion of the court, be impounded or immobilized for an additional period of up to 90 days upon conviction of an offender for driving while his driver's license, learner's permit, or privilege to drive a motor vehicle has been suspended or revoked for (i) a violation of sections 18.2-36.1, 18.2-51.4, 18.2-266 or 46.2-341.24 of the state code or a substantially similar ordinance of the city or (ii) driving after adjudication as an habitual offender, where such adjudication was based in whole or in part on an alcohol-related offense, or where such person's license has been administratively suspended under the provisions of section 46.2-391.2 of the state code. However, if, at the time of the violation, the offender was driving a motor vehicle owned by another person, the court shall have no jurisdiction over such motor vehicle but may order the impoundment or immobilization of a motor vehicle owned solely by the offender at the time of arrest. All costs of impoundment or immobilization, including removal or storage expenses, shall be paid by the offender prior to the release of his motor vehicle. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in sections 46.2-304 and 46.2-357 of the state code, no person, resident or nonresident (i) whose driver's license, learner's permit or privilege to drive a motor vehicle has been suspended or revoked or, (ii) who has been directed not to drive by any court or by the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles, or (iii) who has been forbidden, as prescribed by operation of any statute of the commonwealth or a substantially similar ordinance of the city, to operate a motor vehicle in the commonwealth shall thereafter drive any motor vehicle or any self-propelled machinery or equipment on any street or highway in the city until the period of such suspension or revocation has terminated or the privilege has been reinstated. A clerk's notice of suspension of license for failure to pay fines or costs given in accordance with section 46.2-395 of the state code shall be sufficient notice for the purpose of maintaining a conviction under this section. For the purposes of this section the phrase "motor vehicle or any self-propelled machinery or equipment" shall not include mopeds. 
(c)  A violation of section (b) of this ordinance is a class 1 misdemeanor. A third or subsequent violation of section (b) of this ordinance or of Section 46.2-301(B.) of the state code occurring within a ten-year period shall include a mandatory minimum term of confinement in jail of ten days. However, the court shall not be required to impose a mandatory minimum term of confinement in any case where a motor vehicle is operated in violation of section (b) of this ordinance or of Section 46.2-301(B.) of the state code in a situation of apparent extreme emergency which requires such operation to save life or limb. 
(d)  Upon a violation of section (b) of this ordinance, the court shall suspend the person's license or privilege to drive a motor vehicle for the same period for which it had been previously suspended or revoked. 
    In the event such person has violated this section by driving during a period of suspension or revocation which was not for a definite period of time, the court shall suspend such person's license, permit or privilege to drive for an additional period not to exceed 90 days, to commence upon the expiration of the previous suspension or revocation or to commence immediately if the previous suspension or revocation has expired. 
(e)  Any person who operates a motor vehicle or any self-propelled machinery or equipment in violation of the terms of a restricted license issued pursuant to subsection E of Section 18.2-271.1 of the state code is not guilty of a violation of this section of the City Code but is guilty of a violation of section 18.2-272 of the state code. 
(Code 1959, § 20-62; Ord. No. O-89-229, § 1, 9-12-89; Ord. No. O-91-206, 9-10-91; Ord. No. O-92-201, 6-23-92, eff. 7-1-92; Ord. No. O-07-038, 3-13-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-301. 
Sec. 25-95. - Driving while restoration of license is contingent upon furnishing proof of financial responsibility. 
(a)  No person, resident or nonresident, (i) whose driver's license or learner's permit has been suspended or revoked by any court or by the commissioner or by operation of law pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, Title 46.2, or of Section 18.2-271 of the Code of Virginia, or who has been disqualified pursuant to the provisions of the Virginia Commercial Driver's License Act (Sections 46.2-341.1 et seq. of the Code of Virginia), or of section 25-166 of this Code, or (ii) who has been forbidden as prescribed by law by the commissioner, the state corporation commission, the commonwealth transportation commissioner or the superintendent of the state police to drive a motor vehicle in the commonwealth shall drive any motor vehicle in this city during any period wherein the restoration of license or privilege is contingent upon the furnishing of proof of financial responsibility, unless he has given proof of financial responsibility in the manner provided in Code of Virginia, Article 15 (Section 46.2-435 et seq.) of Chapter 3 of Title 46.2. Any person who drives a motor vehicle on the streets or highways of the city and has furnished proof of financial responsibility but who has failed to pay a reinstatement fee shall be tried in accordance with Section 46.2-300 of the state code. 
(b)  A first offense violation of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-63; Ord. No. O-91-206, 9-10-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-302 
Sec. 25-96. - Chauffeurs as operators and vice versa. 
    Any person licensed as a chauffeur under Code of Virginia, Chapter 5, Title 46.1, shall not be required to procure an operator's license, but no person shall drive any motor vehicle as a chauffeur, unless licensed as a chauffeur. Notwithstanding other provisions of law, no person shall be required to obtain a chauffeur's license for the purpose of driving a school bus. 
(Code 1959, § 20-64) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-338. 
Sec. 25-97. - Use of restricted operator's, etc., license. 
    Any person issued an operator's or chauffeur's license on which there is printed or stamped restrictions as provided by the Code of Virginia, Section 46.1-378, and who operates a motor vehicle in violation of such restrictions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 25-3. 
(Code 1959, § 20-54) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-329. 
Sec. 25-98. - Age limits for drivers of school buses and passenger carriers. 
    It shall be unlawful: 
(a)  For any person, whether licensed or not, who is under the age of 18 years to drive a motor vehicle while in use as a school bus for the transportation of pupils to or from school; provided, however, that such school bus may be operated by a person between the ages of 16 and 18 years, with the approval of the city school board; 
(b)  For any person, whether licensed or not, who is under the age of 18 years, to drive a motor vehicle while in use as a public passenger-carrying vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 20-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-919, 46.2-810. 
Sec. 25-99. - Violations in regard to operator's etc., licenses generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts: 
(a)  To display or cause or permit to be displayed or to have in his possession any operator's or chauffeur's license knowing the same to be fictitious or to have been canceled, revoked, suspended or altered, or photographed for the purpose of evading the intent of this article or the state law; 
(b)  To lend to, or knowingly permit the use of, by one not entitled thereto, any operator's or chauffeur's license issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof; 
(c)  To display or represent as his own any operator's or chauffeur's license not issued to the person displaying the same; 
(d)  To reproduce by photograph or otherwise, any operator's or chauffeur's license or temporary permit or instruction permit issued by the division without obtaining prior written consent of the division; 
(e)  To fail or refuse to surrender, upon demand, any operator's or chauffeur's license issued in this state or any other state to any court in this city in which an operator or chauffeur has been tried and convicted for the violation of any law of this state or ordinance of this city regulating or affecting the operation of a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 20-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-346. 
Sec. 25-100. - Suspension of operator's etc., license upon conviction of reckless driving-Generally. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties for reckless driving prescribed in section 25-151 and except in those cases for which a revocation of license is provided in Code of Virginia, paragraph (e) of section 46.1-417 any court may suspend any license issued to a convicted person under Code of Virginia, Chapter 5 (section 46.1-348 et seq.) Title 46.1, for a period of not less than ten days nor more than six months, and such court shall require the convicted person to surrender his license so suspended to the court where it shall be disposed of in accordance with section 25-104. 
(b)  If a person convicted has not obtained the license required by such chapter, or is a nonresident, the court may direct in the judgment of conviction that such person shall not, for a period of not less than ten days or more than six months as may be prescribed in the judgment, drive or operate any motor vehicle in this state. The court or the clerk of court shall transmit the license to the commissioner along with the report of the conviction required to be sent to the division. Where the conviction is a second conviction which will require revocation under Code of Virginia, section 46.1-417, the court shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of such person and thereupon transmit the same to the division of motor vehicles as provided by law. 
(Code 1959, § 20-68) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-392. 
Sec. 25-101. - Same-Reckless driving for exceeding speed of sixty-five or seventy-five miles per hour. 
    When any person shall be convicted of reckless driving for exceeding a speed of 65 or 75 miles per hour, as the case may be, upon the highways of this city under section 25-152, then in addition to any other penalties provided by law, except in those cases for which revocation of licenses is provided in Code of Virginia, Section 46.1-417, the operator's or chauffeur's license of such person may be suspended by the court or judge for a period of not less than 60 days nor more than six months. In case of conviction the court or judge shall order the surrender of the license to the court where it shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, Section 46.1-425. Where the conviction is a second conviction which would require revocation under the provisions of Code of Virginia, Section 46.1-417, the court shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of such person and thereupon transmit the same to the division of motor vehicles as provided by law. lf such person so convicted has not obtained a license required by Code of Virginia, Chapter 5 (Section 46.1-348 et seq.) of Title 46.1, or is a nonresident, such court shall direct in the judgment of conviction that such person shall not drive or operate any motor vehicle in this city for a period of not less than 60 days nor more than six months. 
(Code 1959, § 20-69) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-393. 
Sec. 25-102. - Additional fine and jail sentence for fourth conviction of certain offenses. 
    If any person, having been convicted three times of any offense or offenses set forth below, within a period of ten years, be again convicted of any one of such offenses within such ten-year period, he shall, in addition to the penalty otherwise prescribed by law for such offense, be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. The offenses, for a fourth conviction of which such penalties may be imposed, are the following: Violations within Virginia of Sections 18.1-54, 46.1-176, 46.1-191, 46.1-350, or of any similar ordinance of any county, city or town in Virginia, and manslaughter involving the operation of a motor vehicle, voluntary or involuntary. Provided, however, that for the purposes of this section where more than one manslaughter conviction results from a single act or omission, then only the first such conviction shall constitute an offense. 
(Code 1959, § 20-69.1) 
Sec. 25-103. - Revocation of license upon fourth conviction of any such offense. 
    In addition to the penalties set forth in section 46.1-423.1 of the Code of Virginia or section 25-102 of this Code, if any person be convicted of a fourth offense as therein provided, the court in which such conviction is had shall revoke the operator's or chauffeur's license of such person for a period of five years. 
(Code 1959, § 20-69.2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-394. 
Sec. 25-104. - Disposition of surrendered licenses upon conviction requiring revocation or suspension. 
(a)  In any case in which the accused is convicted of an offense, upon the conviction of which the law requires or permits, revocation or suspension of the operator's or chauffeur's license of the person so convicted, the court shall order the surrender of such license, which shall remain in the custody of the court during the period of such revocation or suspension if such period does not exceed 30 days, or until: 
(1)  The time allowed by law for appeal has elapsed, when it shall be forwarded to the commissioner; or 
(2)  An appeal is affected and proper bond posted, at which time it shall be returned to the accused. 
(b)  Provided, however, that when the time of suspension or revocation coincides or approximately coincides with the appeal time, the court may retain the license and return the same to the accused upon the expiration of the suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1959, § 20-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398. 
Sec. 25-105. - Purchasing, etc., vehicle from vendor who does not have certificate of title. 
    Any person who shall purchase, trade, exchange or barter for a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in this city, knowing or having reason to believe that the vendor thereof has not secured a certificate of title, or knowing or having reason to believe that the vendor thereof does not legally have in his possession a certificate of title therefor issued to the owner thereof, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 25-3. 
(Code 1959, § 20-71) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-616. 
Secs. 25-106-25-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic regulations in parks, § 28-1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-117. - Drive on right side of highways. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, upon all highways of sufficient width the driver of a vehicle shall drive the same upon the right half of the highway, unless it is impracticable to travel on such side of the highway, and except when overtaking and passing another vehicle, subject to the limitations applicable in overtaking and passing set forth in sections 25-121 and 25-125. 
(Code 1959, § 20-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-802. 
Sec. 25-118. - Keep to the right in crossing intersections or railroads. 
    In crossing an intersection of highways or the intersection of a highway by a railroad right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall at all times cause such vehicle to travel on the right half of the highway, unless such right side is obstructed or impassable. 
(Code 1959, § 20-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-803. 
Sec. 25-119. - Driving on streets laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any street or highway has been divided into clearly marked lanes for traffic, drivers of vehicles shall obey the following regulations: 
(a)  Any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions existing shall be driven in the lane nearest the right-hand edge or curb of the highway when such lane is available for travel, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or in preparation for a left turn or as permitted in paragraph (d) of this section; 
(b)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has ascertained that such movement can be made with safety; 
(c)  Upon a highway which is divided into three lanes a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or in preparation for a left turn or unless such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction in which the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted or marked to give notice of such allocation; provided, that official traffic-control devices may be erected directing specific traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device; 
(d)  Whenever the city traffic engineer has designated right-hand lanes for slow-moving traffic and when such lanes are signposted or marked to give notice of such designation, a vehicle may be driven in any lane allocated to traffic moving in the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding, but when traveling within such inside lanes vehicles shall be driven at approximately the speed authorized in such lanes and speed shall not unnecessarily be decreased so as to block, hinder or retard traffic; 
(e)  Whenever a highway is marked with double traffic lanes consisting of a solid line immediately adjacent to a broken line, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of such line if the solid line is on the right of the broken line, except that it shall be lawful to make a left turn for the purpose of entering or leaving a public, private or commercial road or entrance; 
(f)  Wherever a highway is marked with double traffic lines consisting of two immediately adjacent solid lines, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of such lines, except that it shall be lawful to make a left turn for the purpose of entering or leaving a public, private or commercial road or entrance. 
(Code 1959, § 20-100) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-804. 
Sec. 25-120. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, each giving to the other, as nearly as possible, one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1959, § 20-101) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-837. 
Sec. 25-121. - Passing upon overtaking vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass at least two feet to the left thereof and shall not again drive to the right side of the highway until safely clear of such overtaken vehicle, except as provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 20-102) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-838. 
Sec. 25-122. - Audible signal upon overtaking vehicle. 
    The driver of an overtaking motor vehicle when traveling outside of a business or residence district shall, when necessary to insure safe operation, give audible warning with his horn or other warning device before passing or attempting to pass a vehicle proceeding in the same direction. 
(Code 1959, § 20-103) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-840. 
Sec. 25-123. - When overtaking vehicle may pass on right. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn, and the driver of such vehicle has given a signal as required. 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction. 
(3)  Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1959, § 20-104) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-841. 
Sec. 25-124. - Driver to give way to overtaking vehicle. 
    Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 20-105) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-842. 
Sec. 25-125. - Limitations on privileges of overtaking and passing. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the center line of a highway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety. 
(b)  No person operating a truck or tractor and trailer shall pass or attempt to pass any truck or tractor and trailer going in the same direction on an upgrade hill if such passing will impede the passage of following traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 20-106) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-843. 
Sec. 25-126. - Following too closely. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of both vehicles and the traffic upon, and conditions of, the highway at the time. 
(Code 1959, § 20-107) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-816. 
Sec. 25-127. - Right-of-way generally. 
    Except as provided in section 25-127.1, section 25-129 and section 25-234, when two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately the same time the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right, unless a "yield-right-of-way" sign is posted. Where any such sign is posted, the driver of the vehicle approaching or entering such intersection on the highway, road or street on which such sign is posted shall yield the right-of-way to the driver of a vehicle approaching or entering such intersection from either direction. At traffic circles vehicles already in the circle shall have the right-of-way over vehicles approaching and entering the circle. The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit any right-of-way which he might otherwise have hereunder. 
(Code 1959, § 20-115; Ord. No. O-87-249, § 1, 11-10-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-820. 
Sec. 25-127.1. - Right-of-way at uncontrolled T intersections. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 25-127, when vehicles arrive at approximately the same time at a T intersection not controlled by any traffic control device, the driver of the vehicle on the highway, road or street that intersects but does not cross the other highway, road or street shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle traveling on the other highway, road or street. 
(Ord. No. O-87-249, § 1, 11-10-87) 
Sec. 25-128. - Right-of-way when vehicle turns to left. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to constitute a hazard; provided, however, that where there is an automatic signal device governing the flow of traffic at any intersection and allowing turns to the left while all other vehicular traffic is required to stop, any vehicle making such turn shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles approaching the intersection. 
(Code 1959, § 20-116) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-825. 
Sec. 25-129. - Entering public street from private road, etc. 
    The driver of a vehicle entering a public street or highway or sidewalk from a private road, driveway, alley or building shall stop immediately before entering such street, highway or sidewalk and, upon entering such street, highway or sidewalk, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such public street or highway or to all pedestrians or vehicles approaching on such public sidewalk. 
(Code 1959, § 20-117) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-826. 
Sec. 25-130. - Right-of-way of military. 
    United States forces or troops, or any portion of the Virginia National Guard or Naval Militia, parading or performing any duty according to law, or any civil defense personnel performing any duty according to law, shall have the right-of-way in any street or highway through which they may pass; provided, that the carrying of the United States mail, the legitimate functions of the police and the progress and operation of fire engines and fire divisions shall not be interfered with. 
(Code 1959, § 20-118) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-827. 
Sec. 25-131. - Approach of police, fire-fighting, etc., vehicles. 
(a)  Upon the approach of any vehicle listed in paragraph (a) of section 25-132 giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or air horn designed to give automatically intermittent signals, the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb, clear of any intersection of highways, and shall stop and remain in such position unless otherwise directed by a police or traffic officer until such vehicle shall have passed. This provision shall not operate to relieve the driver of any such vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway, nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of any arbitrary exercise of such right-of-way. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall constitute failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(Code 1959, § 20-119) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-829. 
Sec. 25-132. - Exemption of police, fire-fighting, etc., vehicles from regulations in certain emergencies. 
(a)  The driver of any emergency vehicle, when such vehicle is being used in the performance of public services, and when such vehicle is operated under emergency conditions, may, without subjecting himself to criminal prosecution: 
(1)  Proceed past any steady or flashing red signal, traffic light, stop sign or device indicating moving traffic shall stop if the speed and movement of the vehicle is sufficiently reduced to enable it to pass a signal, traffic light or device with due regard to the safety of persons and property; 
(2)  Park or stop notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Disregard regulations governing a direction of movement of vehicles turning in specified directions so long as the operator does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Pass or overtake, with due regard to the safety of persons and property, another vehicle at any intersection; 
(5)  Disregard speed limits, while having due regard for safety of persons and property; 
(6)  Pass or overtake with due regard to the safety of persons and property, while en route to an emergency, stopped or slow-moving vehicles, by going to the left of the stopped or slow-moving vehicle either in a no-passing zone or by crossing the highway centerline; 
(7)  Pass or overtake with due regard to the safety of persons and property, while en route to an emergency, stopped or slow-moving vehicles, by going off the paved or main traveled portion of the roadway on the right. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, vehicles exempted in this instance will not be required to sound a siren or any device to give automatically intermittent signals. 
(b)  These exemptions granted to emergency vehicle shall apply only when the operator of such vehicle displays a flashing, blinking or alternating emergency light or lights and sounds a siren, exhaust whistle, or air horn designed to give automatically intermittent signals, as may be reasonably necessary, and, only when there is in force and effect for such vehicle either (i) standard motor vehicle liability insurance covering injury or death to any person in the sum of at least $100,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident and, subject to the limit for one person, to a limit of $300,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and to a limit of $20,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident or (ii) a certificate of self-insurance issued pursuant to Section 46.2-368 of the Code of Virginia. Such exemptions shall not, however, protect the operator of any such vehicle from criminal prosecution for conduct constituting reckless disregard of the safety of persons and property. Nothing in this section shall release the operator of any such vehicle from civil liability for failure to use reasonable care in such operation. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "emergency vehicle" shall mean: 
(1)  Any law enforcement vehicle operated by or under the direction of a federal, state, or local law enforcement officer (i) in the chase or apprehension of violators of the law or persons charged with or suspected of any such violation or (ii) in response to an emergency call; 
(2)  Any regional detention center vehicle operated by or under the direction of a correctional officer responding to an emergency call or operating in an emergency situation; 
(3)  Any vehicle used to fight fire, including publicly owned state forest warden vehicles, when traveling in response to a fire alarm or emergency call; 
(4)  Any ambulance, rescue, or life-saving vehicle designed or used for the principal purpose of supplying resuscitation or emergency relief where human life is endangered; 
(5)  Any department of emergency management vehicle or office of emergency medical services vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or operating in an emergency situation; and 
(6)  Any department of corrections vehicle designated by the director of the department of corrections, when (i) responding to an emergency call at a correctional facility, (ii) participating in a drug-related investigation, (iii) pursuing escapees from a correctional facility, or (iv) responding to a request for assistance from a law enforcement officer. 
(d)  Any law enforcement vehicle operated by or under the direction of a federal, state, or local law enforcement officer may disregard speed limits, while having due regard for safety of persons and property, (i) in testing the accuracy of speedometers of such vehicles or (ii) in testing the accuracy of speed measuring devices specified in Section 46.2-882 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1959, § 20-120; Ord. No. O-02-002, 1-15-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920. 
Sec. 25-133. - Following or parking near fire apparatus. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm at any distance closer than 500 feet to such apparatus or to park such vehicle within 500 feet of where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1959, § 20-121) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-921. 
Sec. 25-134. - Driving over fire hose. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway for use at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1959, § 20-122) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-922. 
Sec. 25-135. - Vehicles on sidewalks; penalty. 
    If any person rides or drives any vehicle, including bicycles and motorcycles, on the sidewalks of the city, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(Code 1959, § 20-123) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-903. 
Sec. 25-136. - Improper driving. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, upon the trial of any person charged with reckless driving where the degree of culpability is slight, the court in its discretion may find the accused not guilty of reckless driving but guilty of improper driving and impose a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Code 1959, § 20-77.2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-869. 
Sec. 25-137. - Driving through safety zone prohibited. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not, at any time, drive through or over a safety zone. 
(Code 1959, § 20-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-814. 
Sec. 25-138. - Backing. 
    The operator of any vehicle in the city shall not back such vehicle unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 20-93) 
Sec. 25-139. - Blocking intersections. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless there is sufficient space beyond such intersection or crosswalk in the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1959, § 20-94) 
Sec. 25-140. - Coasting. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle when traveling upon a downgrade upon any highway shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral. 
(Code 1959, § 20-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-811. 
Sec. 25-141. - Driving time restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle on the highways of this city for more than 13 hours in any period of 24 hours or for a period which, when added to the time such person may have driven a motor vehicle over the highways out of this city, would make an aggregate of more than 13 hours in any period of 24 hours; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the operation of motor vehicles used in snow removal or similar emergency situations by the state department of highways and transportation or the City of Lynchburg or their contractors or agents. 
(b)  It shall also be unlawful for the owner of any such vehicle to cause or permit the same to be driven in violation of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 20-96; Ord. of 11-27-79; Ord. No. O-79-349, § 1, 11-27-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-812. 
Sec. 25-142. - Rotary traffic islands. 
    A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1959, § 20-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-807. 
Sec. 25-143. - Automobiles not to be operated with television within view of operator of vehicle. 
    No motor vehicle operated in the city shall be equipped with, nor shall there be used therein, a television receiver forward of the driver's seat or the screen of which would otherwise be visible to the driver while operating the vehicle. This section shall apply to all motor vehicles which are registered or should be registered in the state. The operator of a motor vehicle which is not registered in the state and is not required to be registered in the state shall not operate a television receiver which violates the provisions of this section when driving through or within the city. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-198) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1077. 
Sec. 25-144. - Weight of vehicles and loads-Regulated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 46.2-1138.1, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the maximum gross weight and axle weight to be permitted on the road surface of any street or highway in the city shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article 17, Chapter 10, Title 46.2, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 46.2-1313 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of Sections 46.2-1122 through 46.2-1137 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, in effect on the date of the adoption of this section are hereby adopted and made a part of the City Code as fully as if set out herein and are hereby made applicable within the city. 
    References to the term "highway" shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways, alleys and rights-of-way within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the restrictions of the Code of Virginia which are adopted as part of the City Code. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1-13.39:2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, all future amendments to the sections of the Code of Virginia that are incorporated in this section are also incorporated by reference herein. 
(Ord. No. O-81-038, § 1, 2-24-81; Ord. No. O-95-221, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 25-144.1. - Same-Exception as to vehicles designed for towing disabled vehicles. 
    The provisions of Section 46.1-339 shall not apply to a vehicle designed for towing disabled vehicles, when towing such vehicle in an emergency and in such manner that a part of the combined weight of the two vehicles rests upon an axle or axles of the towing vehicle, provided the towed and towing vehicles each are within the weight limits prescribed in Section 46.1-339. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to permit the violation of any lawfully established load limit on any bridge. For the purpose of this section, "emergency" shall include towing disabled inoperative vehicles to places designated by owners. 
(Ord. No. O-81-038, § 1, 2-24-81) 
Sec. 25-144.2. - Same-Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any violation of section 25-144, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 46.2-1131 and the liquidated damages provisions of Section 46.2-1135 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. All fines imposed for a violation of section 25-144 shall be paid into the city treasury as provided by Section 46.2-1308 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, but in all cases in which the arrest is made or the summons is issued by an officer of the department of state police or of any other division of the state government, all fines and forfeitures collected upon convictions or upon forfeitures of bail of any person so arrested or summoned, shall be credited to the state literary fund. 
(b)  Any fine assessed by the court shall be entered by the court as a judgment for the city and shall constitute a lien upon the overweight vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O-81-038, § 1, 2-24-81; Ord. No. O-95-221, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 25-145. - Streets closed to trucks. 
(a)  The city manager is expressly authorized to prohibit the use of trucks, except for the purpose of receiving loads or making deliveries, on any public street, or any portion of a public street, maintained by the city; provided, that any street, or any portion of a street, that is closed to trucks must be clearly indicated by suitable signs at such places as may be necessary to notify the drivers of such vehicles of such prohibition and the decision to close a street or any portion of a street to trucks shall be based on an engineering and traffic analysis/study pursuant to section 25-37 of the City Code. 
(b)  Vehicles prohibited. Once a street or any portion of a street has been identified as being closed to trucks by erecting suitable signs the use of any street, or portion of street, so designated, by trucks other than pickup or panel trucks not exceeding an actual gross weight of 7,500 pounds, except for the purpose of receiving passengers or goods or making deliveries, is prohibited. The city's traffic engineer shall maintain a list of the streets and the portions of street that have been closed to trucks and such list shall be available for review upon request. 
(c)  Within 30 days after a sign is erected closing a street, or a portion of a street to trucks, or within 30 days of the issuance of a letter from the city manager declining to close a street, or a portion of a street to trucks, any person who is aggrieved by the action or inaction of the city manager with respect to closing a street or a portion of a street to trucks may appeal the city manager's decision to city council by letter to the clerk of council, who shall then schedule this matter for consideration by city council within a reasonable period of time. Notice of this consideration shall be provided to residents along the street in question. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. The driver of any such vehicle operated in violation of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-81-165, § 2, 8-11-81; Ord. No. O-88-233, 9-13-88; Ord. No. O-11-133, 11-22-11) 
Sec. 25-145.1. - Streets closed to pedestrians, bicycles and animals; penalty. 
(a)  The use of any portion of the Lynchburg Expressway between Carter Glass Memorial Bridge and Lakeside Drive and the 460 Bypass between Campbell Avenue and the western city limits by pedestrians, persons riding bicycles, horsedrawn vehicles, and animals led, ridden or driven on the hoof is prohibited, and the city manager is authorized and directed to erect suitable signs at such places as may be necessary to notify the public of this prohibition. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-81-165, § 2, 8-11-81) 
Sec. 25-146. - Streets and highways open to certain vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for long trailers (48 feet), long twin trailers (28 feet each), or vehicles of 102 inches in width to travel on any street in the city unless such street has been designated for such use by the council of the City of Lynchburg. A list of such streets shall be filed in the office of the city traffic engineer. 
(b)  Any person violating subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor and punished in accordance with section 25-3. 
(Ord. No. O-83-177, § 1, 8-9-83) 
Sec. 25-147. - Occupants of front seats of motor vehicles required to use safety lap belts and shoulder harnesses. 
(a)  Each person at least 16 years of age and occupying the front seat of a motor vehicle equipped or required by the provisions of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia to be equipped with a safety belt system, consisting of lap belts, shoulder harnesses, combinations thereof or similar devices, shall wear the appropriate safety belt system at all times while the motor vehicle is in motion on any public street, highway, alley or other right-of-way within the city. A child under the age of four years, however, shall be protected as required by the provisions of section 25-147.1 of this article. 
(b)  Each driver of a motor vehicle equipped or required by the provisions of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia to be equipped with a safety belt system who is transporting a child of at least four years of age, but less than 16 years of age, in the front seat of such motor vehicle shall cause such child to wear the appropriate safety belt system. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person for whom a licensed physician determines that the use of such safety belt system would be impractical by reason of such person's physical condition or other medical reason, provided the person so exempted carries on his person or in the vehicle a signed written statement of the physician identifying the exempted person and stating the grounds for the exemption; or 
(2)  Any law enforcement officer transporting persons in custody or traveling in circumstances which render the wearing of such safety belt system impractical; or 
(3)  Any person while driving a motor vehicle and performing the duties of a rural male carrier for the United State Postal Service; or 
(4)  Any persons driving a motor vehicle and performing the duties of a rural newspaper route carrier, newspaper bundle hauler, or a news rack carrier; or 
(5)  Drivers of taxicabs; or 
(6)  Personnel of commercial or municipal vehicles while actually engaged in the collection or the delivery of goods and services, including but not limited to solid waste, where such collection or delivery requires the personnel to exit and enter the cab of the vehicle with such frequency and regularity so as to render the use of safety belt systems impractical and the safety benefits derived therefrom insignificant. Such personnel shall resume the use of safety belt systems when actual collection or delivery has ceased or when the vehicle is in transit to or from a point of final disposition or disposal, including but not limited to solid waste facilities, terminals, or other location where the vehicle may be principally garaged; or 
(7)  Any person driving a motor vehicle and performing the duties of a utility meter reader; or 
(8)  Law enforcement agency personnel driving motor vehicles to enforce laws governing motor vehicle parking. 
(d)  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $25.00 to be paid into the city's general fund. No assignment of demerit points shall be made under article 19 of chapter 3 of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia and no court costs shall be assessed for violations of this section. 
(e)  A violation of this section shall not constitute negligence, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation, ownership, or maintenance of a motor vehicle, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any such civil action. 
(f)  A violation of this section may be charged on the uniform traffic summons form. 
(g)  No citation for violations of this section shall be issued unless the officer issuing such citation has caused to stop or arrest the driver of such motor vehicle for the violation of some other provision of the City Code or the Code of Virginia relating to the operation, ownership, or maintenance of a motor vehicle or any criminal statute. 
(Ord. No. O-93-301, 11-23-93) 
Sec. 25-147.1. - Child restraint devices required. 
(a)  Any person who drives on the public streets, highways, alleys, or other rights-of-way within the city, any motor vehicle manufactured after January 1, 1968, shall ensure that any child under the age of four (i) of which he is the parent or legal guardian or (ii) which he regularly transports therein is provided with and properly secured in a child restraint device of a type which meets the standards adopted by the United States Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Whenever any physician licensed to practice medicine in the Commonwealth of Virginia or any other state determines, through accepted medical procedures, that the use of a child restraint system by a particular child would be impractical by reason of the child's weight, physical unfitness, or other medical reason, the child shall be exempt from the provision of this section. Any person transporting a child so exempted shall carry on his or her person or in the vehicle a signed written statement of the physician identifying the child so exempted and stating the grounds therefor. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  the transporting of any child in a vehicle having an interior design which makes the use of a child restraint device impractical; or 
(2)  the transporting of children by public transportation, bus, school bus, or farm vehicle. For purposes of this section, "farm vehicle" means a vehicle which is either (i) exempt from registration pursuant to Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia or (ii) registered as a farm vehicle pursuant to Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, or (iii) owned by a resident of another state under whose laws the vehicle is either registered as a farm vehicle or exempt from registration by virtue of its use as a farm vehicle. 
(d)  The use of a seat belt of the type which is the standard equipment in new automobiles sold in the Commonwealth of Virginia shall not violate this article if (i) the affected child is between three and four years old and (ii) the weight and size of the child is such as to make the use of such seat belt practical and the use of an approved child restraint impractical. 
(e)  Any person, including those subject to jurisdiction of a juvenile and domestic relations district court, found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00 for a violation of paragraph (a) or a civil penalty of $20.00 for failure to carry a statement as required by paragraph (b). The court may waiver or suspend the imposition of the penalty for violation of paragraph (a) if it finds that the failure of the defendant to comply was due to his financial inability to acquire a child restraint system. All civil penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(f)  Violations of this section shall not constitute negligence per se; nor shall violation of this section constitute a defense to any claim for personal injuries to a child or recovery of medical expenses for injuries sustained in any motor vehicle accident. 
(Ord. No. O-93-301, 11-23-93) 
Secs. 25-148-25-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECKLESS DRIVING 

Sec. 25-150. - Generally. 
    Irrespective of the maximum speeds herein provided, any person who drives a vehicle upon a highway recklessly, or at a speed, or in a manner, so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person, shall be guilty of reckless driving; provided, that the driving of a motor vehicle in violation of any speed limit provision of section 25-193 shall not of itself constitute ground for prosecution for reckless driving under this section. Reckless driving shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1959, § 20-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-852. 
Sec. 25-151. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except in those cases for which revocation of license is provided under Code of Virginia, paragraph (e) of Section 46.1-417, the court may, in addition to the foregoing punishment, suspend any license issued to such convicted person under Code of Virginia Chapter 5 of Title 46.1 for a period of not less than ten days nor more than six months and the court shall require such convicted person to surrender his license so suspended. lf such person so convicted has not obtained the license required by such chapter the court may direct in the judgment of conviction that such person shall not, for a period of not less than ten days nor more than six months as may be prescribed in the judgment, drive or operate any motor vehicle in this state. 
(c)  The court or the clerk of such court shall transmit such license to the commissioner along with the report of such conviction required to be sent to the division. 
(Code 1959, § 20-77) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-868, 46.2-392. 
Sec. 25-152. - Specific instances. 
    A person shall be guilty of reckless driving who shall: 
(a)  Drive a vehicle when not under proper control or with inadequate or improperly adjusted brakes upon any street in this city; 
(b)  While driving a vehicle, overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, upon or approaching the crest of a grade or upon or approaching a curve in the highway, where the driver's view along the highway is obstructed, except where the overtaking vehicle is being operated on a highway having two or more designated lanes of roadway for each direction of travel or on a designated one-way street or highway; 
(c)  Drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle; 
(d)  Pass or attempt to pass two other vehicles abreast, moving in the same direction, except on highways having separate roadways of three or more lanes for each direction of travel, or on designated one-way streets or highways; 
(e)  Drive any motor vehicle, including any motorcycle, so as to be in and parallel to another vehicle in a lane designed for one vehicle, or drive any motor vehicle, including any motorcycle, so as to travel parallel to any other vehicle traveling in a lane designed for one vehicle; provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to any validly authorized parade, motorcade or motorcycle escort; 
(f)  Overtake or pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any steam, diesel or electric railway grade crossing or at any intersection of highways unless such vehicles are being operated on a highway having two or more designated lanes of roadway for each direction of travel or on a designated one-way street or highway, or while pedestrians are passing or about to pass in front of either of such vehicles, unless permitted so to do by a traffic light or police officers; 
(g)  Fail to stop, when approaching from any direction, a school bus, whether publicly or privately owned, which is stopped on any highway or school driveway for the purpose of taking on or discharging children, elderly, mentally or physically handicapped persons, and to remain stopped until all children, elderly, mentally or physically handicapped persons, are clear of the highway or school driveway and the bus is put in motion, except the driver of a vehicle upon a dual highway, when the roadways are separated by a physical barrier or barriers or an unpaved area, need not stop upon approaching a school bus which is on a roadway so separated from the one on which he is driving or an adjoining service road so separated. This subsection shall apply to school buses which are equipped with warning devices prescribed in Section 46.1-287, Code of Virginia, and are painted yellow with the words "school bus, stop, state law" in black letters at least six inches high on the front and rear thereof. If space is limited on the front, the words "School Bus" may be in letters at least four inches high. This subsection shall also apply to school buses which are equipped with warning devices as prescribed in Section 46.1-287, Code of Virginia, and which are painted yellow with the words "School Bus" in black letters at least eight inches high on the front and rear thereof. Only school buses as defined in Section 46.1-1(37), Code of Virginia, which are painted yellow and equipped with the required lettering and warning devices shall be identified as school buses; 
(h)  Fail to give adequate and timely signals of intention to turn, partly turn, slow down or stop, as required by section 25-178; 
(i)  Exceed a reasonable speed under the circumstances and traffic conditions existing at the time regardless of any posted speed limit; 
(j)  Drive a motor vehicle upon the streets in this city (i) at a speed of 45 miles per hour or more where the applicable speed limit is 25 miles per hour or less, (ii) at a speed of 55 miles per hour or more where the applicable speed limit is 30 or 35 miles per hour, (iii) at a speed of 65 miles per hour or more where the applicable maximum speed limit is 40 or 45 miles per hour, (iv) at a speed of 20 miles per hour or more in excess of the applicable maximum speed limits where the applicable maximum speed limit is more than 45 miles per hour, (v) in excess of 80 miles per hour regardless of the posted speed limit; 
(k)  Fail to bring his vehicle to a stop immediately before entering a highway from a side road when there is traffic approaching upon such highway within 500 feet of such point of entrance, unless a "Yield-Right-of-Way" sign is posted; or where such sign is posted, fail, upon entering such highway, to yield the right-of-way to the driver of a vehicle approaching on such highway from either direction; or 
(l)  Drive or operate any automobile or other motor vehicle upon any driveway or premises of a church, or school, or of any recreational facility, or of any business property open to the public, or on the premises of any industrial establishment providing parking space for customers, patrons or employees, or upon any highway under construction or not yet open to the public, recklessly or at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. 
(Code 1959, § 20-73; Ord. No. O-92-201, 6-23-92, eff. 7-1-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-853 through 46.2-864. 
Sec. 25-153. - Racing on highways. 
    Any person who shall engage in a race between two or more motor vehicles on the highways of the city shall be guilty of reckless driving. When any person shall be convicted of reckless driving under this section, then in addition, to any other penalties provided by law, the operator's or chauffeur's license of such person shall be suspended by the court or judge for a period of not less than months nor more per than two years. In case of conviction the court or judge shall order the surrender of the license to the court where it shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of section 25-104. 
(Code 1959, § 20-76) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-865. 
Sec. 25-154. - Aiders or abettors. 
    Any person, although not engaged in a race as defined in section 25-153, who aids or abets any such race shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-76.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-866. 
Sec. 25-155. - Disregarding police officer's signal to stop; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who, having received a visible or audible signal from any police officer to bring his motor vehicle to a stop, shall operate such motor vehicle in a willful or wanton disregard of such signal so as to interfere with or endanger the operation of the police vehicle or endanger other property or person, or who shall increase his speed and attempt to escape or elude such police officer shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  When any person is convicted under this section, then in addition to the penalties provided herein, the driver's license of such person may be suspended by the court or judge for a period not to exceed one year. However, in any case where the speed of the accused is determined to have exceeded the maximum allowed by 15 miles per hour where the maximum speed is 55 miles per hour or greater, the driver's license shall be suspended by the court or judge trying the case for a period of not less than 90 days. In case of conviction and suspension the court or judge shall order the surrender of the license to the court where it shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Section 46.1-425 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1959, § 20-77.1; Ord. No. O-85-290, § 1, 11-26-85; Ord. No. O-88-184, § 1, 8-9-88) 
Secs. 25-156-25-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE 

Sec. 25-162. - Driving motor vehicle, engine, etc. while intoxicated, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle, engine or train (i) while such person has a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or more by weight by volume or 0.08 grams or more per 210 liters of breath as indicated by a chemical test administered as provided in this division, or (ii) while such person is under the influence of alcohol, or (iii) while such person is under the influence of any narcotic drug or any other self-administered intoxicant or drug of whatsoever nature, or any combination of such drugs, to a degree which impairs his ability to drive or operate any motor vehicle, engine or train safely, or (iv) while such person is under the combined influence of alcohol and any drug or drugs to a degree which impairs his ability to drive or operate any motor vehicle, engine or train safely. For the purpose of this section, the term "motor vehicle" shall include mopeds, while operated on the public streets, highways, alleys and rights-of-way within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-84; Ord. No. O-82-146, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. O-85-292, § 1, 11-26-85; Ord. No. O-86-146, § 1, 7-8-86; Ord. No. O-88-184, § 1, 8-9-88; Ord. No. O-89-136, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. O-92-201, 6-23-92, eff. 7-1-92; Ord. No. O-94-117, 6-14-94, eff. 7-1-94) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit driving while intoxicated, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-132; similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266. 
Sec. 25-162.1. - Driving a commercial motor vehicle while intoxicated, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any commercial motor vehicle (i) while such person has a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or more by weight by volume or 0.08 grams or more per 210 liters of breath as indicated by a chemical test administered as provided in this division or (ii) while such person is under the influence of alcohol or (iii) while such person is under the influence of any narcotic drug or any other self-administered intoxicant or drug of whatsoever nature, or any combination of such drugs, to a degree which impairs his ability to drive or operate any commercial motor vehicle safely or (iv) while such person is under the combined influence of alcohol and any drug or drugs to a degree which impairs his ability to drive or operate any commercial motor vehicle safely. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a lesser included offense of an offense under provision (i), (ii), or (iv) of subsection (a) of this section for a person to drive or operate a commercial motor vehicle while such person has a blood alcohol concentration of 0.04 percent or more by weight by volume or 0.04 grams or more per 210 liters of breath as indicated by a chemical test administered in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-92-201, 6-23-92, eff. 7-1-92; Ord. No. O-94-117, 6-14-94, eff. 7-1-94) 
Sec. 25-162.2. - Persons under age twenty-one driving after illegally consuming alcohol; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to operate any motor vehicle after illegally consuming alcohol. Any such person with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.02 percent or more by weight by volume or 0.02 grams or more per 210 liters of breath but less than 0.08 by weight by volume or less than 0.08 grams per 210 liters of breath as indicated by a chemical test administered as provided in this article shall be in violation of this section. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by forfeiture of such person's license to operate a motor vehicle for a period of six months from the date of conviction and by a fine of not more than $500.00. The penalties and license forfeiture provisions set forth in Sections 16.1-278.9, 18.2-270 and 18.2-271 of the Code of Virginia, shall not apply to a violation of this section. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be eligible to attend an alcohol safety action program under the provisions of section 18.2-271.1 of the Code of Virginia and shall be eligible for a restricted license during the term of license suspension. 
(c)  Notwithstanding section 16.1-278.8 and section 16.1-278.9 of the Code of Virginia, upon adjudicating a juvenile delinquent based upon a violation of this section, the juvenile and domestic relations district court shall order disposition as provided in subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. O-94-117, 6-14-94, eff. 7-1-94) 
Secs. 25-163-25-167. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-82-146, adopted July 13, 1982, repealed §§ 25-163-25-167. 
Sec. 25-168. - Adoption of state law. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 46.2-1313 and Section 18.2-268.12 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of Sections 18.2-267, 18.2-268.1 through 18.2-268.11, 18.2-269, 18.2-270, 18.2-271, 18.2-271.1, 18.2-271.2, 18.2-272, 18.2-273 and sections 46.2-301, 46.2-301.1, 46.2-341.24, 46.2-341.25, 46.2-341.26:1 through 46.2-341.26:11, 46.2-341.27, 46.2-341.28, 46.2-341.29, 46.2-341.30, 46.2-341.31, 46.2-341.33, 46.2-341.34 and 46.2-391.2 through 46.2-391.5 of the Code of Virginia (1950) as amended, and in effect on July 1, 1993, are hereby adopted and made a part of this division and this chapter as fully as though set out and are hereby made applicable within the city. References therein to "highways of this state" shall be deemed to refer to streets, highways, alleys and rights-of-way within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person, within the city, to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any section of the Code of Virginia which is adopted by this section. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1-13.39:2 of the Code of Virginia, future amendments to the sections of the Code of Virginia that are incorporated in this section are also incorporated by reference herein. 
(Ord. No. O-82-146, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. O-84-181, § 1, 7-2-84; Ord. No. O-85-292, § 1, 11-26-85; Ord. No. O-86-146, § 1, 7-8-86; Ord. No. O-88-184, § 1, 8-9-88; Ord. No. O-89-136, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. O-90-240, 8-14-90; Ord. No. O-91-206, 9-10-91; Ord. No. O-92-201, 6-23-92, eff. 7-1-92; Ord. No. O-93-165, 6-22-93, eff. 7-1-93; Ord. No. O-94-011, 1-25-94; Ord. No. O-94-117, 6-14-94, eff. 7-1-94) 
Sec. 25-169. - Reimbursement of expenses incurred in responding to DUI and related incidents. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the following provisions shall, at the time of sentencing or in a separate civil action, be liable to the city or to any responding volunteer rescue squad, or both, for restitution of reasonable expenses incurred by the city for responding law enforcement, firefighting, rescue and emergency services, including those incurred by the sheriff's office, or by any volunteer rescue squad, or by any combination of the foregoing, when providing an appropriate emergency response to any accident or incident related to such violation and shall also be liable for restitution of reasonable expenses incurred by the city when issuing any related arrest warrant or summons, including the expenses incurred by the sheriff's office, or by any volunteer rescue squad, or by any combination of the foregoing: 
(1)  The provisions of Sections 18.2-36.1, 18.2-51.4, 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1, 29.1-738, 29.1-738.02, or 46.2-341.24, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or any succeeding sections thereof, or a similar ordinance, when such operation of a motor vehicle, engine, train or watercraft while so impaired is the proximate cause of the accident which required the response of the police and fire or emergency services. 
(2)  The provisions of Article 7 (Section 46.2-852 et seq.) of Chapter 8 of Title 46.2, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or any succeeding sections thereof, relating to reckless driving, when such reckless driving is the proximate cause of the accident which required the response of the police and fire or emergency services. 
(3)  The provisions of Article 1 (Section 46.2-300 et seq.) of Chapter 3 of Title 46.2, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or any succeeding sections thereof, relating to driving without a license or driving with a suspended or revoked license, which required the response of the police and fire or emergency services. 
(4)  The provisions of Section 46.2-894, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or any succeeding sections thereof, relating to improperly leaving the scene of an accident which required the response of the police and fire or emergency services. 
(b)  Personal liability under this section for reasonable expenses of an appropriate emergency response pursuant to subsection (a) shall not exceed $1,000.00 in the aggregate for a particular accident, arrest, or incident. In determining the "reasonable expense," the city or volunteer rescue squad may bill a flat fee of $350.00 or a minute-by-minute accounting of the actual costs incurred. As used in this section, "appropriate emergency response" includes all costs of providing law enforcement, fire-fighting, rescue, and emergency medical services. The court may order as restitution the reasonable expenses incurred by the locality for responding law enforcement, fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical services. The provisions of this section shall not preempt or limit any remedy available to the locality or to any volunteer rescue squad to recover the reasonable expenses of an emergency response to an accident or incident not involving impaired driving or operation of a vehicle or other conduct as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. O-02-017, 1-22-02; O-09-106, 9-22-09, eff. 11-1-09; Ord. No. O-11-102, 9-13-11) 
Secs. 25-170-25-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 25-174. - Turning around in streets. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle in the city shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction except at an intersection of highways; provided, however, that no driver shall cause any vehicle to make a turn to proceed in the opposite direction at any intersection where there is a sign or other marking prohibiting such action. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from any direction within 500 feet. 
(Code 1959, § 20-108) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-845. 
Sec. 25-175. - Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection or other location on any highway, except as prohibited by any provision of this chapter, shall do so as follows: 
(a)  Right turn. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(b)  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(c)  Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, and at any crossover from one roadway of a divided highway to another roadway thereof on which traffic moves in the opposite direction, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection or crossover shall approach the intersection or crossover in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection or crossover the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection or crossover, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1959, § 20-109) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-846. 
Sec. 25-176. - Markers, etc., regulating turns. 
    The city traffic engineer may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at any intersection, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(Code 1959, § 20-109) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-846. 
Sec. 25-177. - Signals required-Generally. 
    Every driver who intends to start, back, stop, turn or partly turn from a direct line shall first see that such movement can be made in safety and whenever the operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such movement shall give such signals as are required in sections 25-178, 25-179 or 25-180 plainly visible to the driver of such other vehicle, of his intention to make such movement. 
(Code 1959, § 20-110) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-848. 
Sec. 25-178. - Same-How given. 
(a)  The signals required in section 25-177 shall be given by means of the hand and arm or by some mechanical or electrical device approved by the superintendent of state police, in the manner herein specified. Whenever the signal is given by means of the hand and arm, the driver shall indicate his intention to start, stop, turn or partly turn by extending the hand and arm from and beyond the left side of the vehicle, in the following manner: 
(1)  Left: For left turn or to pull to the left, the arm shall be extended in a horizontal position straight from and level with the shoulder. 
(2)  Right: For right turn or to pull to the right, the arm shall be extended upward. 
(3)  Slow or stop: For slowing down or to stop, the arm shall be extended downward. 
(b)  Whenever the lawful speed is more than 35 miles per hour, such signals shall be given continuously for a distance of at least 100 feet, and in all other cases at least 50 feet, before slowing down, stopping, turning, partly turning or materially altering the course of the vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 20-111) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-849. 
Sec. 25-179. - Same-Change of course. 
    Drivers having once given a hand, electrical or mechanical device signal must continue the course thus indicated, unless they alter the original signal and take care that drivers of vehicles and pedestrians have seen and are aware of the change. 
(Code 1959, § 20-112) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-850. 
Sec. 25-180. - Same-Duty of drivers receiving signals. 
    Drivers receiving a signal from another driver shall keep their vehicle under complete control and shall be able to avoid an accident resulting from a misunderstanding of such signal. 
(Code 1959, § 20-113) 
Sec. 25-181. - Same-Drivers of parked vehicles. 
    Drivers of vehicles standing or stopped at the curb or edge before moving such vehicles shall give signals of their intention to move into traffic, as hereinbefore provided, before turning in the direction the vehicle will proceed from the curb. 
(Code 1959, § 20-114) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-851. 
Secs. 25-182-25-187. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY VEHICLES 

Sec. 25-188. - Definitions. 
    Golf cart for the purposes of this article means a self-propelled vehicle that is designed to transport persons playing golf and their equipment on a golf course. 
    Utility vehicle for the purposes of this article means a motor vehicle that is (i) designed for off-road use, (ii) powered by an engine of no more than 25 horsepower, and (iii) used for general maintenance, security, agricultural, or horticultural purposes. "Utility vehicle" does not include all-terrain vehicles as defined in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, riding lawn mowers, or any other vehicle whose definition is included in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia. 
( Ord. No. O-16-035, § 1, 4-12-16 ) 
Sec. 25-188.1. - Use of golf carts or utility vehicles on public highways. 
(a)  No person shall operate a golf cart or utility vehicle on or over any public highway in the city except as provided in this division. 
(b)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the operation of golf carts and utility vehicles by public employees and agents in the performance of governmental functions. 
( Ord. No. O-16-035, § 1, 4-12-16 ) 
Sec. 25-188.2. - Designation of public highways for golf cart and utility vehicle operations. 
(a)  No portion of the public highways may be designated for use by golf carts and utility 
vehicles  unless the city council has reviewed and approved such highway usage. 
(b)  The city council may by ordinance authorize the operation of golf carts and utility vehicles on designated public highways within the city after (i) considering the speed, the volume of traffic, the average number of accidents, and the character of motor vehicle traffic using such highways, (ii) the physical characteristics of the public highways, such as the width, grade, condition of the pavement, etc. (iii) such other information as the city council may deed reasonably necessary to decide if golf carts and utility vehicles can be safely operated on such public highways, and (ii) determining that the operation of golf carts and utility vehicles on particular highways is compatible with state and local transportation plans and consistent with the Commonwealth's Statewide Pedestrian Policy. 
(c)  No public highway shall be designated for use by golf carts and utility vehicles if such golf cart and utility vehicle operations will impede the safe and efficient flow of motor vehicle traffic. 
(d)  Signs, approved by the city traffic engineer, alerting motorists that golf carts and utility vehicles may be in operation shall be erected along all roads designated for golf cart and utility vehicle operation in such locations as determined by the city traffic engineer. The city shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of any signs pertaining to the operation of golf carts or utility vehicles. The cost of the installation and continued maintenance of the signs on streets and highways designated for the use of golf carts and utility vehicles shall be the responsibility of the organizations, individuals, homeowners associations or other entities requesting the designations. All costs incurred by the city for the installation and continued maintenance of the signs shall be assessed to and recovered from the organization, individual, or entity that requested the designation. 
(e)  If such signage is not in place at all times, the operation of golf carts and utility vehicles shall be illegal and must immediately cease until the signs are repaired or replaced. 
( Ord. No. O-16-035, § 1, 4-12-16 ) 
Sec. 25-188.3. - Public highways designated for golf cart and utility vehicle operations. 
(a)  The city council hereby designates the following public highways within the city upon which golf carts and utility vehicles may be operated in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  In the area of Randolph College, as follows: 
a.  Rivermont Avenue (sidewalk only; must yield to pedestrians), from North Princeton Circle to 2470 Rivermont Avenue. 
b.  The signalized crossing at Rivermont Avenue and North Princeton Circle. 
c.  The crosswalk at the intersection of Rivermont Avenue and Norfolk Avenue. 
d.  South Princeton Circle, from Rivermont Avenue to 220 South Princeton Circle. 
e.  North Princeton Circle, from Rivermont Avenue to 80 North Princeton Circle. 
f.  Norfolk Avenue, from the rear driveway at 2601 Rivermont Avenue to Cedar Drive. 
g.  Westmoreland Street, from Rivermont Avenue to 227 Westmoreland Street. 
h.  Arlington Street, from Rivermont Avenue to the driveway serving 2615 Rivermont Avenue. 
(2)  In the area of Lynchburg College, as follows: 
a.  Faculty Drive, from Lakeside Drive to its end. 
b.  Hood Street, from Lakeside Drive to Bristol Street. 
c.  Bristol Street, from Hood Street to Monticello Avenue. 
d.  Monticello Avenue, from Bristol Street to Lakeside Drive. 
e.  The signalized crossing at the intersection of Monticello Avenue, Oakley Avenue and Lakeside Drive. 
f.  Jubal Street, from Oakley Avenue to College Street. 
g.  Hood Street, from Jubal Street to Lakeside Drive. 
h.  Blue Ridge Street, from Jubal Street to Lakeside Drive. 
i.  College Drive, from Lakeside Drive to Vernon Street. 
j.  Vernon Street, from College Street to Richmond Street. 
k.  Brevard Street, from College Street to Thomas Road. 
l.  Westwood Avenue, from College Street to Thomas Road. 
m.  College Street, from Vernon Street to its end. 
n.  McCausland Street, from College Street to Thomas Road. 
o.  Lakewood Street, from McCausland Street to Thomas Road. 
(3)  In the area of Liberty University, as follows: 
a.  Candlers Mountain Road (sidewalk only; must yield to pedestrians), from Hershey-Esbenshade to University Boulevard. 
b.  The signalized crossing at Hershey-Esbenshade and Candlers Mountain Road. 
c.  The signalized crossing at Candlers Mountain Road and University Boulevard. 
d.  University Boulevard, from Candlers Mountain Road to Liberty Mountain Drive. 
e.  Liberty Mountain Drive, from Candlers Mountain Road to the City boundary with Campbell County. 
f.  A crossing of Candlers Mountain Road at the intersection with Liberty Mountain Drive and the hotel driveway. 
g.  Regents Parkway from Liberty Mountain Drive to University Boulevard 
(4)  In the area of Central Virginia Community College, as follows: 
a.  CVCC Campus Drive (State Route 368), from Wards Road to Wards Ferry Road. 
(5)  In the area of Springhill Cemetery, as follows: 
a.  Wythe Road (sidewalk only; must yield to pedestrians), from Fort Avenue to Rives Street; 
b.  Rives Street, from Wythe Road to James Street; 
c.  Blackburn Street, from Rives Street to Stadium Road; 
d.  James Street, from Rives Street to Stadium Road; 
e.  Gordon Street, from Stadium Road to Rives Street; 
f.  Rives Street, from Gordon Street to Lancaster Street; 
g.  Lancaster Street, from Rives Street to Fort Avenue; and 
h.  Fort Avenue (sidewalk only; must yield to pedestrians), from Wythe Road to Lancaster Street. 
Even if the city council has approved the operation of a golf cart or utility vehicle on a designated public highway, if the designated public highway is maintained by the Virginia Department of Transportation, no person shall operate any golf cart or utility vehicle on such public highway until the Virginia Department of Transportation also approves the operation of golf carts and utility vehicles on such public highway. 
(b)  With regard to each of the public highways listed in subsection (a) above, the city council has considered the factors set forth in subsection 25-188.2(b) above, as required by Section 46.2-916.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
( Ord. No. O-16-035 , § 1, 4-12-16; Ord. No. O-18-017 , § 1, 3-27-18; Ord. No. O-18-072 , § 1, 9-11-18) 
Sec. 25-188.4. - Limitations on golf cart and utility vehicle operations on designated public highways. 
(a)  Golf cart and utility vehicle operations on designated public highways shall be in accordance with the following limitations: 
(1)  A golf cart or utility vehicle may be operated only on designated public highways where the posted speed limit is 25 miles per hour or less. A golf cart or utility vehicle may cross a highway at an intersection controlled by a traffic light if the highway has a posted speed limit of no more than 35 miles per hour; 
(2)  No person shall operate any golf cart of utility vehicle on any designated public highway unless the signage required by Section 25-188.2(d) of this division is installed at the time of said operation; if such signage is not in place, the operation of golf carts and utility vehicles shall be illegal and must immediately cease until the signs are repaired or replaced; 
(3)  No person shall operate any golf cart or utility vehicle on any public highway unless he has in his possession a valid driver's license; 
(4)  Every golf cart or utility vehicle, whenever operated on a public highway, shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem in conformity with Section 4 6.2-1081 of the Code of Virginia; 
(5)  Golf carts and utility vehicles shall be operated upon the public highways only between sunrise and sunset, unless equipped with such lights as are required in Section 46.2-1010 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, for different classes of vehicles; 
(6)  Golf carts and utility vehicles operating on designated public highways pursuant to this section shall be covered by an insurance policy. Such policy shall meet the minimum liability amounts contained in Section 46.2-472 of Code of Virginia and provide coverage during the operation of the golf cart or utility vehicle on public highways; proof of such insurance shall be maintained in such golf cart or utility vehicle at all times such golf cart or utility vehicle is in operation on a designated public highway; 
(7)  Golf carts and utility vehicles must be operated in accordance with all applicable state and local laws and ordinances, including all laws, regulations, and ordinances pertaining to the possession and use of alcoholic beverages; 
(8)  Only the number of people the golf cart or utility vehicle is designed to seat may ride on a golf cart or utility vehicle. Additionally, passengers shall not be carried on the part of a golf cart or utility vehicle designed to carry golf bags or other cargo, and no one shall ride standing in a golf cart or utility vehicle; 
(9)  Golf carts and utility vehicles must be operated to the extreme right of the roadway and must yield to all vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(10)  Golf carts and utility vehicles should not be operated during inclement weather, nor when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions; and 
(11)  The police chief or his designee may prohibit the operation of golf carts or utility vehicles on any highway if the police chief determines that the prohibition is necessary in the interest of public safety. 
(b)  The limitations of subsection (a) above shall not apply to golf carts and utility vehicles being operated as follows: 
(1)  To the extent necessary for local government employees or agents, operating only upon highways located within the locality, to fulfill a governmental purpose, provided the golf cart or utility vehicle is being operated on highways with speed limits of 35 miles per hour or less; and 
(2)  As necessary by employees of public or private two-year or four-year institutions of higher education if operating on highways within the property limits of such institutions, provided the golf cart or utility vehicle is being operated on highways with speed limits of 35 miles per hour or less. 
( Ord. No. O-16-035, § 1, 4-12-16 ) 
Sec. 25-188.5. - Application or nomination procedure. 
(a)  Any individual, organization, or entity may apply to the city manager to have a qualifying public highway in the city designated for golf cart or utility vehicle use, provided, however, that if the public highway is located within a neighborhood with a homeowners association, whether mandatory or not, the application shall be in the name of the homeowners association and shall be signed by a duly-authorized representative of the homeowners association. 
(b)  At a minimum, each application shall include the following: 
(1)  The full legal name of the individual, organization, or entity making the application; 
(2)  The name and route number, if any, of each public highway to be designated; 
(3)  An application fee of $250.00. 
(c)  Upon receipt and acceptance of the application by the city manager, it shall be considered by the chief of police and the city traffic engineer, who shall make a recommendation to the city manager. 
(d)  The city manager shall review the recommendations of the chief of police and city traffic engineer and shall make a recommendation to the city council. 
(e)  The city council shall consider the recommendations of the city manager, the factors set forth in Section 25-188.2(d) of this division, and the general merits of the application before making a determination. 
(f)  Any costs associated with the application, including advertising costs, shall be the responsibility of the individual, organization, or entity making the application. All such costs incurred by the city shall be assessed to and recovered from the individual, organization, or entity making the application. 
( Ord. No. O-16-035, § 1, 4-12-16 ) 
Sec. 25-188.6. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00. 
( Ord. No. O-16-035, § 1, 4-12-16 ) 
Sec. 25-188.7. - Revocation of designation. 
    The city council may, at its sole discretion and upon recommendations of the city manager, suspend the designation of any public highway for golf cart or utility vehicle use at any time. 
( Ord. No. O-16-035, § 1, 4-12-16 ) 
Sec. 25-188.8. - Liability disclaimer. 
    All persons who operate or ride upon golf carts or utility vehicles on public highways do so at their own risk and peril, and must be observant of and attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. The city shall have no liability under any theory of liability and assumes no such liability for permitting golf carts and utility vehicles to be operated on designated public highways. 
( Ord. No. O-16-035, § 1, 4-12-16 ) 
Secs. 25-189-25-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPEED LIMITATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Speed limits for railroad trains, § 33-8. 
State Law reference- Maximum speed limits generally, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-870 et seq.; authority of city to vary speed limits, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300. 

Sec. 25-193. - Maximum limits generally. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway of this city at a speed in excess of: 
(a)  Twenty-five miles per hour in a business or residential district unless otherwise prescribed by the proper authorities of the city pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, section 46.2-878. 
(b)  Thirty-five miles per hour unless otherwise prescribed by the proper authorities of the city pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, section 46.2-878. 
(c)  The maximum speed limit for school buses shall be 45 miles per hour or the minimum speed limit allowable, whichever is greater, on any highway where the maximum speed limit is 55 miles or less. However for any such vehicle which takes on or discharges children, the maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour between the first stop and the last stop, not including the school. 
(d)  Twenty-five miles per hour between portable signs, tilt-over signs or fixed blinking signs placed in or along any highway bearing the word "school" or "school crossing." Any signs erected under this section shall be placed not more than 600 feet from the limits of the school property or crossing in the vicinity of the school, which is used by children going to and from the school. However, "school crossing" signs may be placed in any location within the city that has been approved for such signs by the city council. It shall be the duty of the principal or chief administrative officer of each school or some responsible person designated by the school board, preferably not a classroom teacher, to place such portable signs in the highway at a point not more than 600 feet from the limits of the school property and remove such signs when their presence is no longer required by this subsection. Such portable signs, tilt-over signs or fixed blinking signs shall be placed in a position plainly visible to vehicular traffic approaching from either direction but shall not be placed so as to obstruct the roadway. Such portable signs, tilt-over signs or blinking signals shall be in a position, or be turned on, for 30 minutes preceding regular school hours and for 30 minutes thereafter and during such other times as the presence of children on such school property or going to and from school reasonably requires a special warning to motorists. The city council may decrease the period of time preceding and following regular school hours during which such portable signs, tilt-over signs, or blinking signs shall be in position or lit if it determines that no children will be going to or from school during the period of time that it subtracts from the 30-minute period. The city council may increase or decrease the speed limit provided in this subsection only after justification for such increase or decrease has been shown by an engineering and traffic investigation; and provided further, that no such increase or decrease in the speed limit shall be effective unless such increased or decreased speed limit is conspicuously posted upon the portable signs, tilt-over signs or fixed blinking signs required by this subsection. 
(e)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(f)  Whenever the city traffic engineer determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any part of a highway consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the traffic engineer may determine and declare a minimum speed limit to be set forth on signs posted on such highway below which no person shall drive a vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(g)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 25-3. However, any person operating any motor vehicle in excess of maximum speed limit established specifically for a school crossing zone, when such school crossing zone is (i) indicated by appropriately placed signs displaying the maximum speed limit and (ii) in operation pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00, in addition to other penalties provided by law. 
For purposes of this section, "school crossing zone" means an area located within the vicinity of a school or near a highway where the presence of children on such school property or going to and from school reasonably requires a special warning to motorists. Such zones are marked and operated in accordance with the requirements of this section with appropriate warning signs or other traffic control devices indicating that a school crossing is in progress. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the maximum speed limit in school zones in residential areas may be decreased to 15 miles per hour if (i) the school board passes a resolution requesting the reduction of the maximum speed limit for a particular school zone from 25 miles per hour to 15 miles per hour and (ii) the city council enacts an ordinance establishing the speed-limit requested by the school board. 
(Code 1959, § 20-78; Ord. No. O-01-159, 8-14-01) 
Sec. 25-193.1. - Posting of speed limits in certain enumerated residence districts and the fine for exceeding the maximum speed limit in a posted residence district. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 46.2-878.2 of the Code of Virginia, the maximum speed limits shall be indicated by appropriately placed signs in the following enumerated resident districts (as adopted by city council by separate ordinance): 
(1)  Melinda Drive 
(2)  Alta Lane 
(3)  Del Ray Circle 
(4)  Sheffield Drive 
(b)  When the maximum speed limit for a residence district is indicated by appropriately placed signs displaying the maximum speed limit, any person exceeding such speed limit shall be guilty of a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of $200.00, in addition to other penalties provided by law. No portion of the fine shall be suspended unless the court orders 20 hours of community service. 
(Ord. of 2-14-06, Ord. No. O-06-021; Ord. No. O-06-128, 10-10-06; Ord. No. O-07-132, 10-09-07) 
Sec. 25-194. - Limits for specific streets. 
    Upon any streets or highways within the city where a maximum speed limit has been established and posted as maintained in the traffic engineering files, no person shall drive a vehicle in excess of such maximum speed limit. 
(Code 1959, § 20-80) 
Sec. 25-194.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 25-194.1 pertaining to enumerated speed limits, which was derived from Code 1959, § 20-80.2, was repealed by Ord. No. O-93-053, adopted Feb. 23, 1993, and which was replaced by § 25-194.2. 
Sec. 25-194.2. - Authority of city manager to set speed limits. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the speed limits fixed by other sections of this chapter, the city manager is expressly authorized to increase or decrease or establish speed limits on all streets maintained by the city; provided, that such speed limits are clearly indicated by markers or signs and such speed limits shall be based on engineering and traffic investigation pursuant to Section 46.2-1300 of the Code of Virginia. The city manager is further authorized to fix the speed on streets of the city for congested areas or curves, right angle turns or other dangerous points on the streets, when such areas or points are clearly indicated by marker or signs and such speed limits are based on an engineering or traffic investigation. 
(b)  The city manager is expressly authorized to reduce for a temporary period not to exceed 60 days, without such engineering and traffic investigation, the speed on any street or highway of the city on which work is being done or where the street or highway is under construction or repair. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle in excess of any speed fixed by the city manager in accordance with the provisions of this section, if such speed limit is clearly indicated by markers or signs. 
(Ord. No. O-93-053, 2-23-93) 
Sec. 25-194.3. - Decreased maximum speed limit in highway work zones. 
    The operation of any motor vehicle in excess of a maximum speed limit as established specifically for a highway work zone, when workers are present and when such highway work zone is indicated by appropriately placed signs displaying the reduced maximum speed limit and the penalty for violations, shall be unlawful and shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00. 
    For the purposes of this section, "highway work zone" means a construction or maintenance area that is located on or beside a city highway and marked by appropriate warning signs or other traffic control devices indicating that work is in progress. 
    Nothing in this section shall preclude the prosecution or conviction for reckless driving of any motor vehicle operator whose operation of any motor vehicle in a highway work zone, apart from speed, demonstrates a reckless disregard for life, limb, or property. 
(Ord. No. O-93-102, 4-13-93) 
Sec. 25-195. - When markers required for conviction. 
    No person shall be convicted of a violation of an ordinance enacted by the city council pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, Section 46.1-180, decreasing the speed limit established in section 25-193, paragraph (b), when such person has exceeded the speed limit in an area where the speed limit has been decreased, unless such area is clearly indicated by a conspicuous marker at the termini of such area. 
(Code 1959, § 20-79) 
Sec. 25-196. - Not applicable to certain vehicles under certain circumstances. 
(a)  The speed limitations set forth in this chapter shall not apply to vehicles when operated with due regard for safety under the direction of the police in the chase or apprehension of violators of the law, or of persons charged with or suspected of any such violations, or in testing the accuracy of speedometers on police vehicles, or in testing the accuracy of the radio microwave or other electrical devices specified in section 25-197 nor to fire department vehicles when traveling in response to a fire alarm or pulmotor call, nor to ambulances when traveling in emergencies outside the city. 
(b)  These exemptions granted to such a moving vehicle shall apply only when the operator of such vehicle displays a flashing, blinking or alternating red light and sounds a siren, bell, exhaust whistle or air horn designed to give automatically intermittent signals, as may be reasonably necessary, and only when there is in force and effect for such vehicle standard automobile liability insurance covering injury or death to any one person in the sum of at least $100,000.00 in any one accident, and subject to the limit for one person, to a limit of $300,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and to a limit of $10,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident. Such exemptions shall not, however, protect the operator of any such vehicle from criminal prosecution for conduct constituting reckless disregard of the safety of persons and property. Nothing in this section shall be construed to release the operator of any such vehicle from the civil liability for failure to use reasonable care in such operation. 
(Code 1959, § 20-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920. 
Sec. 25-197. - Checking speed with electrical devices; certificate as to accuracy; arrest without warrant. 
(a)  The speed of any motor vehicle in the city may be checked by the use of radio microwaves or other electrical device. The results of such checks shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the speed of such motor vehicle in any court or legal proceedings where the speed of the motor vehicle is at issue. 
(b)  In any court or legal proceedings in which any question arises as to the calibration or accuracy of any radio microwaves or other electrical device used to check the speed of any motor vehicle, a certificate, executed and signed by the officers calibrating or testing such device for its accuracy and stating the time of such test, type of test and results of testing when such certificate is accompanied by a certificate, or a true copy thereof showing the calibration or accuracy of the speedometer of any vehicle employed in calibrating or testing such device, and when and by whom such speedometer calibration was made, shall be admissible when attested by one such officer who executed and signed it as evidence of the facts therein stated and the results of such testing. 
(c)  The driver of any such motor vehicle may be arrested without a warrant under this section; provided, that the arresting officer is in uniform and displays his badge of authority; provided further, that such officer has observed the registration of the speed of such motor vehicle by the radio microwaves or other electrical device, or has received a radio message from the officer who observed the speed of the motor vehicle registered by the radio microwaves or other electrical device; provided that, in case of an arrest based on such a message that such radio message has been dispatched immediately after the speed of the motor vehicle was registered and furnished the license number or other positive identification of the vehicle and the registered speed to the arresting officer. (Code 1959, § 20-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-882. 
Sec. 25-198. - Prohibiting use of devices to detect presence of radar, penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the highways of this city when such vehicle is equipped with any device or mechanism to detect radar employed by law enforcement personnel to measure the speed of motor vehicles upon the highways of this city for law enforcement purposes; it shall be unlawful to use any such devices or mechanism upon any such motor vehicle upon the highways. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any such device or mechanism in this city. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any receiver of radio waves utilized for lawful purposes to receive any signal from a frequency lawfully licensed by any state or federal agency. Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
    This section shall not be construed to authorize the forfeiture of any such device or mechanism. Any such device or mechanism may be taken by the arresting officer if needed as evidence, and, when no longer needed, shall be returned to the person charged with the violation of this section, or at that person's request, his expense, mailed to an address specified by him. Any unclaimed devices may be destroyed on court order after six months have elapsed from the final date for filing an appeal. 
(b)  No person shall be guilty of a violation of this section when a device or mechanism in question, at the time of the alleged offense, had no power source and was not readily accessible for use by the driver or any passenger in the vehicle. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the presence of any such prohibited device or mechanism in or upon a motor vehicle upon the highways of this city shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation of this section. The city need not prove that the device in question was in operative condition or being operated. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any motor vehicles owned by the state or any political subdivision thereof and which are used by law enforcement officers in their official duties, nor to the sale of any such device or mechanism to law enforcement agencies for use in their official duties. 
(e)  No demerit points shall be awarded by the commissioner of the division of motor vehicles for violations of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 20-82.1; Ord. No. O-94-288, 11-8-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1079. 
Sec. 25-199. - Table of speed and stopping distances. 
(a)  All courts shall take notice of the following table of speed and stopping distances of motor vehicles, which shall not raise a presumption, in actions in which inquiry thereon is pertinent to the issues: 
Speed In Average Stopping Distances Total Stopping Distance: 
Driver and Miles 
Per 
Hour Feet 
Per 
Second Automobile 
Brakes 
(In Feet) Truck 
Brakes 
(Brakes on 
All Wheels) 
(In Feet) Average 
Driver 
Reaction 
(3/4 Second) 
(In Feet) Automobiles 
(In Feet) Trucks 
(In Feet) 10 14.67 5 7 11 16 18 15 22.0 12 17 16 28 33 20 29.34 21 30 22 43 52 25 36.62 32 47 27 59 74 30 44.0 47 67 33 80 100 35 51.3 63 92 38 101 130 40 58.7 82 120 44 126 164 45 66.0 104 152 50 154 202 50 73.3 128 187 55 183 242 55 80.7 155 227 61 216 288 60 88.0 185 270 66 251 336 65 95.3 217 316 71 288 387 70 102.6 252 367 77 329 444 75 109.9 289 422 82 371 504 80 117.2 328 480 88 416 568 90 132.0 425 607 99 524 706 100 145.6 514 750 109 623 859  
(b)  The courts shall further take notice that such table is the result of experiments made with motor vehicles, unloaded except for the driver, equipped with four-wheel brakes, in good condition, on dry, hard, approximately level stretches of highway free from loose material. 
(Code 1959, § 20-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-880. 
Secs. 25-200-25-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-211. - Drivers to obey signs. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall stop, slow down or regulate the speed of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to accord with the requirements of road signs, signals, markings or lights erected upon the authority of the state highway commission, proper agencies of the federal government or the city manager, and the failure of such driver to comply with this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 25-3, unless otherwise prescribed. 
(Code 1959, § 20-41) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-830. 
Sec. 25-212. - Others than official signs prohibited. 
    No unauthorized person shall erect or maintain upon any highway any warning or direction sign, marker, signal or light in imitation of any official sign, marker, signal or light erected under the provisions of this chapter, and no person shall erect or maintain upon any highway any traffic or highway sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the erection or maintenance of signs, markers or signals bearing thereon the name of an organization which has been authorized to erect the same by the city manager as provided by law; nor shall this section be construed to prohibit the erection by contractors or public utility companies of temporary signs approved by the city, as provided by section 35-12 of the city code, warning motorists that work is in progress on or adjacent to the highway. 
    Any violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-42; Ord. No. O-18-013 , 2-27-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-831. 
Sec. 25-213. - Injuring signs. 
    Any person who shall deface, obscure, injure, knock down or remove any sign legally posted as provided in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-43) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-832. 
Sec. 25-214. - Signals by lights or semaphores. 
(a)  Signals by lights or semaphores shall be as follows: 
(1)  Red indicates that traffic then moving shall stop and remain stopped as long as the red signal is shown, except in the direction indicated by a lighted green arrow; provided, however, that except where a sign is placed prohibiting turns on red, vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal may, after coming to a full stop, cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn, or to make a left turn if such left turn is made from a highway which allows for traffic in but one direction into another highway which allows for traffic in but one direction and after making such left turn the turning traffic will be going in that direction. Such turning traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic using the intersection. 
(2)  Green indicates that traffic shall then move in the direction of the signal and remain in motion as long as the green signal is given, except that such traffic shall yield to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the intersection. 
(3)  Amber indicates that a change is about to be made in the direction of the moving traffic. When the amber signal is shown, traffic which has not already entered the intersection, including the crosswalks, shall stop if it is not reasonably safe to continue, but that which has already entered the intersection shall continue to move until the intersection has been entirely cleared. The amber signal is a warning that the red signal is imminent. 
(4)  The use of a flashing red indicates that traffic shall stop before entering an intersection and the use of flashing amber indicates that traffic may proceed through the intersection or past such signal with reasonable care under the circumstances. 
(b)  Officers of the law and uniformed school crossing guards may assume control of traffic otherwise controlled by lights or semaphores and in such event signals by such officers and uniformed crossing guards shall take precedence over such lights and semaphores. 
(Code 1959, § 20-40; Ord. of 1-11-77) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-833. 
Sec. 25-215. - Signals by traffic officers. 
    Police officers and uniformed school crossing guards may direct traffic by signals. Such signals other than by voice shall be as follows: 
(a)  To stop traffic by hand: Stand with shoulders parallel to moving traffic. Raise arms 45 degrees above shoulder with hand extended, palm towards moving traffic to be stopped. 
(b)  To move traffic by hand: Stand with shoulders parallel to traffic to be moved. Extend right arm and hand full length at height of shoulders towards such traffic, fingers extended and joined, palm down. Bring hand sharply in direction traffic is to move. Repeat movement with left arm and hand to start traffic from opposite direction. 
(c)  To start and stop traffic by whistle: One blast, moving traffic to stop; two blasts, traffic in opposite direction to move. 
(d)  Emergency stop of traffic by whistle: Three or more short blasts, all traffic shall immediately clear the intersection and stop. 
(Code 1959, § 29-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1309. 
Secs. 25-216-25-221. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ONE-WAY STREETS 

Sec. 25-222. - One-way roadways. 
    The city traffic engineer may designate any highway or separate roadway under the jurisdiction of the city for one-way traffic and shall erect appropriate signs, and traffic thereon shall move only in the direction designated. 
(Code 1959, §§ 20-98, 20-125(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-806. 
Sec. 25-223. - Variances; permit. 
    When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager, or his duly authorized representative, that the strict enforcement of this division will cause an unreasonable hardship on some particular person relative to the loading or unloading of trucks or other vehicles on such one-way streets, then in such event the city manager, or his duly authorized representative, is authorized to issue a special permit to such person permitting a variance from the provisions of this division. Any such special permit shall be in writing and shall specify the nature of such variance and the place and period of time when such variance shall be permitted. Such permit shall only be issued when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager, or his duly authorized representative, that the granting of such permit will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience to the person who seeks such permit. 
(Code 1959, § 20-125(b)) 
Secs. 25-224-25-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STOP, YIELD INTERSECTIONS 

Sec. 25-230. - Authority to designate intersections. 
    The city traffic engineer shall designate intersections at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way; provided, that no section based on this authority shall be deemed violated if, at the time of the alleged violation the sign or marker placed in conformity with this section is missing or defaced so that an ordinarily observant person under the same circumstances would not be aware of the existence of the regulation. 
(Code 1959, § 20-126) 
State Law reference- Authority to authorize an officer of the city to designate intersections at which vehicles shall stop or yield the right-of-way, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301 
Sec. 25-231. - Designation of through streets. 
    For the purpose of promoting the safe use of the streets of the city, the city manager, or his duly authorized official, shall have the authority to designate according to his judgment certain streets or portions of streets as through or arterial streets. A listing of such through or arterial streets shall be maintained in the traffic engineering files. All traffic proceeding regularly along such designated through or arterial streets shall have the right-of-way over traffic entering such streets. 
(Code 1959, § 20-127) 
Sec. 25-232. - Obedience to signs. 
    All vehicles and bicycles shall, upon arrival at and before entering any through street or stop or yield intersection, obey the traffic signs posted at or near such intersections. 
(Code 1959, § 20-127) 
Sec. 25-233. - Stop regulations. 
    When a "stop" sign is posted at or near the entrance to any arterial street or designated intersection, every driver of a vehicle approaching such stop sign shall, before proceeding to enter such street or intersection, come to a full stop at the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. A listing of all such stop intersections shall be maintained in the traffic engineering files. 
(Code 1959, § 20-127) 
Sec. 25-234. - Yield regulations. 
    When a "yield-right-of-way" sign is posted at or near the entrance to any through street or designated intersection, every driver of a vehicle approaching such sign shall, before proceeding to enter such street or intersection, yield the right-of-way to the drivers of all vehicles approaching from either direction on the through or arterial street. A listing of all such yield intersections shall be maintained in the traffic engineering files. 
(Code 1959, § 20-127) 
Sec. 25-235. - Exceptions. 
    Where there is a traffic officer or signal device at any intersection, the traffic officer or signal device when in operation shall control traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 20-127) 
Secs. 25-236-25-246. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Parking at city market, § 13-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Local parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-247. - Restricted and no-parking areas. 
    The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to determine and define street areas within which the volume of vehicular traffic is such as to require restrictions upon parking of vehicles; to classify vehicles with reference to parking; to designate the time, place and manner in which such vehicles may be allowed to park upon the highways; to make such rules and regulations as traffic conditions may require in various areas and under the varying conditions which may prevail at different times. A listing of such restrictions shall be maintained in the traffic engineering files. It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer, upon the promulgation of such regulations, and before the same shall become effective, to give such public notice thereof, by establishing and posting signs, or otherwise, as may be reasonably adequate to make clear to the operators of vehicles in "no-parking" or "restricted parking" areas, the existence, nature and requirements of such regulations. From and after the effective date of regulations imposed in any area by virtue of the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle in any restricted or prohibited area otherwise than in accordance with these regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 20-129; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-247.1. - Restricted or prohibited parking areas. 
(a)  The city council hereby finds that that the free circulation of traffic through the streets of the city is necessary to the health, safety and general welfare of the public; that over the years the revitalization of the city's central business district has increased the number of residents, customers and visitors in the central business district and has greatly increased the parking of motor vehicles of all kinds on the public streets in the central business district creating parking congestion on the streets in the central business district; and, that such parking congestion prevents the free circulation of traffic in and through the central business district. Therefore, it is the intention of city council to address parking issues in the central business district and to support the recent and planned growth and development in the central business district by providing for the orderly and efficient use of the available parking spaces. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the city council by Section 46.2-1220 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(b)  No person shall park any vehicle in any restricted or prohibited parking area within the central business district for a period of time in excess of the maximum time shown for the parking area as indicated on signs posted on the street where the parking area is located. The central business district is designated as that area of downtown from fifth street to the route 29 business expressway and from clay street to the riverfront. 
(c)  No person shall park a vehicle within the central business district for longer than the posted time limit on either side of the same street within the same block within an eight-hour period during the same day. For purposes of this section, a "block" is defined as that portion of both sides of the same street between two intersecting streets or what would be the continuation of two intersecting streets. However, parking for longer than the posted time limit in one block does not preclude parking an additional consecutive period of time on another block within the central business district. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall apply between the hours designated by the city on all days, except Sundays or on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, President's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and day after, Christmas Eve and Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10; Ord. No. O-11-134, 11-22-11) 
Sec. 25-247.2. - Parking pay station. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle in a parking space for a period of time in excess of the maximum time shown on the parking pay station for the parking space or indicated on signs in the block where the parking pay stations are located, or for a time period in excess of the time limits posted on the street or in a city parking facility. 
(b)  Within a consecutive time period equal to the time limit posted, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the posted time limit for the time zone or block. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall apply between the hours designated by city council or the city manager on all days, except Sundays or on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King, Jr.'s birthday, President's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and day after, Christmas Eve and Christmas Day or as otherwise designated by city council or the city manager. 
(d)  In absence of other posted limits, parking pay stations shall be presumed to be in operation and require the deposit of the required parking fees between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(e)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking pay station any coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time. 
(f)  No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking pay station or sign installed under this division. 
(Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-248. - Ownership of vehicle inference. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any parking prohibition or restriction ordinance, regulation or rule, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons or warrant was parked in violation of such ordinance, regulation or rule, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such parking the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Code of Virginia, Chapter 3 (Section 46.2-1220 et seq.) shall constitute in evidence a permissible inference that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1959, § 20-129; Ord. No. O-11-134, 11-22-11) 
Sec. 25-249. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Unless otherwise provided, any person violating the provisions of this division relating to overtime parking shall be punished by a fine of $20.00 for each offense; and any person violating the provisions of this division relating to parking in prohibited areas and loading zones shall be punished by a fine of $30.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1959, §20-151; Ord. of 9-27-77; Ord. No. O-95-070, 3-28-95, eff. 6-1-95; Ord. No. O-97-235, 11-25-97, eff. 1-1-98; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-250. - Stopping on highways-Generally. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be stopped in such a manner as to impede or render dangerous the use of the street, alleyway or highway by others, except in the case of an emergency as the result of an accident or mechanical breakdown, in which case the emergency flashing lights of such vehicle shall be turned on if the vehicle is equipped with such lights and such lights are operating, and a report shall be made to the nearest police officer as soon as practicable and the vehicle shall be removed from the roadway to the shoulder as soon as possible and removed from the shoulder without unnecessary delay; and if such vehicle is not promptly removed, such removal may also be ordered by a police officer at the expense of the owner if the disabled vehicle creates a traffic hazard. 
(b)  Except upon one-way streets, and when actually loading or unloading merchandise as provided in section 25-259, no vehicle shall be stopped except close to and parallel to the right-hand edge of the curb or roadway. In no instance shall such vehicle be parked with the near wheels further than six inches from the curb. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be stopped at or in the vicinity of a fire, vehicle or airplane accident or other area of emergency, in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard or interfere with the necessary procedures of police officers, fire fighters, rescue workers or others whose duty it is to deal with such emergencies. Any vehicle found unlawfully parked in the vicinity of such fire, accident or area of emergency may be removed by order of a police officer or in the absence of a police officer, by order of the uniformed fire or rescue officer in charge at the risk and expense, not to exceed $25.00, of the owner of the vehicle if such vehicle creates a traffic hazard or interferes with the necessary procedures of police officers, fire fighters, rescue workers or others whose assigned duty is to deal with such emergencies. Vehicles being used by accredited information services, such as press, radio and television, when being used for the gathering of news, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, except when actually obstructing the police officers, fire fighters and rescue workers dealing with such emergencies. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned or controlled by the Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Highways and Transportation, or the city, while actually engaged in the construction, reconstruction or maintenance of highways. 
(Code 1959, § 20-134; Ord. No. O-88-014, § 1, 1-26-88; Ord. No. O-09-123,10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-888, 46.2-889. 
Sec. 25-251. - Same-Mail vehicles. 
    The provisions of subsection 25-250(a) shall not apply to any rural mail carrier stopping on the highway while loading or unloading mail at a mailbox; provided that there be lettered on a sign securely attached to and displayed at the rear of such vehicle, in letters at least four inches in height, the following: 
CAUTION FREQUENT STOPS U.S. MAIL 
    Nor shall the provisions of section 25-250(a) apply to such mail carrier so stopped if, in lieu of such sign, the vehicle has, and is using, supplemental turn signals mounted at each side of the vehicle upon the roof. Between the lights on the assembly shall be mounted a sign with the words "U.S. Mail," which sign shall be yellow with black letters at least four inches in height, and which light shall be of the type approved by the superintendent of state police. The lettered sign shall be folded down out of vision prior to the first stop on the route and following the last stop on the route. 
    Provided, further, that nothing in this section shall be construed so as to relieve any such mail carrier from civil liability for such stopping on any highway, if he is negligent in so doing, and if such negligence proximately contributes to any personal injury or property damage resulting therefrom. 
(Code 1959, § 20-134(f)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-892. 
Sec. 25-252. - To discharge cargo or passengers; school buses. 
    No truck or bus, or part thereof, except a school bus or public transit bus, shall be stopped on the traveled portion of any highway for the purpose of taking on or discharging cargo or passengers, unless the operator cannot leave the traveled portion of the highway with safety. A school bus or public transit bus may be stopped on the traveled portion of the highway when taking on or discharging passengers, but these stops shall be made only at points where it can be clearly seen for a safe distance from both directions. 
(Code 1959, § 20-136; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-893. 
Sec. 25-253. - Flares and other signals when vehicle disabled on highway after dark-Required. 
    Whenever any bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home is disabled and stops upon any portion of the traveled portion of any highway in this city, except upon streets or highways which are artificially lighted at night, at any time during which lights are required upon motor vehicles by section 25-320, the operator of such bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home shall place or cause to be placed on the roadway three red reflector flares or torches of a type approved by the superintendent. One of the flares or torches shall be placed in the center of the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home and not less than 100 feet therefrom in the direction of the traffic approaching in that lane, one not less than 100 feet from such bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home in the opposite direction and one at the traffic side of such bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home not closer than ten feet from the front or rear thereof; provided, however, that if such bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home is disabled within 500 feet of a curve or crest of a hill, or other obstruction to view, the flares or torches in that direction shall be so placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the highway, but in no case less than 500 feet from the disabled vehicle. Red reflectorized triangular warning devices of a type approved by the superintendent may be used in lieu of flares or torches. 
(Code 1959, § 20-137) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-111. 
Sec. 25-254. - Same-When red reflector flares or lanterns required. 
    If any vehicle referred to in section 25-253 is used for the transportation of flammable liquids in bulk, whether loaded or empty, or for transporting flammable gases, red reflector flares or red electric lanterns of a type approved by the superintendent shall be used. Such reflectors or lanterns shall be lighted and placed upon the roadway in the manner provided in section 25-253. 
(Code 1959, § 20-138) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-111. 
Sec. 25-255. - Same-When red flags required instead of flares, etc. 
    During such time as lights on motor vehicles are not required red flags not less than 12 inches both in length and width shall be used in place of flares, torches, reflectors or lanterns. The flags shall be placed upon the roadway in the manner prescribed in sections 25-253 and 25-254 for flares, torches, reflectors and lanterns, except that no flag shall be required to be placed at the side of such vehicle; but if the disablement of such vehicle continues into the period when lights on motor vehicles are required, flares, torches, reflectors or lanterns shall be placed as required by sections 25-253 and 25-254. Red reflectorized triangular warning devices of a type approved by the superintendent may be used in lieu of flags. 
(Code 1959, § 20-139) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-111. 
Sec. 25-256. - Parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or where authorized by a traffic-control device, including official signs or pavement markings, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk or city trail; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway so as to block ingress or egress; 
(3)  Within an intersection or traveled way; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(8)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing; 
(9)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when properly signposted; 
(10)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic; 
(11)  On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(12)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway or within a tunnel; 
(13)  At any place where official signs and/or pavement markings prohibit parking; 
(14)  Between the street curb, or the edge of the paved portion of the roadway when there is no street curb, and the adjacent sidewalk. 
(15)  Between the street curb and the adjacent right-of-way line or sidewalk so as to cause the continual mounting and/or dismounting of the curbing. 
(b)  No person other than a police officer shall move a vehicle into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful, or start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or shift, change or move the levers, brake, starting device, gears or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver thereof, or attempt to do so. 
(Code 1959, § 20-131; Ord. of 6-12-79; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1239. 
Sec. 25-257. - Parking on private property. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any private property or lot area without the express or implied consent of the owner thereof. Whenever signs or markings have been erected on any lot or lot area, contiguous or adjacent to a street, thoroughfare or alley indicating that no vehicles are permitted to stand or park thereon, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle across any curb or lot line or over any driveway from a street or alley into such lot or area for the purpose of standing or parking such vehicle, or for any person to stop. stand or park any vehicle in such property or lot area. 
(Code 1959, § 20-132) 
Sec. 25-257.1. - Parking on city property. 
    The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to establish regulations concerning the parking of vehicles on all property owned or leased by the city, including, pursuant to section 25-267 of this Code, the towing of vehicles parked on such property in violation of such regulations. He shall cause signs to be erected at or near each place to be so regulated sufficient to apprise an ordinarily observant person of such regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the requirements of such signs. The provisions of this section shall apply to vehicles parked at the Lynchburg Regional Airport in violation of parking regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 20-130.1; Ord. of 10-26-76; Ord. No. O-92-277, 9-8-92; Ord. No. O-97-231, 11-25-97; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-257.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-97-236, adopted Nov. 25, 1997, repealed § 25-257.2. 
Sec. 25-258. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle upon or in any street, alley or parkway for the purpose of selling or offering the same for sale or rent. No sign or lettering shall be attached or placed upon any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle parked in or upon any public street, alley, or parkway of the city indicating that such vehicle is offered for sale or for rent. It shall also be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street in a business district from which any merchandise is being sold, except in the downtown business district by special permit. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to stop a vehicle at any time upon the highway for the purpose of advertising any article of any kind, or to display thereupon advertisements of any article or advertisement for the sale of the vehicle itself. 
(Code 1959, § 20-133; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-259. - Backing up to curbs. 
    No vehicle shall be backed up to a curb, except during the time actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise therefrom and shall not be positioned in such a manner as to block traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 20-135; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-260. - Angle or perpendicular parking. 
    Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, the city manager or his designee may, when in his discretion the public interest so requires, provide for angle or perpendicular parking on any street, or portion thereof; provided, however, that such streets are marked so as to apprise an ordinarily observant person of the regulation. 
(Code 1959, § 20-140; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-261. - Parking vehicles without state license on highways. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle having no current state license on any highway. 
(Code 1959, § 20-141) 
Sec. 25-261.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-95-242, adopted Sept. 12, 1995, repealed § 25-261.1. 
Sec. 25-262. - Parking prohibitions within certain areas. 
(a)  No vehicle, other than a passenger vehicle, pickup or panel truck not exceeding an actual gross weight of 7,500 pounds, shall be parked or left standing in any street of the city in any residential district thereof, for any purpose or length of time, other than for the unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of merchandise, materials or passengers or while making service calls. Provided, however, that even when engaged in the above-described activities no oversized vehicle shall be parked upon a residential street for any period in excess of 48 hours. This prohibition shall not apply to vehicles being used in connection with city projects for the construction, repair, maintenance, remodeling, alteration, grading or other improvement of city-owned property, public streets, public sewers or city-owned utility lines. Vehicles being used in connection with non-city utility and construction work may be allowed to park on residential streets for periods in excess of 48 hours with the prior written permission of the city traffic engineer. 
(b)  No vehicle intended or designed to transport caustic, flammable, explosive or otherwise dangerous materials shall be permitted to be parked over-night on a residential street. 
(c)  During the time an oversized vehicle is temporarily parked on a residential street it must be parked in such a manner that it does not impede or render dangerous the use of the public street by others. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142(c); Ord. No. O-96-145, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 25-262.1. - Removal or concealment of parking enforcement identification marks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter or conceal any parking enforcement identification marks placed on any motor vehicle by any officer or employee of the city for the purpose of enforcing the parking restrictions contained in this article. Any person violating this section shall be punished by a fine of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. O-95-070, 3-28-95, eff. 6-1-95; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-263. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-95-242, adopted Sept. 12, 1995, repealed § 25-263. 
Sec. 25-264. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-09-123, adopted Oct. 13, 2009, eff. Jan. 1, 2010. repealed § 25- 264. 
Sec. 25-265. - Manner of using loading zones. 
    Where a loading and unloading zone has been set apart by the city manager or his designee in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter, the following regulations shall apply with respect to the use of such areas: 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. 
(b)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in a space marked as a curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or bundles. 
(Code 1959, § 20-144; Ord. No. O-88-232, 9-13-88; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-266. - Manner of using bus stops and taxicab stands. 
    Where a bus stop or taxicab stand has been set apart by the city manager in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1959, § 20-145) 
Sec. 25-267. - Removal and disposition of vehicles unlawfully parked on private or city property. 
    As authorized by Section 46.2-1232 of the Code of Virginia, it shall be lawful for any owner, operator or lessee of any parking lot or parking area or space therein, or part thereof, or of any other lot or building, including the city, or authorized agent of the person having control of such premises, to have any motor or other vehicle, occupying such lot, area, space or building, or part thereof, without the permission of such owner, operator, lessee or authorized agent of the one having the control of such premises removed, by towing or otherwise, to a licensed garage for storage until called for by the owner or his agent; provided, that notice of such action shall be first or simultaneously therewith given to at least one of the local law enforcement officers; provided further, that in the event of such removal and storage the owner of the vehicle involved shall be chargeable with and such vehicle may be held for a reasonable charge for its removal and storage. All businesses engaged in towing vehicles without the consent of their owners shall prominently display at their main place of business a comprehensive list of all their fees for towing, recovery and storage services, or the basis of such charges. Charges in excess of those posted shall not be collectable from any motor vehicle owner whose vehicle is towed, recovered or stored without his consent. However, notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, if the owner of the trespassing vehicle is present and removes the trespassing vehicle from the premises before it is actually towed, the trespassing vehicle shall not be towed, but the owner of the trespassing vehicle shall be liable for a reasonable fee not to exceed $50.00 in lieu of towing. 
    In lieu of having such vehicle removed by towing or otherwise, it shall be lawful for such owner, operator, lessee or authorized agent, including the city, to cause the vehicle to be immobilized by a boot or other device that prevents the vehicle from being moved by preventing a wheel from turning; provided such boot or other device is of a design that does no damage to the vehicle or wheel; and provided further, that the charge for the removal of such boot or device shall not exceed $50.00. In lieu of having such vehicle removed by towing or otherwise, or in lieu of causing the vehicle to be immobilized, it shall be lawful for such owner, operator, lessee or authorized agent to cause to request a duly authorized police officer to issue on such premises a notice of a violation of section 25-257 of the City Code to the registered owner of such vehicle. 
    This section shall not apply to city or state owned vehicles or where a vehicle shall, because of a wreck or other emergency, be parked or left temporarily upon the property of another. 
(Code 1959, § 20-149; Ord. No. O-88-013, § 1, 1-26-88; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-268. - Liability for damage to vehicles parked in free parking lot. 
(a)  No action shall lie or proceeding be brought against any person conducting any business and maintaining a parking lot, at which free parking accommodations are provided for customers or employees of such business, when a motor vehicle is parked in such parking lot, for the total or partial loss of such motor vehicle by reason of theft or damage by any person other than the employee or for the total or partial loss of property left in such motor vehicle by reason of theft or damage by any person other than an employee. 
(b)  As used in this section, "free parking accommodations" means parking accommodations for which no specific charge is made and the patronage of the business by customers and the performance of the regular services for the business by employees shall not constitute the payment of any consideration for the use of the parking accommodations. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall relieve any person of liability resulting from his own wrongdoing. 
(Code 1959, § 20-150) 
Editor's note- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1234. 
Sec. 25-269. - Removal or immobilization of motor vehicles against which there are outstanding parking violations. 
(a)  Whenever there is found parked upon the public streets or highways or public grounds of the city any motor vehicle against which there are three or more outstanding, unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices or citations, such vehicle may, by towing or otherwise, be removed to another place for temporary storage and safekeeping by an officer or employee of the police department, or by any other person acting under the direction of such officer or employee, or such vehicle may be immobilized in such manner as to prevent its removal or operation. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any police officer or employee of the police department removing or immobilizing the motor vehicle, or under whose direction such vehicle is removed or immobilized, to inform as soon as practical the owner of the removed or immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices or citations for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized. In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this section, there shall be placed on such vehicle in an conspicuous manner, a notice warning that such vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle might damage it. 
(c)  The owner of an immobilized vehicle, or other person acting on the owner's behalf, shall be allowed at least 24 hours from the time of immobilization to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle. Failure to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle within that time period may result in the removal of the vehicle to a storage area for safekeeping under the direction of a police officer or employee of the police department. 
(d)  The owner of such immobilized motor vehicle, or other person acting on the owner's behalf, may repossess or secure the release of the vehicle by payment of the outstanding parking violations notices or citations for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized and by payment of all reasonable costs incidental to the immobilization, removal and storage of the vehicle, and the efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle. Should the owner of the vehicle fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs, or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable, such motor vehicle may be sold in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 46.2-12.13 and 46.2-12.17 of the Code of Virginia. Any personal property found in any unattended or abandoned motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer may be sold incident to the sale of the vehicle as authorized in this section. 
(e)  The owner or other person entitled to lawful procession of a removed or immobilized motor vehicle shall have the right to request a hearing before the city manager or his designee in order to determine the validity of the removal or immobilization. A hearing must be requested in writing within 14 days after the motor vehicle is immobilized or removed. Administrative hearings will be held between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. any weekday which is not a holiday. The hearing officer will review the circumstances and any evidence presented and decide whether just cause existed for the removal or immobilization of a motor vehicle. Anyone wishing to contest a removal or immobilization, should bring the outstanding parking violation notices or citations along with the vehicle registration and any other documentation to be presented to the hearing officer. The removal, immobilization and storage cost will be waived only if the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was improperly removed or immobilized. The hearing shall be in the form of an administrative proceeding rather than a judicial trial and the rules of evidence shall not apply. The decision of the designated hearing officer is final and is not subject to appeal. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to deprive any person of their constitutional right to a hearing in a court of competent jurisdiction as to the outstanding parking violation notices or citations which led to the removal or immobilization of the motor vehicle. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall apply to motor vehicles parked at the Lynchburg Regional Airport. 
(Ord. No. O-95-070, 3-28-95, eff. 6-1-95; Ord. No. O-97-231, 11-25-97; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-270. - Construction parking permits. 
    Construction parking permits are issued by the inspections division of the community development department. Permits will be issued to vehicle owners who are actively engaged in the construction project (plumbing/electrical contractors, etc.). Construction parking permits shall only be issued for vehicles that are used to transport equipment, tools and supplies used by the owner at the work site. 
(Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-271. - Construction dumpster permits. 
    Dumpster permits are required in order to place dumpsters in on-street parking spaces or on the city's right-of-way. Permits are issued by the engineering department under authority of Code section 35-12. 
(Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10; Ord. No. O-18-013 , 2-27-18) 
Secs. 25-272-25-274. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REMOVAL OF UNATTENDED, ABANDONED, ETC., VEHICLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Inoperative vehicles, § 21-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for removal of unattended, abandoned, etc., motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213. 

Sec. 25-275. - Removal authorized. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof (i) is left unattended on a public highway or other public property and constitutes a traffic hazard, (ii) is illegally parked, (iii) is left unattended for more than ten days either on public property or on private property without the permission of the property owner, lessee, or occupant, or (iv) is immobilized on a public roadway by weather conditions or other emergency situation, such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof may be removed for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer. 
    A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and part thereof may not be removed from private property without the written request of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises. The person at whose request the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer is removed from private property shall indemnify the city, against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage, or sale thereof. It shall be presumed that such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof is abandoned if it (i) lacks either a current license plate, or a valid state safety inspection certificate or sticker, and (ii) it has been in a specific location for four days without being moved. As promptly as possible, each removal shall be reported to the police department and to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer. Before obtaining possession of the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof, the owner of the vehicle shall pay to the parties entitled thereto all costs incidental to its removal and storage and locating said owner. If the owner of the vehicle fails or refuses to pay the cost or if his identity or whereabouts is unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search has been made, and after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record with the office of the department of motor vehicles against the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer, the vehicle shall be treated as an abandoned vehicle under the provisions of Article 1 of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia and may be sold in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 46.2-12.13 and 46.2-12.17 of the Code of Virginia. Any personal property found in any unattended or abandoned motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer may be sold incident to the sale of the vehicle as authorized in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 20-147; Ord. No. O-88-013, § 1, 1-26-88; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-276. - Liability. 
    The person at whose request a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is removed from privately owned property under the provisions of this division shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 20-147) 
Sec. 25-277. - Notice generally. 
    Each removal of a vehicle under the provisions of this division shall be reported immediately to the chief of police, who shall give notice to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as promptly as possible. 
(Code 1959, § 20-147) 
Sec. 25-278. - Redemption by owner. 
    The owner of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer removed under the provisions of this division, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the city all reasonable costs incidental to the removal, storage and location of such vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 20-147; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-279. - Sale authorized. 
    Should the owner of a vehicle removed under the provisions of this division fail or refuse to pay the costs of such removal and storage thereof, or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown or unascertainable after a diligent search has been made, and after notice to him at his last-known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the state division of motor vehicles, the chief of police after holding the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer 30 days and after due notice of sale, dispose of the same at public sale and the proceeds from such sale shall be forwarded by the chief of police to the city collector. 
(Code 1959, § 20-147; Ord. No. O-88-013, § 1, 1-26-88) 
Sec. 25-280. - Value less than one hundred fifty dollars. 
    lf the value of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer removed under the provisions of this division be determined by three disinterested dealers or garagemen to be less than $150.00 which would be incurred by such advertising and public sale, it may be disposed of by private sale or junked. 
(Code 1959, § 20-147; Ord. No. O-88-013, § 1, 1-26-88) 
Sec. 25-281. - Disbursement of proceeds from sale. 
    The city collector shall pay from the proceeds of the sale of any motor vehicle removed under the provisions of this division the cost of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens and notice of sale, and the balance of such funds shall be held by him for the owner of such vehicle and paid to him upon satisfactory proof of ownership. 
(Code 1959, § 20-147) 
Sec. 25-282. - Special fund. 
    If no claim has been made by the owner of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer removed and sold under the provisions of this division for the proceeds of such sale, after the payment of the cost of administering this division, the funds shall be deposited in a special fund established by the city for this purpose. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the city within three years from the date of such sale and if timely application is made therefor, the city will pay the same to the owner without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor shall any suit, action or proceeding be initiated for the recovery of such funds after three years from the date of such sale. This section shall not operate to deprive the city of other remedies available under law to obtain payment from the owner of unattended, abandoned or immobile vehicles for towing, storage or services rendered. 
(Code 1959, § 20-147; Ord. No. O-88-013, § 1, 1-26-88) 
Sec. 25-283. - Contracts with private persons for removal, etc., of vehicles. 
    The city manager shall have the power to enter into contracts with the owner or operator of garages or places for the removal or storage of vehicles referred to in this division. The contracts shall provide for the payment by the city of reasonable charges for the removal and storage of such vehicles, shall require such owners or operators to deliver such vehicles to the owners thereof or to their agents upon demand therefor upon furnishing satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership or agency, and that the owners or operators of such garages or places of storage will indemnify the owners of such vehicles for injury or damage thereto resulting from the negligent removal or storage thereof, and such owners or operators shall be required to provide themselves with adequate liability insurance to cover such indemnity. 
(Code 1959, § 20-148) 
Secs. 25-284-25-289. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PARKING 

Sec. 25-290. - Purposes of system. 
    In order to reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of streets within areas zoned for residential uses for the parking of vehicles by persons not residing therein; to protect those areas from polluted air, excessive noise, trash and refuse caused by the entry of such vehicles; to protect the residents of those areas from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences; to preserve the residential character of those areas; to promote efficiency in the maintenance of those streets in a clean and safe condition; to preserve the value of the property in those areas, and to preserve the safety of children and other pedestrians in traffic safety, and the peace, good order, comfort, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; it is necessary to establish a system of permit parking. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2; Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1 (20-142.2), 1-22-80) 
Sec. 25-291. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this division, the term "resident" shall be deemed to mean a person who customarily resides and maintains a place of abode within the permit parking district, or who owns realty abutting a street or public way within such a district upon which a dwelling intended for human habitation is located. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(b); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1 (20-142.2(b)), 1-22-80) 
Sec. 25-292. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00, nor more than $50.00 for each offense. 
(b)  In any prosecution charging a violation of this division, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons or warrant was parked in violation of this ordinance, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such parking the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by the Code of Virginia, Chapter 3 (Section 46.1-41, et seq.), shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(c)  If any person transfers, or allows others to use or possess any parking permit issued to them, or gives false answers upon application therefor, or uses or continues to use such parking permit after termination or expiration thereof by expiration of time or operation of law or cessation of residence, or violates any of the terms, conditions, rules or regulations applicable to same, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(e); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1 (20-142.2(e)), 1-22-80) 
Sec. 25-293. - Designation of area. 
    Should the city manager, based upon studies conducted by the city traffic engineer, ascertain that parking spaces on the streets within a particular residential area or distinct portion of such residential area, not less than the lesser of 360 feet or one city block, unless the street in such district is abutted by unimproved land, in which case said minimum lengths shall not apply, are used for the consistent parking of vehicles not belonging to the residents of the particular area to such an extent as to create congestion, excessive noise, air pollution, and cause the residents of such areas unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences and that through a petition to the city signed by a majority of the contiguous property owners to the streets of such area, or portion thereof, desire the establishment of such area as a permit parking area, then the city manager shall establish such area as a permit parking district. The issuance of a permit does not guarantee an on-street parking space will be available 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(a); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1 (20-142.2(a)), 1-22-80; Ord. No. O-81-165, § 1, 8-11-81; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-294. - Appeal from designation. 
    Any resident of a permit parking district area may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 days after the decision is rendered by the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 142.2(a); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1 (20-142.2(a)), 1-22-80) 
Sec. 25-295. - Exceptions. 
    The parking prohibitions of this division shall not apply to service or delivery vehicles which are being used to provide services to or make deliveries to residents of the permit parking district. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(c); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1 (20-142.2(c), 1-22-80)) 
Sec. 25-296. - Permit required. 
    Unless a parking permit, validly issued pursuant to regulations contained in or adopted pursuant to this division, be properly displayed, no vehicle shall be parked upon any street or public way within a permit district. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(b); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1(20-142.2(b)), 1-22-80) 
Sec. 25-297. - Application for permit. 
    Permanent residents within a permit parking district may apply to the billings and collections division for a permit to park their vehicle(s) upon the streets or public ways of the permit parking district in which such applicant resides. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(b); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1(20-142.2(b)), 1-22-80; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-298. - Permit fees. 
    A fee of $15.00 shall be charged each resident for the issuance of one parking permit, and a fee of $15.00 shall be charged each resident for each additional or replacement permit, such fee to be used by the city to defray the cost of the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(b); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1(20-142.2(b)), 1-22-80; Ord. No. O-90-093, 3-27-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-299. - Issuance. 
    Upon proof that the applicant for a permit required by the provisions of this division is a resident of the permit parking district, a parking permit shall be issued for each vehicle owned by such applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(b); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1(20-142.2(b)), 1-22-80) 
Sec. 25-300. - Duration. 
    Permits issued under the provisions of this division shall be valid for a period of one year. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(b); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1(20-142.2(b)), 1-22-80; Ord. No. O-81-165, § 1, 8-11-81) 
Sec. 25-301. - Nontransferable. 
    A permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be personal, nonassignable and nontransferable. Each such permit shall be valid only for a specifically prescribed vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(b); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1(20-142.2(b)), 1-22-80) 
Sec. 25-302. - Visitor passes. 
    Each household shall receive two visitor passes at no additional charge. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(b); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1(20-142.2(b)), 1-22-80; Ord. No. O-96-297, 11-12-96; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-303. - Signs. 
    The city manager or his duly designated representative shall cause appropriate signs to be placed upon all streets of the permit parking district, such signs to be of such character as to readily inform an ordinarily observant person of the existence of the parking prohibition within said district. 
(Code 1959, § 20-142.2(d); Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-80-024, § 1(20-142.2(d)), 1-22-80) 
Sec. 25-304. - Permit parking in certain designated areas of Church and Court Streets. 
(a)  In order to protect residents of certain designated areas of Church and Court Streets that do not have off street parking from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residence and in order to promote traffic safety and the peace, good order, comfort, convenience and welfare of the inhabitance of the city, the city finds that it is necessary to establish a system of permit parking for residents of business districts. 
(b)  For purposes of this section the term "resident" shall be deemed to mean a person that resides and maintains a place of abode within a business district and does not have off street parking for their vehicle. 
(c)  A resident in a business district that does not have off street parking for their vehicle may apply to the billings and collections division for a parking permit to park their vehicle in the public streets adjoining their residence in the business district in which they live without regard to the normal restrictions on the length of parking time. Two permit(s) shall be issued for each residential lot. 
(d)  The parking permit shall be displayed from the rear view mirror of the vehicle in such a manner that it may be viewed from the front and rear of the vehicle. When there is no rear view mirror the permit shall be displayed on the vehicle dashboard. The permit shall not be displayed from the rear view mirror while the vehicle is in motion. If the permit is not properly displayed the normal restrictions on the length of permitted parking time shall apply. 
(e)  A fee of $15.00 shall be charged for each permit issued or each replacement permit. The fees will be used by the city to defray the cost of the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Permits issued under this section are valid only on the vehicle for which they are issued and shall be valid for a period of one year. 
(g)  The person shall not transfer or allow another person to use or possess any parking permit issued to them or continue to use a permit after its termination or expiration or give false information upon application for the permit. Nor shall any person use a permit to park upon the public streets in any business district except for the public streets adjoining their residence. 
(h)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250.00. In addition the parking permit of such person shall be terminated by the billings and collections division. 
(Ord. No. O-96-125, 5-14-96; Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Sec. 25-305. - Permit parking in the central business district (CBD). 
(a)  In order to protect residents of the central business districts who do not have off-street parking from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences and in order to promote traffic safety and the peace, good order, comfort, convenience and welfare of the inhabitance of the city, the city finds that it is necessary to establish a system of permit parking for residents of the central business district. 
(b)  Residents who live in the central business district (CBD-designated as that area of downtown from Fifth Street to the Rt. 29 Business Expressway and from Clay Street to the riverfront) or residential property owners may apply for a CBD residential parking permit. The permit will allow residents to park in an assigned city off street parking facility closest to their residence 24 hours per day, seven days per week. Approval will be based on parking spaces availability. The cost for the first permit shall be $25.00 per month. Each additional permit shall cost $50.00 per month. Proof of residence is required and maybe satisfied by a copy of a current lease/mortgage document reflecting the residential address, a valid Virginia driver's license reflecting the residential address or current vehicle registration. 
(c)  A resident shall not transfer or allow another person to use or possess any parking permit issued to them or continue to use a permit after its termination or expiration or give false information upon application for the permit. Nor shall any person use a permit to park upon the public streets in the central business district. 
(d)  Permits issued under this section are valid only on the vehicle for which they are issued and shall be valid for a period of one year. 
(e)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250.00. In addition the parking permit of such person shall be terminated by the billings and collections division. 
(Ord. No. O-09-123, 10-13-09, eff. 1-1-10) 
Secs. 25-306-25-309. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 

Sec. 25-310. - Parking in spaces reserved for persons with disabilities; penalty. 
(a)  No vehicles other than those displaying disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, or temporary removable windshield placards issued under § 46.2-1241 of the state code, or DV disabled parking license plates issued under subsection B of § 46.2-739 of the state code, shall park in any parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities. 
(1)  No person without a disability that limits or impairs his ability to walk shall park a vehicle with disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, temporary removable windshield placards, or DV disabled parking license plates issued under subsection B of § 46.2-739 of the state code in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk except when transporting a disabled person in the vehicle. 
(2)  A summons or parking ticket for the offense may be issued by law enforcement officers or duly designated city employees without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of any private parking area. 
(3)  Parking a vehicle in a space reserved for persons with disabilities in violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00. 
(b)  No person shall use or display an organizational removable windshield placard, permanent removable windshield placard or temporary removable windshield placard beyond its expiration date. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00. 
(c)  Organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards and temporary removable windshield placards shall be displayed in such a manner that they may be viewed from the front and rear of the vehicle and be hanging from the rearview mirror of a vehicle utilizing a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk. When there is no rearview mirror, the placard shall be displayed on the vehicle's dashboard. No placard shall be displayed from the rearview mirror while a vehicle is in motion. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00. 
(d)  In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons, parking ticket, citation, or warrant was parked in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation. 
(e)  No violation of this section shall be dismissed for a property owner's failure to comply strictly with the requirements for disabled parking signs set forth in § 36-99.11 of the state code, provided the space is clearly distinguishable as a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk. 
(Ord. No. O-97-236, 11-25-97; Ord. No. O-11-090, 7-12-11) 
Sec. 25-310.1. - Adoption of state law. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia (1950) as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of Sections 46.2-1240, 46.2-1247, 46.2-1248, 46.2-1249, 146.2-1250, 46.2-1251, 46.2-1252 and 46.2-1253 of the Code of Virginia (1950) as amended, and in effect on July 1, 1997, are hereby adopted and made a part of this division and this chapter as fully as though set out and are hereby made applicable within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person, within the city, to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any section of the Code of Virginia which is adopted by this section. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1-12.39:2 of the Code of Virginia, future amendments to the sections of the Code of Virginia, that are incorporated in this section are also automatically incorporated by reference herein. 
(Ord. No. O-97-236, 11-25-97) 
Secs. 25-311-25-316. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 25-317. - Inspection of vehicles. 
    When the superintendent compels, by proclamation of the governor or otherwise, the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer registered in Virginia and operated upon a highway within this state to submit such vehicle to an inspection of its mechanism and equipment by an official inspection station, designated for that purpose, and any such owner or operator of any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer operated upon the highways of this city fails to submit such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to such inspection or fails or refuses to correct or have corrected in accordance with the requirements of this chapter or of state law any mechanical defects found by such inspection to exist, he shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
    Each day during which such motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer is operated on any street or highway within the city after failure to comply with this section shall constitute a separate offense. However, no penalty shall be imposed on any owner or operator for the operation of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer after the expiration of a period fixed for the inspection thereof, over the most direct route between the place where such vehicle is kept or garaged and an official inspection station, for the purpose of having it inspected pursuant to a prior appointment with such station. 
(Code 1959, § 20-58; Ord. No. O-95-039, 2-28-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1157 and 46.2-1171. 
Sec. 25-317.1. - Parking vehicles without inspection sticker on highways within the city. 
    Any person who parks any vehicle which is registered or titled in Virginia and which does not display a current state inspection sticker on any street or highway within the city shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each day such vehicle remains on the highway shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable under this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-89-252, § 1, 9-26-89; Ord. No. O-90-018, 1-23-90) 
Sec. 25-318. - Unauthorized taking, possession or use of inspection stickers, etc. 
    No person shall within this city remove from the custody of any person to whom the same has been issued by or under authority of the superintendent, nor have in his possession or use otherwise than as authorized by the superintendent, the sticker in connection with the inspection of motor vehicles authorized herein. 
(Code 1959, § 20-59) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1172. 
Sec. 25-319. - Imitation or counterfeit inspection stickers. 
(a)  No person shall make, issue or knowingly use any imitation or counterfeit of any official certificate of inspection. 
(b)  No person shall display or cause to be displayed upon any vehicle any certificate of inspection and approval knowing the same to be fictitious or issued for another vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 20-60) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1173. 
Sec. 25-320. - Lighting equipment. 
    Every vehicle operated within the city shall be equipped with lights, lamps and lighting equipment, and the same shall be operated and used, as required by state law. 
(Code 1959, §§ 20-202-20-219) 
State Law reference- Lighting equipment, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1010 et seq. 
Sec. 25-321. - Brakes. 
    Every vehicle in the city shall be equipped with brakes in compliance with the provisions of state law. 
(Code 1959, §§ 20-168-20-173) 
State Law reference- Brakes, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1066 et seq. 
Sec. 25-322. - Illegal sirens, whistles, etc.; unlawful use of horns, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be equipped with or for any person to use upon any vehicle any siren or exhaust, compression or spark plug whistle or horn, except as may be authorized in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be equipped with or for any person to use any horn or warning device while upon a highway or any way open to public travel that is not of a type that has been approved by the superintendent or for any person at any time to use a horn otherwise than as a reasonable warning or to make any unnecessary or unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other warning device, except that the vehicles of common carriers or extraordinarily large and heavy vehicles may be equipped with such type of warning device as the superintendent may require or permit. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a siren, bell or supplemental horn may be used on a vehicle as a noisemaker for an alarm system provided the device is installed so as to prohibit acuation of the system by the driver while the vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1959, § 20-176) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1060. 
Sec. 25-323. - Sirens or exhaust whistles upon emergency vehicles. 
    Every police vehicle and vehicle used for the purpose of fire fighting and every ambulance or rescue vehicle used for emergency calls shall be equipped with a siren, exhaust whistle or air horn designed to give automatically intermittent signals of a type not prohibited by the superintendent. Publicly owned vehicles used by a state forest warden, may also be so equipped. 
(Code 1959, § 20-177) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1061. 
Sec. 25-324. - Warning devices on school buses; use thereof. 
(a)  The city school board operating any school bus, or for whom any school bus is operated, shall have each such school bus equipped with a warning device of such type as may be prescribed by the state board after consultation with the superintendent of state police. Such a warning device shall indicate when such bus is stopped, is about to stop, and when it is taking on or discharging children, elderly, mentally or physically handicapped persons. Such warning device shall be used and in operation for a distance of not less than 100 feet before any proposed stop of such bus if the lawful speed limit is less than 35 miles per hour, and for a distance of at least 200 feet before any proposed stop of such bus if the lawful speed limit is 35 miles per hour or more. 
(b)  Any person operating such bus who fails or refuses to equip such vehicle being driven by him with such equipment, or who fails to use such warning device in the operation of such vehicle, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall on conviction be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(Code 1959, § 20-178) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1090. 
Sec. 25-325. - Mirrors. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway of this city which is not equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway for a distance of not less than 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle. 
(b)  No motor vehicle registered in this state designed and licensed primarily for passenger vehicular transportation on the public highways and manufactured for the year 1969 or for subsequent years shall be operated on the streets or highways of this city unless equipped with at least one outside and at least one inside rearview mirror meeting the requirements of subsection (a) hereof. 
(Code 1959, § 20-180) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1082. 
Sec. 25-326. - Rear fenders, flaps or guards required for certain motor vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate upon a highway any motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles having a licensed gross weight in excess of 40,000 pounds which motor vehicle or combination of vehicles is not equipped with rear fenders, flaps or guards which shall be of such size as will substantially prevent the projection of rocks, dirt, water or other substances to the rear. Vehicles used exclusively for hauling logs shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(b)  "Gross weight" for the purpose of this section includes the load upon such motor vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
(Code 1959, § 20-181) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1083. 
Sec. 25-327. - Signs on windshields, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon a highway with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, sideshields or rear windows of such motor vehicle other than a certificate or other paper required to be placed by law or which may be permitted by the superintendent. The size and placement location of stickers or decals used by counties, cities and towns in lieu of license plates shall be in compliance with regulations promulgated by the superintendent. 
(Code 1959, § 20-182) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1052. 
Sec. 25-328. - Suspension of objects so as to obstruct view of driver. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon a highway with any object or objects other than a rear-view mirror, sun visor or other equipment of the motor vehicle approved by the superintendent, suspended from any part of such motor vehicle in such manner as to obstruct the driver's clear view of the highway through the windshield, the front side windows, or the rear window. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon a highway in this city with any object or objects, other than a rear-view mirror, sun visor, or other equipment of the motor vehicle approved by the superintendent, suspended from any part of such motor vehicle in such a manner as to obstruct the driver's clear view of the highway through the windshield, the front side windows, or the rear window, or to alter a passenger-carrying vehicle in such a manner as to obstruct the driver's view through the windshield; provided, however, that this section shall not apply when the driver's clear view of the highway through the rear window is obstructed if such motor vehicle is equipped with a mirror on each side, so located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway for a distance of not less than 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 20-182.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1054 
Sec. 25-329. - Windshield wipers. 
    Every permanent windshield on a motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning snow, rain, moisture or other matter from the windshield directly in front of the operator. The device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle; provided, that every such device on a vehicle designed or used to carry passengers for compensation or hire or as a public conveyance to transport schoolchildren or others shall be of a mechanically or electrically operated type. The device or devices on any motor vehicle manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1943, shall clean both the right and left sides of the windshield and shall be of a mechanically or electrically operated type. 
(Code 1959, § 20-183) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1055. 
Sec. 25-330. - Windshields. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon a highway in this city any motor vehicle or reconstructed motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, registered in this state, which was manufactured, assembled or reconstructed after July 1, 1970, unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a windshield. 
(Code 1959, § 20-184.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1057 
Sec. 25-331. - Depth of treads on tires. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer registered in Virginia on any street or highway in this city, if such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is equipped with one or more tires which either: 
(1)  When measured in any two adjacent tread grooves where the tread is thinnest, at three equally spaced intervals around the circumference of the tire and exclusive of "tiebars" by a tread depth gauge calibrated in thirty-seconds of an inch, is found to have tread depth of less than two thirty-seconds of an inch at such locations; or 
(2)  When equipped with tread wear indicators, is found to have such indicators in contact with pavement at any two adjacent grooves at three equally spaced intervals. 
(b)  No motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall be issued an inspection approval sticker if equipped with any tire the use of which is prohibited under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to tires mounted on dual wheels installed on motor vehicles having seats for more than seven passengers: 
(1)  Operated wholly within a municipality or 
(2)  Operated by urban and suburban bus lines, which are defined as bus lines operating over regularly scheduled routes the majority of whose passengers use the buses for traveling a distance of not exceeding 40 miles, measured one way, on the same day between their place of abode and their place of work, shopping areas or schools. 
(Code 1959, § 20-186.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1043 
Sec. 25-332. - Cleats, etc., on tires; chains with studs. 
(a)  No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway shall have on its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike or any other protuberance of any material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire, except that it shall be permissible to use farm machinery having protuberances which will not injure the highway and to use chains of reasonable proportions when required for safety because of snow, ice or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to slide or skid. It shall also be permissible to use upon any vehicle, whose gross weight does not exceed 10,000 pounds, tires with studs which project not more than one-sixteenth of an inch beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire when compressed and which cover not more than three percent of the traction surface of the tire when compressed and which cover not more than three percent of the traction surface of the tire. 
(b)  The use of such studded tires shall be permissible from October 15, 1974 to April 15, 1975, and from October 15, 1975 to April 15, 1976. 
(Code 1959, § 20-187) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1044. 
Sec. 25-333. - Traction engines and tractors; permit. 
    The city manager may issue special permits limited to such time as he may deem proper, authorizing the operation upon a highway of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of such movable tracks. A fee of $2.00 shall be charged for each permit at the time of issuance. 
(Code 1959, § 20-188) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1046. 
Sec. 25-334. - When signal device required. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is so constructed or carries a load in such a manner as to prevent a hand-and-arm signal required in section 25-178 from being visible, both to the front and rear of such vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or any vehicle the driver of which is incapable of giving the required hand-and-arm signals, shall be equipped with a mechanical or electrical signal device which meets the requirements of state law and is of a type that has been approved by the superintendent. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on any highway a motor vehicle registered in this state and manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1955, unless such vehicle be equipped with such a mechanical or electrical signal device on both front and rear. 
(c)  Any such mechanical or electrical signal device may be used in lieu of the hand-and-arm signal required by section 25-178. 
(d)  The first two paragraphs of this section shall not apply to any motorcycle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers used for agricultural or horticultural purposes which are exempted from annual registration under Code of Virginia, section 46.1-45. 
(Code 1959, § 20-189) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1038. 
Sec. 25-335. - Requirements of signal devices. 
(a)  Every signal device intended and used to give a signal of intention to turn a vehicle shall be so constructed and so installed as to give a signal plainly visible in clear weather and under normal traffic conditions from a distance of at least 100 feet to the rear and 100 feet to the front of the vehicle; and provided that no front signal shall be required on vehicles manufactured or assembled before January 1, 1943. 
(b)  Motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers, when temporarily stopped on the traveled or paved portion of the highway so as to create a traffic hazard, shall use all four turn signals simultaneously to signal approaching motorists of the existing hazard whenever such vehicle is equipped with a device which will cause the four turn signals to flash simultaneously. All four signals may be flashed simultaneously on a vehicle stopped at the scene of a traffic hazard, but in no event shall all four signals be flashed simultaneously while the vehicle is in motion. 
(c)  Motor vehicles may be equipped with a braking warning system or device which will cause the vehicle's brake lights to flash when the vehicle is in motion but committed to an emergency or panic stop. 
(Code 1959, § 20-190) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1039. 
Sec. 25-336. - Flag or light at end of load. 
    Whenever the load on any vehicle shall extend more than four feet beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, there shall be displayed at the end of such load in such position as to be clearly visible at all times from the rear of such load, a red flag not less than 12 inches, both in length and width, except that between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed at the end of such load a red light, plainly visible in clear weather at least 500 feet to the sides and rear of such vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 20-191) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1121. 
Sec. 25-337. - Exhaust system in good working order required. 
(a)  No person shall drive and no owner of a motor vehicle shall permit or allow the operation of any owned vehicle upon a highway unless such motor vehicle is equipped with an exhaust system of a type installed as standard factory equipment, or comparable to that designed for use upon the particular vehicle as standard factory equipment, in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, annoying smoke and escape of excessive gas, steam or oil. An exhaust system shall not be deemed to prevent excessive or unusual noise if it permits or allows the escape of noise in excess of that permitted by the standard factory equipment exhaust system of private passenger motor vehicles or trucks of standard make. 
(b)  The term "exhaust system," as used in this section, means all of the parts of a motor vehicle through which the exhaust passes after leaving the engine block. 
(c)  Chambered pipes and turbo-supercharges shall not be deemed to be an effective muffling device to prevent excessive or unusual noise as required in subsection (a). 
(Code 1959, § 20-192) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1049. 
Sec. 25-338. - Muffler cutout, etc., illegal. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale a muffler without interior baffle plates or other effective muffling device or any "gutted muffler," "muffler cutout" or "straight exhaust." It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on the highways of this city a motor vehicle equipped with a "gutted muffler," "muffler cutout" or "straight exhaust." 
(Code 1959, § 20-193) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1047. 
Sec. 25-339. - Construction must prevent escape of contents. 
    No vehicle shall be operated or moved on any highway unless such vehicle is so constructed as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. 
(Code 1959, § 20-194) 
Editor's note- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1156. 
Sec. 25-339.1. - Secured or covered loads. 
    The loads of all trucks, trailers and semi-trailers, carrying gravel, sand or other nonagricultural and nonforestry products on any streets, highways or roads within the Lynchburg City Limits shall be either (i) secured to the vehicle in which they are being transported or (ii) covered. Public service company vehicles, pickup trucks, coal trucks, and emergency snow removal equipment while engaged in snow removal operations shall be excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-88-263, § 1, 9-27-88, eff. 10-1-88) 
Sec. 25-340. - Tailgates on vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, trailer or other vehicle equipped with a tailgate to lower or open the tailgate thereon, or to suffer or permit such tailgate to be lowered or opened, except during the time the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded, and except during the time the load on the vehicle necessitates a lowered or opened tailgate as a support for the load. It shall be the duty of the operator of any such vehicle to see that the tailgate on such vehicle is kept closed or raised, except during the times hereinbefore specified. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $20.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1959, § 20-195) 
Sec. 25-341. - Fastening load of logs, barrels, etc. 
    No vehicle which is designed or used for the purpose of hauling logs, poles, or lumber, barrels, hogsheads or other material or containers which by their very nature may shift or roll, shall be operated or moved over any highway unless its load is securely fastened by adequate log chains or metal cables so as to prevent the shifting or falling of such load from the vehicle; provided, however, that tobacco hogsheads may, in lieu of chains or metal cables, be secured by manila or hemp rope of such strength as to securely fasten the hogshead against shifting, falling or rolling, and in any case of not less than five-eighth-inch in diameter. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed to release the owner or operator from liability for failure to use reasonable care in securing or fastening such load from shifting or falling. 
(Code 1959, § 20-196) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1155. 
Sec. 25-342. - Mechanical vapor compression refrigeration cooling units. 
    No motor vehicle shall be operated on any highway equipped with any mechanical vapor compression refrigeration cooling unit, used for the cooling of passengers or drivers, unless such device is of a type approved as to safety by the superintendent. No refrigerant used in such unit shall be explosive, flammable or toxic. 
(Code 1959, § 20-197) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1088. 
Sec. 25-343. - Illegal possession or sale of unapproved equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess with intent to sell or offer for sale, either separately or as a part of the equipment of a motor vehicle, or to use or have as equipment upon a motor vehicle operated on a highway, any lighting device, warning device, signal device, safety glass or other equipment on which approval is herein required or on which approval is required by state law, or any part tending to change or alter the operation of such device, glass or other equipment, unless of a type that has been submitted to and approved by the superintendent, or meets or exceeds the standards and specifications of the Society of Automotive Engineers, the American National Standards Institute, Incorporated, or the federal department of transportation. 
(Code 1959, § 20-199) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1002. 
Sec. 25-344. - Illegal use of defective or unsafe equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or have as equipment upon a motor vehicle operated on a highway any device or equipment mentioned in section 25-343 of this Code which is defective or in unsafe condition. 
(Code 1959, § 20-199) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1003. 
Sec. 25-345. - Trademark or name and instructions required. 
    Each device, glass or other equipment mentioned in section 25-343 offered for sale in this city shall bear thereon a trademark or name or be identified in keeping with the superintendent's regulations and shall be accompanied by printed instructions as to the proper mounting, use and candlepower of bulbs, if any, to be used therewith and any particular methods of mounting or adjustments necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter, and any rule or regulation of the superintendent. 
(Code 1959, § 20-200) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1004. 
Sec. 25-346. - Tire chains or snow tread tires; when required. 
(a)  Whenever snow, sleet, or freezing rain is falling or has fallen and such snow, sleet, or freezing rain is causing slippery or hazardous conditions upon the streets of the city, no person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street of the city in such a manner as to become stalled and impede traffic when such stalling is due to the failure of such person to equip the vehicle with effective tire chains or effective snow tread tires. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any of the streets of the city under weather conditions as above set forth without equipping the vehicle with effective tire chains or effective snow tread tires when it is apparent that failure to so equip the vehicle will likely cause such vehicle to stall or impede traffic. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 25-3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 20-134.1) 
Secs. 25-347-25-357. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ASSEMBLIES, DEMONSTRATIONS AND PARADES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Riots and unlawful assemblies, § 27-46 et seq. 

Secs. 25-358-25-368. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 25-358-25-368 were repealed by Ord. No. O-91-199, adopted Aug. 13, 1991, and replaced by §§ 25-374-25-374.11. 
Sec. 25-369. - Dispersal of activity. 
    Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, congregation, parade, meeting, assembly or procession, or the conduct of two or more persons, except as authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this article, the persons comprising said group hall disperse or move when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse and said refusal shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 25-370. - Driving through processions. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or animals comprising a funeral or other authorized procession, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles as defined in this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 20-24) 
Sec. 25-371. - Identification of vehicles in funeral processions. 
    All motor vehicles participating in a funeral procession, when proceeding to any place of burial, shall display illuminated head lamps thereon and such other identification as the city manager may prescribe. 
(Code 1959, § 20-25) 
Sec. 25-372. - Manner of driving in funeral processions. 
    Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as is practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1959, § 20-24) 
Sec. 25-373. - Right-of-way of funeral processions. 
    All motor vehicles in an authorized funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles, except fire apparatus, ambulances and police vehicles, at any street or highway intersection within the city, and may proceed through a stop street or signalized intersection with proper caution and safety. 
(Code 1959, § 20-25) 
Sec. 25-373.1. - Escort for funeral processions. 
    The police department will provide an escort service for funeral processions, upon request, when equipment and personnel are not otherwise engaged in law enforcement activities. The request for an escort must be received by the department no later than 48 hours before the procession. The fee for the escort service is $50.00. This fee covers the cost to the police department of providing the escort service. 
(Ord. No. O-96-233, 8-13-96) 
Secs. 25-374-25-374.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-98-041, adopted Mar. 10, 1998, repealed §§ 25-374-25-374.11. 
Sec. 25-375. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by the Code of Virginia and its general police powers, the city does hereby adopt the following sections in order to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare in the city, to ensure the free and safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles on the public rights-of-way, and to ensure the safe and unimpaired use and enjoyment of public property in places open to the general public and otherwise to regulate and control the time, place and manner of activities that would otherwise threaten or impair the public health, safety, and welfare in the city while also encouraging the exercise of the rights to free speech and assembly in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-99-093, 5-11-99; Ord. No. O-03-012, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 25-375.1. - Definitions. 
    The following terms shall have the meanings set out herein: 
(a)  "Parade" means any march, demonstration, procession or motorcade consisting of people, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof upon the streets, sidewalks or other public areas within the city with an intent or likely effect of attracting public attention that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon the streets, sidewalks, or other public property. 
(b)  "Picket" means anyone who participates in a public assembly, demonstration, march, parade, picket line, procession, rally, or spontaneous event on the streets, sidewalks, or other public areas of the city, either as an individual or as part of a group. 
(c)  "Public assembly" means any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of more than ten people for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon the streets, sidewalks, or other public property within the city or that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal use of any public property in a place open to the general public. 
(d)  "Spontaneous event" shall mean an unplanned or unannounced coming together of people, animals or vehicles in a parade or public assembly which was not contemplated beforehand by any participant therein and which is caused by or in response to unforeseen circumstances or events occasioned by news or affairs first coming into public knowledge within five days of such parade or public assembly. 
(Ord. No. O-99-093, 5-11-99; Ord. No. O-03-012, 1-14-03; Ord. No. O-17-095 , § 1, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 25-375.2. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or participate in a public assembly, demonstration or parade on the public streets, sidewalks, or other public property of the city in a place open to the general public for which a written permit has not been issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this permit shall not apply to: 
(1)  Spontaneous events; 
(2)  Recreational activities, including jogging or walking, that do not require closing public streets or other public streets or other public rights-of-way and that do not interfere with or have a tendency to interfere with the normal use of any public property in a place open to the general public; 
(3)  Door-to-door advocacy, including canvassing, pamphleteering, religious or political proselytizing and the distribution of written materials, and similar activities that do not interfere with or have a tendency to interfere with the free passage of pedestrians and vehicles on the public rights-of-way or the normal use of any public property in a place open to the general public; 
(4)  Door-to-door sales of goods or services, and similar activities that do not interfere with or have a tendency to interfere with the free passage of pedestrians and vehicles on the public rights-of-way or the normal use of any public property in a place open to the general public; provided, however, that any persons or organizations engaging in such activities shall comply with any other applicable requirements of the City Code; 
(5)  Funeral processions; 
(6)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(7)  The United States army, navy, air force and coast guard, the military forces of the state and the police and fire divisions of the city; 
(8)  A governmental agency/agencies acting within the scope of its functions; 
(9)  Park and recreation areas that are regulated by the city's division of parks and recreation. Permits for a public assembly, demonstration, or parade in parks and recreation areas shall be issued in accordance with the guidelines contained in this article and participants in such activities are subject to the restrictions of section 25-375.10(d) of this article; or 
(10)  Areas at the Lynchburg Regional Airport that are regulated by the airport manager. 
(c)  Permits may be granted if they are requested by individuals or organizations who desire to have a permit, even though the permit is not required under this section. 
(Ord. No. O-99-093, 5-11-99; Ord. No. O-03-012, 1-14-03; Ord. No. O-17-095 , § 1, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 25-375.3. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to conduct a parade or public assembly shall make written application to the chief of police, or his designee, at least five days prior to such parade or public assembly. Such application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit; 
(2)  The name and address of any organization or group the applicant is representing; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will act as the parade or public assembly leader or chairman and who will be responsible for the conduct of the parade or public assembly; 
(4)  The type of public assembly, including a description of the activities planned during the event; 
(5)  The date and time (start and ending) of the parade or public assembly; 
(6)  If an assembly, the specific location or locations of the assembly; 
(7)  If a parade, the specific assembly and dispersal locations, the specific route, and the plans, if any, for assembly and dispersal; 
(8)  The approximate number of people who, and animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade or public assembly and the type of animals and a description of the vehicles; 
(9)  A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets or sidewalks or other public rights-of-way proposed to be traversed or used; 
(10)  A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, banners, signs, or other attention-getting devices to be used in connection with the parade or public assembly; and 
(11)  Such other information as the chief of police, or his designee, may deem reasonably necessary in order to properly provide for traffic control, street and property maintenance, administrative arrangements, police and fire protection, and for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  The chief of police, or his designee, shall not issue the permit if any information supplied by the applicant is false or intentionally misleading. 
(c)  The chief of police, or his designee, shall have the authority to and shall make reasonable efforts to consider an application hereunder which is filed less than five days before the date the parade or assembly is proposed to be conducted if, after due consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the parade or public assembly, the anticipated number of participants and the city services required in connection with the event, and where good cause is otherwise shown, the chief of police, or his designee determines that the waiver of the permit application deadline will not present an undue hazard to public safety. 
(Ord. No. O-99-093, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 25-375.4. - Issuance or denial of permit. 
(a)  The chief of police, or his designee, shall issue the permit within three days of receipt of the completed application, and in any event prior to the scheduled parade or public assembly if the proposed parade or public assembly will not endanger the public health, welfare or safety, applying the following criteria and finding that: 
(1)  The time, duration, route and size of parade or assembly will not unreasonably interrupt the safe and orderly movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or the normal use of public property in a place open to the general public; 
(2)  The parade or assembly is not of such a nature that it will require diversion of so great a number of police and fire personnel to properly police the line of movement in the areas contiguous thereto so as to impair the normal protection of the remainder of the city; 
(3)  The applicant has, where appropriate, designated monitors sufficient to control the orderly conduct of the parade or assembly in conformity with such permit; 
(4)  The conduct of the parade or assembly will not unduly interfere with the proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, the remainder of the city, or unreasonably disrupt other public services and protection normally provided to the city; 
(5)  The parade or assembly will not interfere with another parade or assembly for which a permit has been granted; and 
(6)  The parade or assembly proposed will not violate, and will conform with all applicable state regulations and laws governing the proposed event. 
(b)  For parades or public assemblies held on a regular or recurring basis at the same location, an application for an annual permit covering all such parades or assemblies during the calendar year may be filed with the chief of police, or his designee, at least five and not more than 60 days before the date and time at which the first such parade or public assembly is proposed to commence. The chief of police, or his designee, may and shall make reasonable efforts to waive the minimum five-day period after due consideration of the factors specified in subsection (c) in the previous section. 
(c)  If the chief of police, or his designee, denies an application, he shall promptly attempt to call and will promptly mail to the applicant a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit, and notifying the applicant of his right to appeal the denial pursuant to section 25-375.9 of this article. 
(d)  If two or more applications are submitted requesting a permit under this article for a parade or assembly to be used at the same time and place, the application first filed shall be granted if it meets the requirements of this article; 
(e)  If persons promoting different objectives, causes, actions, or policies desire to use a street, sidewalk, or public area for which a permit has already been issued, the chief or police, or his designee, shall allot a number of pickets promoting each objective to use such street, sidewalk or public area on an equitable basis, proportionate to the number of objectives being promoted. The chief of police, or his designee, may also physically separate groups of persons promoting different causes through the use of barricades or similar devices, or assign each group of persons designated areas in which to promote their different objectives, causes, actions, in order to promote the public safety by keeping such groups apart from one another. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall permit the chief of police, or his designee, to deny a permit based upon political, social or religious grounds or reasons or based upon the content of the views expressed. Denial of a permit on such grounds is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O-99-093, 5-11-99; Ord. No. O-03-012, 1-14-03; Ord. No. O-17-095 , § 1, 10-10-17) 
Sec. 25-375.5. - Alternative permit. 
    The chief of police, or his designee, in denying a permit for a parade or public assembly shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade or assembly on a date, at a time, at a place, or over a route different from that proposed by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police, or his designee. An alternate permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-99-093, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 25-375.6. - Notice to city and other officials. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a permit, the chief of police, or his designee, shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(a)  The city manager; 
(b)  The city attorney; 
(c)  The fire chief; and 
(d)  The director of the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. O-99-093, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 25-375.7. - Compliance with directions and conditions. 
    Every person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall substantially comply with all permit terms and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade or assembly chairman or other person heading or leading the parade or assembly shall carry the permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade or assembly, and show the permit when requested to do so. 
(Ord. No. O-99-093, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 25-375.8. - Revocation of permit and authority to disperse crowds. 
(a)  The chief of police, or his designee, shall have the authority to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article if any information supplied by the applicant is discovered to be false or intentionally misleading or if any term, condition, restriction or limitation of the permit has been substantially violated or if there is any continued violation of the terms, conditions, restrictions or limitations of the permit after the applicant or anyone acting in concert with him is notified of a violation of the permit by an appropriate law enforcement official. 
(b)  City police officers may, in the event of an assemblage of persons who attempt to intimidate pickets pursuing their lawful objective through conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or person at whom such conduct is directed, or through the use of violent abusive language in a manner reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, direct the dispersal of the persons so assembled and may arrest any person who fails to absent himself or herself from the place of assemblage when so directed by the police. 
(Ord. No. O-17-095 , § 1, 10-10-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-17-095 , § 1, adopted Oct. 10, 2017, amended § 25-375.8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 25-375.8 pertained to revocation of permit and derived from Ord. No. O-99-093, adopted May 11, 1999. 
Sec. 25-375.9. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the chief of police, or his designee, to grant a permit, or by the revocation of a permit after one has been issued, may but is not required to appeal the denial to the city manager, or his designee, by filing with the city manager's office, within five working days after the date of denial or revocation, a written notice of the appeal setting for the grounds therefor. The city manager, or his designee, shall act upon the appeal within five working days after its receipt. 
(b)  The decision of the chief of police or his designee or the city manager, or his designee, may be appealed to the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg, in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(c)  In any appeal under this section, the city shall have the burden of demonstrating that the denial of the permit was justified under section 25-375.4 of this article. 
(d)  The city shall meet all deadlines set by the court and by applicable statutes and court rules, and shall otherwise seek to assure that the appeal, including any motion for preliminary relief, is decided as expeditiously as possible. 
(Ord. No. O-99-093, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 25-375.10. - Public conduct during parades, demonstrations, assemblies and spontaneous events. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade, demonstration or assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade, demonstration or assembly for which a written permit has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or animals comprising a parade, demonstration or assembly or funeral procession except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(c)  Parking on parade, demonstration or assembly route. The chief of police, or his designee, shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along the public streets or public rights-of-way constituting a part of the route of a parade, demonstration or assembly. The chief of police, or his designee, shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(d)  No person who participates in an assembly, demonstration, march, parade, picket line, procession, rally, or spontaneous event on the streets, sidewalks, or other public areas within the city shall (i) carry bats, clubs, or similar items, (ii) wear masks as prohibited by Section 18.2-422 of the Virginia Code, (iii) carry chemical irritant sprays or caustic substances, (iv) carry shields, (v) carry torches or any other burning substances attached to a stick or rod (candles are permitted), (vi) wear a helmet (unless riding a motorcycle, bicycle, or similar device in a parade or procession), (vii) carry aerosol containers that can be used as incendiary devices, or (viii) carry any item that can be used as a projectile. It is permissible to carry written or printed placards, signs, flags, banners, etc., but such items shall not be attached to poles or rods. 
(Ord. No. O-17-095 , § 1, 10-10-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-17-095 , § 1, adopted Oct. 10, 2017, amended § 25-375.10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 25-375.10 pertained to public conduct during parades, demonstrations, and assemblies and derived from Ord. No. O-99-093, adopted May 11, 1999; and Ord. No. O-03-012, adopted Jan. 14, 2003. 
Sec. 25-375.11. - Severability. 
    If any portion of this article is for any reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article and such invalid provisions or portions thereof shall be severable. 
(Ord. No. O-99-093, 5-11-99) 
Secs. 25-376-25-384. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 25-385. - To obey signs, signals, etc. 
    Pedestrians shall obey signs and signals erected on highways or streets for the direction and control of travel and traffic and they shall obey the orders of police officers engaged in directing travel and traffic on the highways and streets. Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $5.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1959, § 20-263) 
State Law reference- Authority of cities of the first class to regulate pedestrians by ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-935. 
Sec. 25-386. - Crossing highways or streets. 
(a)  When crossing highways or streets, pedestrians shall not carelessly or maliciously interfere with the orderly passage of vehicles. They shall cross whenever possible only at intersections, but where intersections of streets contain no marked crosswalks pedestrians shall not be guilty of negligence as a matter of law for failure to cross at said intersection. They shall cross only at right angles. 
(b)  Pedestrians may cross an intersection diagonally when all traffic entering the intersection has been halted by lights, semaphores or signals by a peace or police officer. 
(Code 1959, § 20-251) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-923 
Sec. 25-387. - Right-of-way generally. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle upon a highway within a business or residential district shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing such highway within any clearly marked crosswalk, whether at mid-block or at the end of any block, or any regular pedestrian crossing included in the prolongation of the lateral boundary lines of the adjacent sidewalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall enter or cross an intersection in disregard of approaching traffic. 
(c)  The drivers of vehicles entering, crossing or turning at intersections shall change their course, slow down or come to a complete stop if necessary to permit pedestrians to cross such intersection safely and expeditiously. 
(d)  Pedestrians crossing highways or streets at intersections shall at all times have the right-of-way over vehicles making turns into the highways or streets being crossed by pedestrians. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions contained in section 25-1 of this Code, as used in this section "business district" means the territory contiguous to a highway where 50 percent or more of the total frontage on either side of the highway for a distance of 150 feet or more is used for business purposes. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions contained in section 25-1 of this Code, as used in this section "residence district" means the territory contiguous to a highway not comprising a business district where 50 percent or more of the total frontage on either side of the highway for a distance of 150 feet or more is used for residential purposes. 
(Code 1959, § 20-252) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-924. 
Sec. 25-388. - Stepping where they cannot be seen. 
    Pedestrians shall not step into that portion of a highway or street open to moving vehicular traffic at any point between intersections where their presence would be obscured from the vision of drivers of approaching vehicles by a vehicle or other obstruction at the curb or side, except to board a passenger bus or to enter a safety zone, in which event, they shall cross the highway or street only at right angles. 
(Code 1959, § 20-253) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-927. 
Sec. 25-389. - Entering or leaving buses. 
    When actually boarding or alighting from passenger buses, pedestrians shall have the right-of-way over vehicles, but shall not, in order to board or alight from passenger buses, step into the highway or street sooner nor remain there longer than is absolutely necessary. 
(Code 1959, § 20-254) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-927. 
Sec. 25-390. - Not to use highways except when necessary; keeping to left. 
    Pedestrians shall not use the highways or streets, other than the sidewalk thereof, for travel, except when necessary to do so because of the absence of sidewalks, reasonably suitable and passable for their use, in which case, if they walk upon the hard surface, or the main-traveled portion of the roadway, they shall keep to the extreme left side or edge thereof, or where the shoulders of the highway are of sufficient width to permit, they may walk on either shoulder thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 20-255) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-927. 
Sec. 25-391. - Soliciting rides or business. 
    No person shall solicit a ride, employment or business from the driver or occupant of any vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 20-258) 
Sec. 25-392. - Playing on streets or highways; roller skates, toys or other devices on wheels or runners; persons riding bicycles, etc., not to attach to vehicles. 
    No person shall play on a highway or street, other than upon the sidewalks thereof, within the city. No person shall use on a highway or street where play is prohibited roller skates, toys or other devices on wheels or runners, except bicycles and motorcycles. The city manager may designate areas on highways or streets where play is prohibited in which persons may be permitted to use roller skates, toys or other devices on wheels or runners, and, if such highways or streets have two traffic lanes, such persons shall keep as near as reasonably possible to the extreme left side or edge of the left-hand lane so that they will be facing oncoming traffic at all times. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, roller skates, toys or other devices on wheels or runners, shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1959, § 20-256) 
State Law reference- As to playing on highways and as to skating, etc., see Code of Virginia, § 46.2-932. 
Sec. 25-393. - Blind pedestrians-Generally. 
    Whenever a pedestrian is crossing or attempting to cross a public street or highway, guided by a guide dog or carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick clearly visible above the body which is metallic or white in color, or white tipped with red, the driver of every vehicle approaching the intersection or place of crossing shall bring his vehicle to a full stop before arriving at such intersection or place of crossing, unless such intersection or place of crossing is controlled by a traffic officer. 
(Code 1959, § 20-259) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-933. 
Sec. 25-394. - Same-Failure to use cane or guide dog not contributory negligence. 
    Nothing contained in section 25-393 shall be construed to deprive any totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person, not carrying a cane or walking stick or not being guided by a dog, of the rights and privileges conferred by law upon pedestrians crossing streets or highways, nor shall the failure of such totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person to carry a cane or walking stick, or to be guided by a guide dog upon the streets, highways, or sidewalks of this city be held to constitute nor be evidence of contributory negligence. 
(Code 1959, § 20-262) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-934. 
Chapter 26 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to abate nuisances, § 38(18). 
Cross reference- Health department, § 2-349 et seq.; air pollution, Ch. 4; erosion and sediment control, Ch. 16; dangerous fences, § 17-18 et seq.; garbage and refuse, Ch. 21; inoperative vehicles, § 21-61; sewers, Ch. 34; trees and vegetation, Ch. 38; water, Ch. 39. 
State Law reference- Power to prevent injury or annoyance from anything dangerous, offensive or unhealthy and to cause any nuisance to be abated, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-14, 15.1-867. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words whenever used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively set forth unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context: 
    Building: Any structure for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Noise: Any sound which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or which causes or tends to cause an adverse affect on humans, and as defined in article III of this chapter pertaining to noise control. 
    Nuisance: The doing of any act or the omission to perform any duty, or the permitting of any condition or thing to exist that endangers life or health, obstructs or interferes with the reasonable or comfortable use of public or private property, or in any way renders other persons insecure in the life or the use of property. Wherever the term nuisance is used in this chapter, it shall be deemed to mean a public nuisance. 
    Odor: Any smell from whatever source resulting from a quality of something that stimulates the olfactory organ and annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities. 
    Person: Person shall include individuals, corporations, partnerships and all other legal entities which may hold title to real or personal property. 
    Premises: A tract of real property with a building or buildings thereon and shall include its grounds and other appurtenances. 
    Private nuisance: A private nuisance is an activity which does not impact the general public, but which implicates or interferes with a right or interest that is unique to an individual or a small number of individuals, and unreasonably interferes with the use and enjoyment of another individual's or a small number of individuals' property. Private nuisances are not covered by this chapter, but individuals who are adversely affected by a private nuisance that unreasonably interferes with the use and enjoyment of their property have the right to initiate a civil action to compel the abatement of such private nuisance. 
    Property: Both real property and personal [property]. 
    Public nuisance: A nuisance which is common to the public generally and which injures or has the potential to injure the general public and adversely affects those citizens generally who may be so circumstanced as to come within its influence. A nuisance shall be deemed to be public if it is committed in such a place and in such a manner that the aggregation of private persons injured thereby is sufficiently great so as to constitute a public annoyance and inconvenience 
(Code 1959, § 22.1-1; Ord. No. O-93-260, 9-28-93; Ord. No. O-16-084 , § 1, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 26-2. - Illustrative enumeration. 
    The existence of any of the following activities or conditions are hereby declared to be public nuisances, provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(a)  Any violation of article II of this chapter pertaining to weed control. 
(b)  Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things that causes a blighting problem or adversely affects the public health or safety. 
(c)  Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin. 
(d)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located. 
(e)  All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises that would constitute a violation of article III of this chapter pertaining to noise control and which are reasonably likely to reoccur in the future. 
(f)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(g)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(h)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other substances. 
(i)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained. 
(j)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground. 
(k)  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
(l)  Any action which unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage area, or that would constitute a violation of chapter 27, article I, of the City Code pertaining to loitering and which are reasonably likely to reoccur in the future. 
(Ord. No. O-93-260, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 26-3. - Prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create, cause, permit or maintain a public nuisance. It shall also be unlawful for any person to permit the continuation of a public nuisance after having been served a notice to abate such nuisance. 
(b)  If the owner of a building or premises fails to abate or cause to be abated a public nuisance occurring on his property after receiving reasonable notice of its existence, even though such nuisance was caused or maintained by others, he shall be deemed to have permitted the continuation of such nuisance. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. In addition, each day a public nuisance shall continue after the date set by the city for its abatement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, §§ 22.1-2, 22.1-3; Ord. No. O-93-260, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 26-3.1. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The nuisance ordinance established by this article shall be enforced and administered by the community development department. The director of community development shall designate the staff members that shall be responsible for the enforcement of the nuisance ordinance. The community development department shall conduct investigations of alleged public nuisances, give the necessary notices to abate public nuisances, make the necessary arrangements to abate public nuisances, prepare the statements of costs and expenses incurred by the city in the abatement of public nuisances and take whatever action is necessary to eliminate the presence of public nuisances within the city. The community development department may also make arrangements with other individuals and agencies to assist in the enforcement of the nuisance ordinance. The director of community development shall serve as the hearing officer for any administrative hearings requested under section 26-6.1 of the nuisance ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-12-07, Ord. No. O-07-089) 
Sec. 26-4. - Notice to abate. 
    Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city, a duly designated officer of the city shall give written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists and to the person causing or maintaining the nuisance, if such person is known. 
(Code 1959, §§ 22-17, 22.1-4; Ord. No. O-93-260, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 26-5. - Contents of notice. 
    The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain: 
(a)  An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(b)  The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary. 
(c)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance. 
(d)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance and a date by which the nuisance shall be abated. 
(e)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person. 
(f)  A statement that the failure to abate a nuisance constitutes a criminal offense punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 22-17; Ord. No. O-93-260, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 26-6. - Service of notice. 
(a)  The notice to abate a nuisance shall be given to the owner, the owner's agent, or person in control of the property on which the nuisance is located by delivering a copy of the notice to abate in person. If the person named in the notice to abate cannot be found after a diligent search, such notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of such person and a copy of the notice to abate shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. 
(b)  The notice to abate a nuisance shall be given a corporation, bank, trust company or other corporate entity who is the owner of such property or who acts as the owner's agent by delivering a copy thereof to its president or such other officer, manager or director or agent thereof in the city; or if such person cannot be found at the regular office or place of business in the city of such corporation, bank, trust company, corporate entity, by delivering a copy to any employee thereof found at such office or place of business; or if no such person is found in such office or place of business, by leaving such copy posted at the front door of such office or place of business and a copy of the notice shall be posted on a conspicuous place on the premises. Such procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. 
(c)  If the owner of property on which a nuisance is located is unknown or has no place of abode, office or place of business in the city, or after reasonable efforts the city cannot locate a last known address, notice shall be given by order of publication, by publishing a copy of the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 30 days prior to the abatement of the nuisance and a copy of the notice to abate shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Ord. No. O-93-260, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 26-6.1. - Hearings. 
    Upon request, a hearing shall be held before a designated officer of the city other than the officer who initially determined the existence of the nuisance. If, after hearing evidence, the hearing officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence that such a nuisance exists, shall order its abatement; otherwise, he shall dismiss the notice. A hearing must be requested in writing at least 48 hours prior to the date given for the abatement of the nuisance. The hearing shall be an informal administrative proceeding rather than a judicial-type trial and while each party shall have the opportunity to present pertinent information and to question adverse witnesses the rules of evidence shall not apply. The decision of the designated officer is final and not subject to appeal. 
(Ord. No. O-93-260, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 26-7. - Abatement by city. 
    Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or who was so ordered by a hearing officer to abate the same, the city shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. In order to abate a nuisance, the city may revoke any permit or license issued by the city to the owner of the offending property and which is required by law to conduct the business or activity which gives rise to the nuisance. If the nuisance is not subject to abatement by the city, or if otherwise appropriate, the designated officer shall cause criminal proceedings to be instituted against the person or persons causing or permitting the continuation of the nuisance. 
    When, in the opinion of the designated officer, a nuisance results in a condition that creates an immediate, serious and imminent threat to the health or safety of the public, the official may have the necessary work done to abate the nuisance whether or not notice to require the owner or occupant of the premises to abate the nuisance has been given. 
(Code 1959, § 22-17; Ord. No. O-93-260, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 26-8. - City's costs declared lien. 
    Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and collected as provided for by law. Such lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied. 
(Code 1959, § 22-17) 
Secs. 26-9-26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEED CONTROL 

Secs. 26-21-26-27.7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-94-113, adopted May 24, 1994, eff. June 1, 1994 repealed previous Weed Control ordinance, found in §§ 26-21-26-27.7, and was replaced by §§ 26-28 through 26-28.8. 
Sec. 26-28. - Authority for and purpose of article. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to section 38(18) of the Lynchburg City Charter and Section 15.1-11 of the Code of Virginia, in order to promote the general welfare of the city and the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience and morale of its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. O-94-113, 5-24-94, eff. 6-1-94) 
Sec. 26-28.1. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to these words when used in this article: 
(a)  "Neglected property" shall include any property which contains weeds that violate the provisions of this article and whose owner/occupant has failed to cut the weeds after receiving notice from the city. 
(b)  "Owner" shall mean and include the owner or occupant of any parcel of real estate, including but not limited to any person in possession thereof having charge thereof as an executor, administrator, trustee, guardian or agent, and the beneficiary of any easement or right of use thereof. 
(c)  "Weeds" shall include any plant, grass or other vegetation (herbaceous or woody) over 12 inches in height, excluding trees, ornamental shrubbery, vegetable and flower gardens purposefully planted and maintained by the property owner or occupant free of weed hazard or nuisance, cultivated crops, or undisturbed woodland not otherwise in violation. 
(Ord. No. O-94-113, 5-24-94, eff. 6-1-94; Ord. No. O-95-235, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 26-28.2. - Prohibited growth. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of any property, either vacant or developed, situated in the city to allow weeds to reach a stage of growth wherein it causes a public nuisance as defined in section 26-1 of this article. 
    Weeds shall be cut on properties zoned for agricultural or conservation purposes, used as farmland, or vacant city-owned property when such weeds are within 50 feet of a residence. 
(Ord. No. O-94-113, 5-24-94, eff. 6-1-94; Ord. No. O-95-235, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 26-28.3. - Violation. 
    Any owner or occupants coming under the provisions of this article who shall fail to cause such weeds, as defined in section 26-28.1, to be cut and/or removed from such property or premises within the time specified in the notice referred to in section 26-28.4 will be deemed to be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-94-113, 5-24-94, eff. 6-1-94) 
Sec. 26-28.4. - Notice to cut, remove. 
    The owner or occupants of property situated in the city shall be, and are hereby, required to cut and/or remove all weeds as defined in section 26-28.1. It shall be the duty of the department of community planning and development to serve notice on the owner or owners to cause such grass, weeds, other foreign growth to be cut and/or removed from the premises within ten calendar days after notification. 
(Ord. No. O-94-113, 5-24-94, eff. 6-1-94; Ord. No. O-00-163, 8-8-00) 
Sec. 26-28.5. - Service of notice-Generally. 
    All notices to comply with the provisions of this article shall be served either by personal service, publication, posting or by certified mail and such procedures shall be deemed the equivalent of personal service. If the owner or owners of any unoccupied lot or premises is not a resident of the city and does not have an agent in the city upon whom notice can be served, notice may be given by sending the same by certified mail to the last-known address of the nonresident owner. The last-known address of the owner shall be that shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records. Nonresident owners shall also have ten calendar days to comply with said directive. 
(Ord. No. O-94-113, 5-24-94, eff. 6-1-94; Ord. No. O-00-163, 8-8-00) 
Sec. 26-28.6. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Citizens may contact the department of community planning and development, which shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this article. The director of the department of community planning and development shall have the authority to delegate duties and powers to other appropriate agencies and individuals to assist the department of community planning and development in the enforcement of this article. Whenever the words "director of community planning and development" are used in this article, they shall include all the agencies or individuals to which the director of community planning and development delegates enforcement powers, except where the contexts clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(b)  The department of community planning and development shall have the authority, whenever deemed appropriate, to have such weeds on property or on such portions of the property as deemed appropriate cut and/or removed and to restrict their future growth by the city's agents or employees, in which event, the costs and expenses thereof, shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner or owners of such property and may be collected by the city in the same manner as taxes and levies are collected and all unpaid costs and expenses shall constitute a lien against such property. 
    Any owner may avoid any liability to the city provided abatement is completed prior to the initiation of the abatement process by the city's designated agent. 
(Ord. No. O-94-113, 5-24-94, eff. 6-1-94) 
Sec. 26-28.7. - Application for removal of weeds. 
(a)  Whenever any person believes that the provisions of this article are being violated, such person can make written application to the department of community planning and development and the department shall examine the condition of the property described in such application. If the department of community planning and development determines that the provisions of this article are being violated, the owner/occupant of the offending property shall be given notice as provided in section 26-28.5 of this article and shall be requested to remove the weeds from the property within ten calendar days of the delivery or mailing of the notice. 
(b)  If the owner of the property cannot be found within the city after a reasonable search, notice shall be sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner as provided in section 26-28.5 of this article and a copy of the notice shall be posted on the property in a conspicuous place and such procedures shall be deemed the equivalent of personal service. 
(c)  If the owner/occupant of the property does not cut the weeds within ten calendar days of the delivery or mailing of the notice or within ten calendar days of the posting of the notice, whichever period is greater, the department of community planning and development shall declare the property to be "neglected property," and such designation shall remain in full force and effect until the owner gives the department of community planning and development adequate assurances that the property will be properly maintained in regard to weeds in the future. 
(d)  Once the department of community planning and development designates a parcel of property to be "neglected property," the person or organization that made application to the department shall be authorized to go onto the property as an agent of the city at the applicant's sole cost and expense to cut, remove and restrict the future growth of the offending weeds. The applicant shall be responsible for taking all precautions necessary to cut, remove and restrict the growth of offending weeds in a safe and proper manner. Chain saws shall not be used unless specifically authorized by the department of community planning and development. 
(e)  Neither the city, or its employees and officials shall be liable for any damages or injuries caused by cutting, removing or restricting the future growth of weeds from a "neglected property" and shall not be liable for any damages, injuries or expenses incurred by any applicant or any other person in cutting, removing or restricting the future growth of weeds. 
(f)  The provisions of this article shall not authorize an applicant to enter onto property to remove trees or shrubbery unless the branches, limbs, or other parts of the trees or shrubbery extend or protrude onto private property in a manner which constitutes a danger to citizens or property or where the limbs or branches are likely to fall in such a manner as to endanger private citizens or property. If the department of community planning and development determines that the trees or shrubbery constitute a danger to private citizens or property, the applicant may be authorized to cut and remove such trees and shrubbery that have been designated for removal by the department of community planning and development in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-94-113, 5-24-94, eff. 6-1-94; Ord. No. O-00-163, 8-8-00) 
Sec. 26-28.8. - Penalty for violation of this article. 
    Violations of any provision of this article shall be punishable as follows: 
(a)  For a first offense within one year, a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  For a second offense within one year, a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(c)  For a third offense within one year, a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-94-113, 5-24-94, eff. 6-1-94) 
Secs. 26-29-26-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL 

Secs. 26-41-26-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-91-170, adopted July 9, 1991, eff. Sept. 1, 1991. Ord. No. O-91-227 added §§ 26-41-26-45 back into City Code until noise meters were obtained for police department. Ord. No. O-92-001, adopted Jan. 14, 1992 repealed §§ 26-41-26-45.) 
Secs. 26-46-26-50. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-51. - Declaration of findings and policy. 
    The city council hereby finds and declares that at certain levels, noise can be detrimental to the health, welfare, safety and quality of life of the inhabitants of the city, and it is in the public interest that noise should be restricted. It is, therefore, the policy of the city to reduce noise in the community and to prohibit unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises from all sources subject to its police power. 
(Ord. No. O-91-170, 7-9-91, eff. 9-1-91.) 
Sec. 26-52. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context: 
(a)  A-weighted sound level. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a type II sound level meter as specified in the American National Standards Institute for sound level meters (S1.4-1983 or a later revision thereof) using the A-weighing network. The sound level so read is designated dB(A). 
(b)  Business commercial area. As defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lynchburg, 1979 (hereinafter "Zoning Ordinance"). 
(c)  Decibel (dB). A unit for measuring the volume of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
(d)  Emergency. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
(e)  Emergency work. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
(f)  Industrial area. As defined by the Zoning Ordinance. 
(g)  Motor vehicle. Every vehicle defined as a motor vehicle by Section 46.2-100, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(h)  Noise. Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse effect on humans. 
(i)  Noise disturbance. Any sound which (i) endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; or (ii) annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or (iii) endangers or injures personal or real property. 
(j)  Person. Means any individual, corporation, cooperative, partnership, firm, association, trust, estate, private institution, group, agency, or any legal successors, representative, agent or agency thereof. 
(k)  Property boundary. An imaginary line along the ground surface and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by one person from that owned, leased or otherwise controlled by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions. 
(l)  Residential area. As defined in the Zoning Ordinance. 
(m)  Sound. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
(n)  Sound level. The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a type II sound level meter as specified in the American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (S1.4-1983 or a later revision thereof). 
(o)  Sound level meter. A type II sound level meter as specified in the American National Standards Institute specifications (S1.4-1983 or later revision thereof) and used to measure sound pressure levels. 
(Ord. No. O-91-170, 7-9-91, eff. 9-1-91.) 
Sec. 26-53. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The noise control program established by this article shall be enforced and administered by the police department. 
(Ord. No. O-91-170, 7-9-91, eff. 9-1-91) 
Sec. 26-54. - Testing of metering devices. 
    In order to implement and enforce this article effectively, the chief of police shall within a reasonable time after the effective date of this article, develop and promulgate standards and procedures for testing and validating sound level meters used in enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-91-170, 7-9-91, eff. 9-1-91.) 
Sec. 26-55. - Prohibited noise, generally. 
(a)  Prohibited noise. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to cause or permit to be caused any of the following prohibited sounds or noises. However, no person shall be charged with a violation of the provisions of this article unless (i) a complainant appears before a magistrate and requests a summons to be issued, or (ii) a violation is committed in the presence of a police officer. 
(b)  Maximum sound pressure levels. No person shall operate or permit to be operated any noise source which generates a sound pressure level exceeding the limits set forth in the table entitled "Maximum Sound Pressure Levels" when measured at or outside the property boundary of the noise source or at any point within any other property affected by the noise. When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more than one district classification, the limits of the most restrictive classification shall apply. 
(c)  Noise sensitive zones. No person shall operate or permit to be operated any noise source on any street or on any property adjacent to any school, institution of learning or court, while the same is in session, or adjacent to any building used as a place of public worship while being so used, or adjacent to any hospital which is audible inside the confines of such school, institution of learning, court, place of worship, or hospital. 
(d)  Specific prohibitions. No person shall engage in any of the following acts, among others, which are declared to be loud disturbing and unnecessary noise in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Sound producing and sound reproducing devices. No person shall operate or permit the playing of any radio, phonograph, television set, music sound system, audio player, radio receiving set, music playing device, sound producing device, record, compact disc, tape, digital music, MP3 or DVD player, musical instrument or any similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound or any loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device capable of producing or reproducing sound, regardless of whether such sound-producing or sound-reproducing machine or device is located inside of a structure or outside of or on a structure, in such a manner or with such volume as to exceed the maximum sound pressure levels set forth in section 26-56. (Prohibitions against excessive noise from radios and music systems in motor vehicles are found in section 26-58 of this article and prohibitions against excessive noise from radios and music systems in the public parks are found in subsection 28-7(b) of the City Code.) 
(2)  Yelling, shouting, etc. No person on or in any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way or on any other publicly owned property or on any privately owned property shall engage in yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except to summon aid in an emergency. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers, etc. for advertising. No person shall use or permit the use of any musical instrument, radio, phonograph, sound amplifier, public address system, or any similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound or any loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device capable of producing or reproducing sound of any kind whereby sound is cast on any highway, street or across property boundaries for the purpose of advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any performance, show, sale or display or merchandise or to any building or structure between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The use of such devices shall be permitted at other times provided they are not operated in such a manner or with such volume as to exceed the maximum sound pressure levels set forth in section 26-56. 
(4)  Shouting and crying of peddlers, etc. The shouting, yelling, whistling, screaming or and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors for the purpose of attracting attention to a performance, show, sale or display of merchandise between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is prohibited. 
(5)  Animals. Prohibitions against excessive noise from animals and fowl are found in section 7-6 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. O-91-170, 7-9-91, eff. 9-1-91; Ord. No. O-92-001, 1-14-92; Ord. No. O-11-025, 3-8-11; Ord. No. O-15-078, § 1, 9-22-15 ) 
Sec. 26-56. - Maximum sound pressure levels. 
Table: Maximum Sound Pressure Levels Receiving Land Use Category Sound Level Limit db(A) 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. Noise sensitive zone 55 50 Residential 57 52 Park and recreational 67 62 Business (commercial) 67 62 Industrial 77 77  
    Measurements in multi-family structures. In a structure used as a multi-family dwelling the police department may take measurements to determine such sound levels from common areas within or outside the structure or from other dwelling units within the structure, when requested to do so by the owner or tenant in possession and control thereof. Such measurement shall be taken at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source, with doors to the receiving area closed and windows in the normal position for the season. 
(Ord. No. O-91-170, 7-9-91, eff. 9-1-91; Ord. No. O-92-001, 1-14-92) 
Sec. 26-57. - Exemptions. 
    The following specific activities are exempt from the provisions of sections 26-55 and 26-56 herein: 
(a)  Sound created by the operation of domestic power tools such as power lawn mowers, chain saws, weed eaters, etc., used in connection with lawn care, leaf removal, gardening, tree maintenance or removal or other landscaping, lawn or timbering activities, provided the operation of said equipment is limited between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and such equipment is operated with a standard muffler or sound dissipating devices. 
(b)  Sound generated by the construction, repair, maintenance, remodeling, demolition, alteration, grading or other improvement of real property, streets, sewers or utility lines, provided such sound is limited between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(c)  Sound generated by the city in the performance of any governmental function. 
(d)  Radios, sirens, horns and bells on police, fire or other emergency response vehicles. 
(e)  Parades, fireworks or other special events or activities for which a permit has been issued by the city, within such hours as may be imposed as a condition for the issuance of the permit. 
(f)  Religious services, religious events or religious activities, including, but not limited to music, bells, chimes and organs which are a part of such religious activity. 
(g)  Sound amplifying equipment used at public parks or recreation fields provided the operation of such equipment has been approved by the department of parks and recreation. 
(h)  Non-commercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public right-of-way or public property for which a permit has been issued by the city, within such conditions as may be imposed as a condition for the issuance of the permit. 
(i)  Band performances or practices, athletic contests or practices and other school-sponsored activities on the grounds of public or private schools, provided that such activities have been authorized by school officials. 
(j)  Fire alarms and burglar alarms, prior to the giving of notice and a reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant in possession of the premises served by any such alarm to turn off the alarm. 
(k)  Sound generated for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(l)  Activities for which the regulation of noise has been preempted by federal law. 
(m)  Religious or political gatherings and other activities protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(n)  The movement of aircraft or trains which is conducted in accordance with or pursuant to applicable federal laws and regulations. 
(o)  Music or jingles by an ice cream truck or similar mobile food service vehicle, provided such vehicle may emit sounds otherwise prohibited by this subsection only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(p)  Sound or noise which is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or the health, safety, life or limb of any person, including sound or noise caused by restoration of utility service after an interruption. 
(q)  Military activities of the state or of the United States of America. 
(r)  Activities for which the regulation of noise has been preempted by federal law. 
(Ord. No. O-91-170, 7-9-91, eff. 9-1-91; Ord. No. O-15-078, § 1, 9-22-15 ) 
Sec. 26-58. - Prohibited noise from motor vehicles. 
    No person within the city limits shall: 
(a)  Operate or permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set or any tape player or any other device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in a motor vehicle in such a manner that the sound can be heard more than 25 feet from the motor vehicle. 
(b)  Sound or permit the sounding of any horn, whistle or other device on or in any vehicle, except as a warning of danger. 
    Prohibitions against other unnecessary noises in the operation of motor vehicles are found in section 25-16 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. O-91-170, 7-9-91, eff. 9-1-91) 
Sec. 26-59. - Penalties and violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Any person who commits a second or subsequent violation of this article within a 12-month period shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
Sec. 26-60. - Severability. 
    It is the intent of the city council that this article shall be construed to secure for the citizens of the city the freedom from any noise disturbance as described herein without violating any of the rights secured by the Constitution to the people. In the event that any provision hereof should ever be determined invalid for any reason, it is the intent of the city council that the remaining provisions continue in effect to the extent that they can be enforced notwithstanding such determination, and, therefore, this article is declared severable. 
(Ord. No. O-91-170, 7-9-91, eff. 9-1-91) 
Secs. 26-61-26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GRAFFITI CONTROL 

Sec. 26-71. - Definition. 
    Graffiti shall mean the unauthorized application by any means of any writing, painting, drawing, etching, scratching or marking of an inscription, word, figure, or design of any type on any public or private building or other real estate or personal property owned, operated or maintained by a governmental entity or agency or instrumentality thereof or by any private person, firm, or corporation. 
(Ord. No. O-96-065, 3-26-96) 
Sec. 26-72. - Graffiti prohibited; criminal penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or damage private or public property, by or through the application of graffiti. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-96-065, 3-26-96) 
Sec. 26-73. - Parental responsibility for damage to property. 
    In the event graffiti is applied to any public property by a minor who is living with either or both parents, the city may institute an action and recover from the parents of the minor, or either of them, the costs for damages suffered by reason of the willful destruction of, or damage to, public property by the minor. The action by the city shall be subject to any limitation on the amount of recovery set forth in Section 8.01-43 of the Code of Virginia or other applicable state law. Any recovery action brought by an owner for damages by reason of graffiti to private property shall be subject to the limitation set forth in Section 8.01-44 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. O-96-065, 3-26-96) 
Sec. 26-74. - Authority for city to remove or repair the defacement of buildings, walls, fences and other structures. 
(a)  The city manager or a designated representative is authorized to undertake or contract for the removal or repair of the defacement, by or through the application of graffiti, on any public buildings, wall, fence or other structure or any private building, wall, fence or other structure where such graffiti is visible from any public right-of-way. 
(b)  Prior to such removal, the city manager or a designated representative shall seek the written permission of the property owner or whenever possible oral permission. If the property owner fails to provide requested permission within ten days of receipt of permission request or denies the oral request, the abatement procedures set forth in sections 26-4 through 26-8 of this chapter shall be followed to effect removal or repair of the defacement. 
(c)  After receiving written permission, oral permission or giving proper notice, the city may undertake the removal or repair of the defacement. Except for those costs recovered pursuant to section 26-73 this article the removal or repair of graffiti shall be at the expense of the city; provided, however, the removal or repair work may be undertaken by volunteers, individuals required to perform community services by order of any court or inmate labor, under appropriate city supervision. 
(Ord. No. O-96-065, 3-26-96) 
Chapter 27 - OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 27-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-92-017, adopted Jan. 14, 1992, repealed § 27-1. 
Sec. 27-1.1. - Obstructing free passage. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by the Code of Virginia and its general police powers, the city does hereby adopt the following section for the purpose of ensuring the free passage of pedestrians and vehicles on the public rights-of-way, to ensure free access to public places and to prevent activities that threaten the public safety or threaten a breach of the peace. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Loiter shall mean to stand around or remain, or to park or remain parked in a motor vehicle at a public place or any other place open to the public and to engage in any conduct prohibited under this law. Loiter also means to collect, gather, congregate, or be a member of a group or a crowd of people, who are gathered together in any public place or any other place open to the public and to engage in any conduct prohibited under this law. 
    Public place shall mean any public street, road, or highway, alley, land, sidewalk, crosswalk, or other public way, or any public resort, place of amusement, park, playground, public building or grounds appurtenant thereto, school buildings or school grounds, or public parking lot or any other publicly owned property. 
    Place open to the public shall mean any place open to the public or any place to which the public is invited or may reasonably expect to be invited, and in, on, or around any privately owned place of business, private parking lot, or private institution, including shopping centers, malls, places of worship, cemeteries, or any place of amusement and entertainment whether or not a charge of admission or entry thereto is made. It includes the elevator, lobby, halls, corridors and areas open to the public of any store, office, or apartment building. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. No person shall loiter on the public sidewalks, streets, public rights-of-way or on privately owned property that is open to the public in such a manner as to create any of the following conditions: 
(1)  No person shall loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon, or otherwise remain on or collect, gather, congregate or be a member of a group of a crowd of people who are gathered together in or upon any public right-of-way or sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or any portion of privately owned property that is open to the public or utilized for public use, so as to unreasonably hinder or obstruct the free normal flow or passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. 
(2)  No person shall block or obstruct, or prevent the free access to the entrance to any building open to the public. 
(3)  No person shall obstruct, molest or interfere or attempt to obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully on or in a public right-of-way, street or highway, in a manner that would cause a reasonable person or pedestrian on a public right-of-way, street or highway to fear for his or her safety. 
(4)  No person shall engage in any conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed when such conduct occurs on or in a public right-of-way or on any privately owned property open to the public or utilized for public use. 
(5)  In order to promote the safe and orderly flow of traffic on the public streets and highways, no person shall stop a motor vehicle in such manner as to impede or render dangerous the use of the streets or highways by others and no person shall loiter on or in the public streets or highways for the purpose of engaging the operator of any motor vehicle or any passenger in a motor vehicle in conversation or any other activity while such motor vehicle is stopped on the main-traveled portion of a street or highway. 
(c)  [Lawful assembly.] Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a lawful assembly. 
(d)  [Misdemeanor.] Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-92-017, 1-14-92; Ord. No. O-03-172, 10-14-03) 
Sec. 27-2. - Adultery and fornication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit adultery or fornication. 
(Code 1959, § 22-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-344, 18.2-366. 
Sec. 27-3. - Bathing in river, etc., without proper suit. 
    No person shall, in the daytime or in the nighttime, if within view of any occupied house or public place, bathe in any river, canal, pool or creek, unless clothed in a proper bathing suit. 
(Code 1959, § 22-5) 
Charter reference- Prevention of indecent, etc., conduct, § 38(24). 
Sec. 27-4. - Panhandling. 
(a)  Purpose. Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by the Code of Virginia and its general police powers, the city does hereby adopt the following section in order to ensure the free and safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles on the public rights-of-way, to ensure free and safe access to public areas and to regulate the time, place and manner of activities that could otherwise threaten the public health, safety and welfare, while also protecting the exercise of citizens' First Amendment rights within the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings: 
    Aggressive manner means: 
(1)  Approaching, speaking to or following a person in a manner that would cause a reasonable person to fear an assault, imminent physical injury, or the imminent commission of a criminal act upon the person or upon property in the person's immediate possession; 
(2)  Touching another person without that person's consent; 
(3)  Intentionally blocking or interfering by any means with the free passage of a person; or 
(4)  Engaging in any conduct with the intention of intimidating another person into giving money or goods to any person. 
    Panhandle or panhandling means doing any of the following acts: 
(1)  Approaching someone to beg, solicit or ask for any items of value, monetary or otherwise; 
(2)  Attempting to sell or obtain compensation for an item or service for or in an amount that is at least twice its value, or an item or service that is already offered or available at no charge to the general public; or 
(3)  Attempting to sell or obtain compensation for an item or service under circumstances that would lead a reasonable person to conclude that the payment is in substance a donation. 
    Public place means any public highway or street, the median area that separates any two or more public highways or streets, a crosswalk, sidewalk, alley, park, bridge, parking lot or other public property within the city, including any building or other structure, or the grounds surrounding buildings that are open to the general public; 
    Travel lane means the portion of a public street over which motor vehicles travel. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person while in the city: 
(1)  To panhandle in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(2)  To panhandle in an aggressive manner in any public transportation vehicle, including busses and trains; 
(3)  To panhandle in an aggressive manner within 15 feet of any automatic teller machine; and 
(4)  To panhandle while standing or otherwise present in a public highway or street, a travel lane or a crosswalk, from any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle located in a travel lane. 
(5)  To ask for or solicit money or things of value in exchange for cleaning motor vehicle windows while the vehicle is in traffic on a public street. 
(6)  To distribute newspapers, newsletters, flyers or any other items to the operator or occupant of a motor vehicle while the vehicle is in traffic on a public street. 
(7)  To panhandle on private property or residential property, including driveways, parking lots, plazas, buildings, doorways, entrances and the grounds surrounding buildings and service stations, without permission from the owner or occupant. 
(8)  To ask for or solicit money or things of value from any operator or occupant of any motor vehicle in a travel lane, while standing, sitting, or otherwise occupying a public highway or street, the median area that separates any public highway or street, or from any area designated as a crosswalk. 
(d)  [Misdemeanor.] Any person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(e)  [Severability.] If any portion of this section of the City Code is for any reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this section and such invalid provision or portions thereof shall be severable. 
(Code 1959, § 22-6; Ord. No. O-00-246, 11-14-00; Ord. No. O-06-020, 2-14-06; Ord. No. O-06-156, 12-12-06) 
Charter reference- Mendicants, § 38(23). 
Sec. 27-5. - Prohibiting purchase or possession of tobacco products by minors. 
(a)  No person shall sell to, distribute to, purchase for or knowing permit the purchase by any person less than 18 years of age, knowing or having reason to believe that such person is less than 18 years of age, any tobacco product, including but not limited to cigarettes and cigars. No tobacco product may be sold from a vending machine (i) except in compliance with subsection (e) and (ii) unless notice is posted on the machine in a conspicuous manner and place indicating that the purchase or possession of tobacco products by minors is unlawful. 
(b)  No person less than 18 years of age shall purchase or possess any tobacco product including but not limited to cigarettes or cigars. The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable to the possession of tobacco products by a person less than 18 years of age making a delivery of tobacco products in pursuit of his employment. 
(c)  No person shall sell or distribute a tobacco product to any individual who does not demonstrate by producing a driver's license or similar photo identification issued by a government agency, that the individual is at least 18 years of age. Such identification is not required from an individual whom the person has reason to believe is at least 18 years of age or whom the person knows is at least 18 years of age. This subsection shall not apply to mail order sales. 
(d)  A violation of subsection (a), (b), or (c) by an individual or by a separate retail establishment shall be punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $50.00 for a first violation and a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00 for a second violation. However, a third or subsequent violation of subsection (a) shall be punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $250.00. A third or subsequent violation of subsection (b) shall be punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00 and the judge in his discretion may enter an order pursuant to subdivision 9 of Section 16.2-278.8 of the Code of Virginia. The commonwealth's attorney may bring an action to recover the civil penalty, which shall be paid into the city treasury. Any law enforcement officer may issue a summons for a violation of subsection (a), (b), or (c). 
(e)  (1)  Cigarettes shall only be sold in sealed packages provided by the manufacturer, with the required health warning. The proprietor of every retail establishment which offers for sale any tobacco product, including but not limited to cigarettes and cigars, shall post in a conspicuous manner and place a sign or signs indicating that the sale of tobacco products to any person under 18 years of age is prohibited by law. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $50.00. No filing fee or other fee or cost shall be charged to the city when instituting an action under this subsection. 
(2)  No person shall operate a vending machine which dispenses tobacco products unless such a machine is located in: 
(i)  A place that is not open to the general public and is not generally accessible to minors; or 
(ii)  A place that is open to the general public. Such a vending machine shall be inside the establishment and unless the vending machine is at least ten feet from any public entrance to the establishment, or the sale of a token is required to operate such a machine, it shall be placed within the normal unobstructed line of sight of the proprietor or his employees. 
(3)  A violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00. No filing fee or other fee or cost shall be charged to the city when instituting an action under this subsection. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to create a private cause of action. 
(Code 1959, § 22-7; Ord. No. O-96-207, 7-9-96) 
Sec. 27-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-95-307, adopted Nov. 15, 1995, repealed § 27-6. 
Sec. 27-7. - Fishing from bridges, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fish from any public bridge, causeway, trestle or viaduct within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 22-12) 
Sec. 27-8. - Gambling. 
    Any person who shall bet, wager or play at any game for money or other thing of value, in violation of the laws of the state, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 22-13) 
State Law reference- Gambling, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325 et seq. 
Sec. 27-9. - Malicious mischief, vandalism. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage, deface, injure, remove, carry or take away or otherwise unlawfully harm or assume control of any property whether public or private, real or personal, which is not his own. 
(Code 1959, § 22-14) 
State Law reference- Injuring, etc., property, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137 et seq. 
Sec. 27-10. - Intoxication, etc., in public places. 
    If any person profanely curses or swears or is intoxicated in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, such person shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and shall be taken and held in custody by the police or in the city jail until sober, or until no longer under the influence of such intoxicant. Further, a law enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or deputy or otherwise, of public inebriates to a court approved detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1959, § 22-15; Ord. of 1-10-78; Ord. No. O-88-066, § 1, 4-12-88; Ord. No. O-90-307, 10-9-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388. 
Sec. 27-11. - Removal of warning lights, barriers, etc. 
    No unauthorized person shall remove any lantern, rope, light, sign or barrier lawfully hung, stretched or erected in the streets of the city or elsewhere for the purpose of safeguarding the public. 
(Code 1959, § 22-16) 
Sec. 27-12. - Obscenity. 
    The provisions of state law governing obscene items are hereby adopted by reference by the city and shall be enforced by the police department. 
(Code 1959, §§ 22-19-22-23) 
Cross reference- Lectures, shows, etc., on sexual matters, § 6-4, indecent and obscene shows, § 6-5. 
State Law reference- Obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372 et seq. 
Sec. 27-13. - Abusive and insulting language. 
    If any person shall in the presence or hearing of another curse or abuse such other person, or use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relatives, or otherwise use such language under circumstances briefly calculated to provide a breach of the peace, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 22-18; Ord. No. O-82-200, § 1, 9-28-82) 
Sec. 27-13.1. - Profane swearing in public. 
    If any person profanely curse or swear in public he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-88-231, § 1, 9-13-88) 
State Law reference- Profane swearing, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388. 
Sec. 27-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-04-018, adopted Feb. 10, 2004, repealed § 27-14. 
Sec. 27-14.1. - Interference with law enforcement animals. 
    Any person who willfully torments, beats, kicks, strikes, injures, taunts, or otherwise mistreats an animal owned by the police department or the sheriff's department or who willfully interferes with the lawful performance of such animal in a law enforcement activity shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. Any person who willfully touches such animal in any manner after being directed not to do so by a police officer or deputy sheriff shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-95-135, 6-13-95, eff. 8-1-95) 
Sec. 27-15. - Prostitution-Generally. 
    Any person who, for money or its equivalent, commits adultery or fornication or any act in violation of Section 18.2-361 of the Code of Virginia or offers to commit adultery or fornication or any act in violation of Section 18.2-361 of the Code of Virginia, and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof, shall be guilty of being a prostitute, or prostitution, which shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 22-27; Ord. No. O-89-268, § 1, 10-10-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-346. 
Sec. 27-16. - Same-Bawdy houses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any bawdy place, or to reside in or at or visit, for immoral purposes, any such bawdy place. Each and every day such bawdy place shall be kept, resided in or visited, shall constitute a separate offense. In a prosecution under this section the general reputation of the place may be proved. 
(b)  As used in this Code, "bawdy place" shall mean any place within or without any building or structure which is used or is to be used for lewdness, assignation or prostitution. 
(Code 1959, § 22-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-347. 
Sec. 27-17. - Same-Aiding prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, with knowledge of, or good reason to believe, the immoral purpose of such visit, to take or transport or assist in taking or transporting, or offer to take or transport on foot or in any way, any person to a place, whether within or without any building or structure, used or to be used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution within this city; or procure or assist in procuring for the purpose of illicit sexual intercourse, or to give any information or direction to any person with intent to enable such person to commit an act of prostitution. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-348. 
Sec. 27-18. - Same-Using vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or chauffeur of any vehicle, with knowledge or reason to believe the same is to be used for such purpose, to use the same or to allow the same to be used for the purpose of prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, or to aid or promote such prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse by the use of any such vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-349. 
Sec. 27-18.1. - Soliciting for prostitution. 
    Any person who, within the limits of the city, offers money or its equivalent to another for the purpose of engaging in sexual acts as defined in Sections 18.2-346 and 18.2-361 of the Code of Virginia and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof shall be guilty of solicitation of prostitution and shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 22-28.1; Ord. of 2-13-79; Ord. No. O-89-268, § 1, 10-10-89; Ord. No. O-98-044, 3-24-98) 
Secs. 27-19, 27-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-11-077, adopted June 14, 2011, eff. July 1, 2011, repealed §§ 27-19, 27-20. 
Sec. 27-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-80-165 repealed § 27-21. 
Sec. 27-22. - Trespass after having been forbidden to do so. 
    If any person without authority of law goes upon or remains upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign or signs posted by such persons or by the holder of any easement or other right-of-way authorized by the instrument creating such interest to post such signs upon such lands, structures, premises or portion or area thereof at a place or places where it or they may be reasonably seen, or if any person, whether he is the owner, tenant or otherwise entitled to the use of such land, building or premises, goes upon, or remains upon such land, building or premises after having been prohibited from doing so by a court of competent jurisdiction by an order issued pursuant to Sections 16.1-253, 16.1-253.1, 16.1-278.2 through 16.1-278.6, 16.1-278.8, 16.1-278.14, 16.1-278.15, or 16.1-279.1 of the Code of Virginia, or an ex parte order issued pursuant to Section 20-103 of the Code of Virginia, and after having been served with such order, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the provisions of Sections 18.2-132 through 18.2-136 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1959, § 22-31; Ord. No. O-88-313, § 1, 12-13-88; Ord. No. O-92-240, 8-11-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119. 
Sec. 27-23. - Location of shoeshine establishments. 
    Any person who shall conduct a shoeshine establishment on the streets or sidewalks of the city shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. (Tax Code 1941, § 65) 
Cross reference- License fee for shoeshine establishments, § 36-93. 
Sec. 27-24. - Minors operating coin-operated machines. 
    It shall be unlawful for any proprietor, owner, operator, bailee, or custodian of any slot machine licensed under the provisions of section 36-104, other than vending machines which do nothing except to vend merchandise and other than machines which provide services only, knowingly to permit any person under the age of 16 years to operate the same. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. (Tax Code 1941, § 72(h)) 
Cross reference- Commercial recreation centers, § 6-61 et seq.; license fee for vending machines, slot machines, etc., § 36-104. 
Sec. 27-25. - Closeout sales, etc., restrictions. 
    During the period of a sale licensed under sections 36-85 through 36-91, the licensee shall: 
(a)  Not employ any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising and shall conduct said sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto. 
(b)  Keep available for inspecting officials at the place of sale, a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application, and make no additions whatsoever to the stock of goods set forth in said inventory. 
(c)  Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place apprising the public of the status of such goods. 
    Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. (Tax Code 1941, § 63.1(7)) 
Sec. 27-26. - Auction sales by retailers, wholesalers or manufacturers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any retail merchant, wholesale merchant or manufacturer to sell, dispose of or offer for sale at public auction, or cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at public auction, any merchandise, product or commodity whatsoever, whether the same be their property, or whether they sell the same as agents or employees of others; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to sales by trustees or receivers of a retailer, wholesaler or manufacturer who is actually going out of business, or where said sale by said trustee or receiver is a bona fide sale to subject the property sold for the benefit of the creditors of said retailer, wholesaler or manufacturer; nor to sales in judicial proceedings or sales on behalf of licensed pawnbrokers of unredeemed pledges in the manner provided by law; nor to sales of household or kitchen furniture or other personal property which has been in use, except that where any merchant, local or nonresident, shall purchase or take on consignment any used or secondhand articles for the purpose of reselling the same, the sale thereof at public auction in the city is expressly prohibited under the terms of this section; nor to the sale of the stock on hand of any person who shall have held a merchant's license for a period of one year next preceding such sale, and have been continuously in business in the city as a retail or wholesale merchant or manufacturer and who is going out of business in said city; and provided, further, that such sale at public auction of the stock on hand of such merchant or manufacturer shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, and shall not continue for more than 30 days in all, and provided further: 
(1)  That the merchandise shall be sold at public auction for cash only; 
(2)  That the merchant shall publicly and conspicuously advertise on the front of the storehouse or building in which the said auction sale is held the fact that the said merchant is going out of business; 
(3)  That at the auction sale no merchandise shall be offered except what has been a bona fide part of the stock of merchandise of said merchant for more than 60 days next preceding the commencement of the said auction sale; and 
(4)  That the merchant, before the commencement of said auction sale, shall file with the commissioner of the revenue of the city an inventory of the said merchandise to be offered at such auction sale, with the cost price to the said merchant of each article shown thereon and with an affidavit thereto attached made by the said merchant, or his duly authorized representative, to the effect that the said inventory is true and correct, that said merchant is going out of business, and that the merchandise to be offered at such auction sale is listed on said inventory and has been a bona fide part of the said merchant's stock of merchandise for more than 60 days next preceding the commencement of the said auction sale; 
(5)  That it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of or offer for sale at public auction, or cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at public auction, any merchandise whatsoever, whether the same be his property or whether he sells the same as agent or employee of others, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or at any time except in a well-lighted place so that each article offered for sale may be plainly seen by all parties bidding thereon, and all announcements made relating to the character, make or value of the article offered must be true and be made in a voice loud enough to be distinctly heard by all parties bidding thereon. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor, and each article sold or offered for sale shall constitute a separate offense under this section. (Tax Code 1941, § 27) 
Cross reference- License fee for going-out-of-business sales, etc., § 36-85. 
Sec. 27-27. - Urination or defecation in public. 
    Any person who urinates or defecates in public or in any place open to public view except in a bathroom, restroom or other facility specifically designed for such purpose shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-01-126, 6-26-01) 
Secs. 27-28-27-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CRIMES AGAINST PEACE AND ORDER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 27-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-81-158, adopted July 14, 1981, repealed § 27-37. 
Sec. 27-37.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-90-307, adopted Oct. 9, 1990, repealed § 27-37.1. See the editor's note to § 27-37.2. 
Sec. 27-37.2. - Disorderly conduct in public places. 
    A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating the risk thereof, he: 
(a)  In any street, highway, public building, or while in or on a public conveyance, or public place, engages in conduct having a tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; or 
(b)  Willfully or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature disrupts any meeting of the governing body of the City of Lynchburg or any division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if the disruption (i) prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the meeting or (ii) has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed; or 
(c)  Willfully or while intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts the operation of any school or any activity conducted or sponsored by any school, if the disruption (i) prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the operation or activity or (ii) has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed. 
    However, conduct prohibited under subsections (a), (b) or (c) shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under other provisions of the City Code or the Code of Virginia. 
    The person in charge of any building, place, conveyance, meeting, operation or activity may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purposes. 
    A person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-90-307, 10-9-90) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-90-307, adopted 10-9-90, repealed § 27-37.1, pertaining to disorderly conduct in public places, and enacted new provisions relative to the same subject and designated as a new § 27-37.2. 
Secs. 27-38-27-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RIOT AND UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Assemblies, parades and processions, § 25-358 et seq. 
State Law reference- Riot and unlawful assembly, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-404 et seq. 

Sec. 27-46. - Obstructing free passage of others. 
    Any person or persons who in any public place or on any private property open to the public unreasonably or unnecessarily obstructs the free passage of other persons to and from or within such public place or private property and who shall fail or refuse to cease such obstruction or move on when requested to do so by the owner or lessee or agent or employees of such owner or lessee or by a duly authorized law enforcement officer shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit lawful picketing. 
(Code 1959, § 22-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-404. 
Sec. 27-47. - What constitutes a riot; punishment. 
(a)  Any unlawful use, by three or more persons acting together, of force or violence which seriously jeopardizes the public safety, peace or order is riot. 
(b)  Every person convicted of participating in any riot shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, §§ 22-34, 22-36) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-405. 
Sec. 27-48. - What constitutes an unlawful assembly; punishment. 
(a)  Whenever three or more persons assembled share the common intent to advance some lawful or unlawful purpose by the commission of an act or acts of unlawful force or violence likely to jeopardize seriously public safety, peace or order, and the assembly actually tends to inspire persons of ordinary courage with well-grounded fear of serious and immediate breaches of public safety, peace or order, then such assembly is an unlawful assembly. 
(b)  Every person who participates in any unlawful assembly shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, §§ 22-34, 22-36) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-406. 
Sec. 27-49. - Remaining after warning to disperse. 
    Every person, except the owner or lessee of the premises, his family and nonrioting guests, and public officers and persons assisting them, who remains at the place of any riot or unlawful assembly after having been lawfully warned to disperse, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 22-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-407. 
Sec. 27-50. - Resisting or obstructing execution of legal process. 
    Every person acting jointly or in combination with any other person to resist or obstruct the execution of any legal process shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 22-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-409. 
Sec. 27-51. - Commission of certain offenses during state of riot or insurrection. 
    Any person, who after the publication of a proclamation by the governor, or who after lawful notice to disperse and retire, resists or aids in resisting the execution of process in any county, city or town declared to be in a state of riot or insurrection, or who aids or attempts the rescue or escape of another from lawful custody or confinement, or who resists or aids in resisting a force ordered out by the governor or any sheriff or other officer to quell or suppress an insurrection or riot, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 22-40) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-413. 
Sec. 27-52. - Injury to property or persons. 
    If any person or persons, unlawfully or riotously assembled, pull down, injure, or destroy, or begin to pull down, injure or destroy any dwelling house or other building, or assist therein, or perpetrate any premeditated injury on the person of another, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 22-41) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-414. 
Sec. 27-53. - Conspiracy; incitement, etc., to riot. 
    Any person who conspires with others to cause or produce a riot, or directs, incites or solicits other persons who participate in a riot to acts of force or violence, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-408. 
Sec. 27-54. - Dispersal of unlawful or riotous assemblies; duties of officers. 
    When any number of persons, whether armed or not, are unlawfully or riotously assembled, the police officials of the city shall go among the persons assembled or as near to them as safety will permit and command them in the name of the city immediately to disperse. If upon such command the persons unlawfully assembled do not disperse immediately, such officer may use such force as is reasonably necessary to disperse them and to arrest those who fail or refuse to disperse. To accomplish this end, the law enforcement officer may request and use the assistance and services of private citizens. Every endeavor shall be used, both by such officer and by the officer commanding any other force, which can be made consistent with the preservation of life, to induce or force those unlawfully assembled to disperse before an attack is made upon those unlawfully assembled by which their lives may be endangered. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-411. 
Sec. 27-55. - Immunity of officers and others in quelling a riot or unlawful assembly. 
    No liability, criminal or civil, shall be imposed upon any person authorized to disperse or assist in dispersing a riot or unlawful assembly for any action of such person which was taken after those rioting or unlawfully assembled had been commanded to disperse, and which action was reasonably necessary under all the circumstances to disperse such riot or unlawful assembly or to arrest those who failed or refused to disperse. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-412. 
Secs. 27-56-27-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WEAPONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Power of city council in connection with firearms, § 38(20). 
State Law reference- Dangerous use of firearms or other weapons, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-279 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 27-67. - Throwing missiles, shooting; use of bows and arrows-Generally. 
(a)  No person shall in any street or public place recklessly or intentionally throw any stone, ball, or missile of any character in such a manner as to cause bodily injury to any person or damage to the property of any person, or discharge anywhere within the city limits any firearm, or discharge an arrow from a bow, except upon a properly located and constructed gunnery or archery range, approved by the chief of police, as hereinafter provided. The above provision shall not apply to peace officials or members of the armed forces of this state or the United States while acting in performance of their duties as such. 
(b)  No minor under the age of 18 shall shoot or discharge any firearm, or arrow from a bow, except upon a properly located, constructed and approved gunnery or archery range, and then only under the immediate supervision of an adult. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall apply to the use of a bow ten pounds or less of draw weight with a blunt rubber-tipped arrow. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer in the performance of his official duties nor to any other person who's said willful act is otherwise justifiable or excusable at law in the protection of his life or property, or is otherwise specifically authorized by law. 
(e)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 33-1; Ord. No. O-81-166, § 1, 8-11-81; Ord. No. O-92-056, 2-25-92; Ord. No. O-06-080, 6-27-06; Ord. No. O-11-077, 6-14-11, eff. 7-1-11) 
Sec. 27-67.01. - Pneumatic guns. 
(a)  As used in this section, "pneumatic gun" means any implement, designed as a gun, that will expel a BB or a pellet by action of pneumatic pressure. "Pneumatic gun" includes a paintball gun that expels by action of pneumatic pressure plastic balls filled with paint for the purpose of marking the point of impact. 
(b)  Pneumatic guns may be used at facilities approved for shooting ranges, or on or within private property with permission of the owner or legal possessor. Use thereof must be conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property. "Reasonable care" means that the gun is being discharged so that the projectile will be contained on the property by a backstop, earthen embankment, or fence. The discharge of projectiles across or over the bounds of the property shall create the rebuttable presumption that the use of the pneumatic gun was not conducted with reasonable care. Minors may use such implements only under the following conditions: 
(1)  Minors under the age of 16 must be supervised by a parent, guardian, or other adult supervisor approved by a parent or guardian and shall be responsible for obeying all laws, regulations, and restrictions governing the use thereof. 
(2)  Minors 16 years of age and older must have the written consent of a parent or guardian and shall be responsible for obeying all laws, regulations and restrictions governing the use thereof. 
(3)  Training of minors in the use of pneumatic guns shall be done only under direct supervision of a parent, guardian, junior reserve officers training corps instructor, or a certified instructor. Training of minors above the age of 16 may also be done without direct supervision if approved by the minor's instructor, with the permission of and under the responsibility of a parent or guardian, and in compliance with all requirements of this section. Ranges and instructors may be certified by the National Rifle Association, a state or federal agency that has developed a certification program, any service of the department of defense, or any person authorized by these authorities to certify ranges and instructors. 
(4)  Commercial or private areas designated for use of pneumatic paintball guns may be established and operated for recreational use in areas where such facilities are permitted by the city's zoning ordinance. Equipment designed to protect the face and ears shall be provided to participants at such recreational areas, and signs must be posted to warn against entry into the paintball area by persons who are unprotected or unaware that paintball guns are in use. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 6-14-11, No. O-11-077, eff. 7-1-11) 
Sec. 27-67.1. - Same-Exception. 
(a)  The provisions of section 27-67 shall not apply to shotguns discharging pellets using number 5, 6, 7, 8 or 9 shot under the following conditions: 
(1)  On land that is 25 acres or more of contiguous area, and 
(2)  Used primarily for agricultural purposes, and 
(3)  The landowner has applied for an annual permit from the chief of police to use his property for this purpose. 
The permit shall be granted by the chief of police or his designee if the application meets the requirements of this section, and 
(4)  The landowner has agreed to allow the city's wildlife management specialists on his property to cull deer under the conditions set forth in a Memorandum of Understanding between the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries and the city. A copy of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries and the city shall be kept in the police department and shall be available for review upon request. It shall be the responsibility of any landowner applying for a permit to review the memorandum of understanding and become familiar with its requirements. 
(5)  Any person or persons discharging a shotgun as set forth above shall, at all times, while engaged in such activity, have in his possession written permission from the landowner to discharge such weapon on the premises. 
(6)  All hunting must be done in compliance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the rules and regulations of the Board of Game and Inland Fisheries. 
(7)  00 to #4 shot may be used in shotguns for the sole purpose of hunting deer. 
(8)  No person or persons shall hunt deer in the city by the use of a dog or dogs. 
(b)  No person shall discharge a shotgun within 100 yards of any building, dwelling, street, sidewalk, alley, roadway or public land or public place within the city limits. 
(c)  Any person engaging in hunting must comply with any conditions or restrictions imposed by the chief of police as a part of the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 33-1; Ord. of 9-7-76; Ord. No. O-92-048, 2-11-92; Ord. No. O-92-372, 12-8-92; Ord. No. O-02-126, 7-9-02; Ord. No. O-02-157, 8-13-02; Ord. No. O-10-107, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 27-67.2. - Same-Exception. 
(a)  The provisions of section 27-67 shall not apply to any hunting performed by or authorized by the city's chief animal warden as part of the city's effort to reduce the size of its deer population. Provided that any hunting authorized by the city's chief animal warden must be conducted in accordance with any conditions or restrictions imposed by the chief animal warden and in compliance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the rules and regulations of the Board of Game and Inland Fisheries. 
(b)  Any person obtaining authorization from a conservation police officer pursuant to Section 29.1-529 of the Code of Virginia permitting the killing of deer must comply with the provisions of this section and all killing of deer must be authorized by the city's chief animal warden under such conditions and restrictions as the chief animal warden deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. O-92-048, 2-11-92; Ord. No. O-10-107, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 27-67.3. - Bow hunting. 
(a)  The provisions of section 27-67 shall not apply when discharging an arrow from a bow for the purposes of deer hunting within the city limits during the early special urban archery season, the early special archery season, the full general firearms deer season or the late special archery season, as designated in regulations promulgated by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The landowner has applied for an annual permit from the chief of police to use his property for this purpose. The permit shall be granted by the chief of police or his designee if the application meets the requirements of this section, and 
(2)  The landowner has agreed to allow the city's wildlife management specialists on his property to cull deer under the conditions set forth in a Memorandum of Understanding with the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries. A copy of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries and the city shall be kept in the police department and shall be available for review upon request. It shall be the responsibility of any landowner applying for a permit to review the Memorandum of Understanding and become familiar with its requirements. 
(3)  Any person discharging a bow as set forth above shall, at all times, while engaged in such activity, have in his possession written permission from the landowner to discharge such a weapon on his premises, and 
(4)  All hunting must be done in compliance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the rules and regulations of the Board of Game and Inland Fisheries, and 
(b)  Discharge of a bow will be from an elevated position located at least 12 feet above the ground. 
(c)  No person shall discharge a bow from, over or across any street, sidewalk, alley, roadway or public land or public place within the city limits or toward any building or dwelling in such a manner that an arrow may strike it. 
(d)  No person shall hunt deer in the city by use of dog or dogs. 
(e)  Any person engaging in deer hunting must comply with any conditions and restrictions imposed by the chief of police as part of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O-02-124, 6-25-02; Ord. No. O-02-126, 7-9-02; Ord. No. O-02-157, 8-13-02; Ord. No. O-02-162, 9-10-02; Ord. No. O-10-107, 9-14-10) 
Sec. 27-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-06-079, adopted June 27, 2006, repealed § 27-68. 
Secs. 27-69, 27-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-06-157, adopted Dec. 12, 2006, repealed §§ 27-69 and 27-70. 
Sec. 27-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-92-158 repealed § 27-71. 
Secs. 27-71.1-27-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-06-157, adopted Dec. 12, 2006, repealed §§ 27-71.1-27-73. 
Secs. 27-74-27-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GUNNERY RANGES 

Sec. 27-81. - Certificate of approval required. 
    It shall be the duty of every person who has installed or who shall hereafter install, set up or operate a gunnery or archery range, to apply to the chief of police for a certificate of approval of said range before operating the same. 
(Code 1959, § 33-1) 
Sec. 27-82. - Minimum requirements. 
    Gunnery ranges to be approved by the chief of police shall comply with the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  All outdoor ranges shall be so located as not to be within 200 yards, at the nearest point, of any city street, alley, right-of-way, parkway, playfield, or other public property, or any dwelling house or commercial establishment, except those occupied by the range operator. 
(b)  All such outdoor ranges shall be clearly marked as such with sufficient signs indicating the location of the range and warning the public. 
(c)  Adequate backstops shall be provided to confine all shot, shells, bullets, pellets or other missiles of similar character. 
(d)  All indoor ranges located entirely within an enclosed building shall have adequate backstops to confine all shot, shells, bullets, pellets or other missiles of similar character. 
(Code 1959, § 33-1) 
Sec. 27-83. - Conditions of issuance. 
    The chief of police in issuing certificates of approval for gunnery ranges may specify the time and manner of shooting and the type of firearm or ammunition which may be used on such ranges. No such certificate of approval shall be issued, except upon a finding by the chief of police after an inspection of the premises involved that the discharge of arrows from a bow, or the discharge of firearms upon such range will not jeopardize life or property, or be a source of annoyance to persons in the area. The certificate of approval may be revoked by the chief of police if the conditions change. No certificate of approval for such range shall be issued, except upon the application of the owner, lessee or persons lawfully in possession of the land, upon which is located the range sought to be approved. 
(Code 1959, § 33-1) 
Sec. 27-84. - Appeal from denial, revocation. 
    In the event the chief of police shall deny or revoke the certificate of approval as herein provided, such applicant shall have the right to appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager within ten days from the date of such denial or revocation. 
(Code 1959, § 33-1) 
Secs. 27-85-27-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Secs. 27-96-27-101. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 27-96-27-101 were repealed by Ord. No. O-91-276, adopted Nov. 12, 1991, eff. Jan. 1, 1992, and were replaced by §§ 27-102-27-115. 
Sec. 27-102. - Applicability. 
    This article is intended to regulate the activities and responsibilities of those persons who purchase, lease or rent, and those persons who own or conduct the business of selling, leasing, renting, maintaining or monitoring alarm systems, devices or services. It is further intended to encourage the improvement in reliability of those systems, devices and services and to ensure that emergency response personnel will not be unduly diverted from responding to actual criminal activity or other emergencies as a result of responding to false alarms. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92) 
Sec. 27-103. - Definitions. 
    Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article. 
    Alarm or alarm system: Any mechanical device, electrical device or series of devices, that are used to detect unauthorized entry into buildings or alerting others of any unlawful activity, fire or other emergency within buildings or on premises. 
    Alarm administrator: The department of emergency services director, who oversees the alarm coordinator and enforces the provisions of this article. 
    Alarm agent: Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: maintaining, servicing, or repairing any alarm or alarm system in or on any building, place or premises. Any person whose duties consist solely of resetting an alarm following activation shall not be deemed to be an alarm agent. 
    Alarm business: The business, by an individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity, of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm or alarm system in or for any building, structure or facility. 
    Alarm coordinator: The person designated by the alarm administrator to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this article. 
    Alarm user: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or business who leases, rents, purchases or uses any monitored or proprietor alarm, alarm system, device or service. 
    Audible alarm: A device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry of premises or fire which when activated generates an audible sound on the premises. 
    Automatic dialing device: A device that is interconnected to a telephone line and programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice methods or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. 
    False alarm: Any activation of an alarm system by failure, malfunction, accidental tripping, misoperation, misuse or negligent maintenance by the owner/user or lessee of the alarm system or his employee or agent or any other activation of an alarm system that results in a response by City of Lynchburg emergency personnel where an emergency situation does not exist. False alarms shall not include signals willfully activated by security alarm users upon good faith belief that an actual fire or attempted burglary, holdup, assault or unlawful entry is about to occur. 
    False alarm appeal's committee: A committee composed of one sworn police officer, firefighter, sheriff's deputy, and a member of the department of emergency services with the department of emergency services director as chairman. 
    Monitored alarm: A device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry in premises, fire or medical emergency and which, when activated, generates an inaudible signal to a monitoring station. A monitored alarm may also generate an audible sound on the premises. 
    Monitoring: The process by which a monitoring company or alarm installation company receives a signal from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the municipality for the purpose of summonsing emergency personnel to the alarm site. 
    Permittee: Any person who is granted an alarm user permit under this article. 
    Person: An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number. 
    Response: The dispatch of emergency personnel that results when the monitoring company or alarm installation company requests an alarm dispatch to the municipality. 
    Small business: Business occupying floor space of 2,000 square feet or less and employs no more than five employees including owners and officers. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92; Ord. No. O-11-068, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 27-104. - Alarm business. 
    The duties of an alarm business shall be as follows: 
(a)  To install an alarm system that meets or exceeds the minimum American National Standards Institute, (ANSI) requirements for the appropriate installations and to use control panels tested for conformance to the Security Industry Association's Control Panel Standard, C.P.-01. 
(b)  To be available to maintain the alarm system in good working order and to take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms. 
(c)  To instruct each of its alarm users and/or the principal occupants of the buildings or premises protected by an alarm system in the proper operation of the system. Such instruction will specifically include all necessary instructions in turning on and off the system and in avoiding false alarms. 
(d)  To provide each purchaser and user with a copy of the pertinent provisions of this article relating to alarm user duties and false alarm assessments. 
(e)  Upon selling, leasing or renting an inaudible alarm system: 
(1)  To insure the City of Lynchburg's Department of Emergency Services, alarm coordinator is kept informed as to the name and telephone number of the primary person, and at least one alternate responsible for responding to the premises when the alarm has been activated. 
(2)  To organize its central receiving station in order to be able to readily and positively identify the type of alarm, i.e., fire, burglary, robbery, or medical emergency, and the location of the alarm if there is more than one system. 
(3)  To maintain current records as to each of these alarm systems, devices, or services which shall include the name of the owner or occupant of the premises, the name and telephone number of the user or primary person, and at least one alternate responsible for responding to the premises when the alarm is activated, and information concerning whether the alarm system includes an audible alarm. 
(4)  To make notification of activated alarm systems in the manner prescribed by city policy, including reasonable information concerning the alarm system. 
(5)  To make every reasonable effort to arrange for either the alarm user, alarm agent or other responsible representative to go to the premises of an activated alarm system in order to be available to assist city emergency personnel in determining the reason for activation and securing the premises. 
(f)  An alarm business that purchases alarm system accounts from another person or acquires another alarm business shall notify the City of Lynchburg Alarm Coordinator of such information and provide details as may be reasonable requested by the alarm coordinator. Said written notice shall be sent within 30 days of purchase. 
(g)  Upon ceasing responsibility for a monitored alarm pursuant to this article, the alarm business shall promptly notify the alarm coordinator. Said written notice shall be sent within ten days, giving pertinent information associated with the alarm site. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92; Ord. No. O-11-068, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 27-105. - Alarm user and property owner/occupant responsibility. 
    The duties of an alarm user shall be as follows: 
(a)  Obtain an alarm users permit for their alarm system as required in section 27-106. 
(b)  Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms. 
(c)  To instruct all personnel who are authorized to place the system or device into operation in the appropriate method of operation. 
(d)  To inform personnel who are authorized to place the alarm system into operation of the provisions of this article emphasizing the importance of avoiding false alarms. A current copy of the pertinent provisions of this article shall be maintained on the premises and be made available to persons who are authorized to place an alarm system into operation. 
(e)  The owner/occupant has the responsibility of re-setting and/or returning all alarm systems to service after an alarm trip or maintenance. The emergency response personnel will not re-set any alarm system. 
(f)  To inactivate or cause to be inactivated audible alarms within 30 minutes of the notification of its activation. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92; Ord. No. O-11-068, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 27-106. - Alarm user's permits required. 
(a)  Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user's permit from the City of Lynchburg Department of Emergency Services for each alarm system. No alarm system located within the city shall be activated without the alarm user having first obtained an alarm user permit as described within this subsection. Such a permit shall be obtained from the City of Lynchburg within 120 days from the effective date of this article or prior to the use of an alarm system which is installed subsequent to the expiration of 120 days from the effective date of this article. 
(1)  The alarm user shall purchase an annual alarm user's permit for each alarm system within the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg, which is intended and/or designed, when activated, to generate a response from one or more municipal public safety agencies. Effective on July 1, 1996, and for each year thereafter, unless otherwise changed by city council, the annual fee for the alarm permit shall be paid by the "alarm user" and imposed as follows: 
a.  Business/industry alarm systems: $55.00; 
b.  Small business, non-profit and governmental agencies alarm system: $45.00; 
c.  Residential alarm system: $30.00; and 
d.  The city retains the right to pro-rate permits that are obtained after July 1 of each year. 
NOTE: An "audible alarm" system unconnected to a central station may require a user permit for one year should the alarm generate more than four false alarm responses in a single permit year from any public safety agency. All user permit requirements for audible alarm systems may be appealed to the false alarm appeal's committee. 
(2)  The application for an alarm user's permit shall be made on an alarm permit application form which is available from the department of emergency services, alarm coordinator and on-line at lynchburgva.gov. Payment of the permit fee for each alarm system shall accompany the application to the city collections division. 
(3)  Every person applying for more than one alarm permit at one location shall pay the alarm user's permit fee for each permit up to five permits. Regardless of the number of permits, the total fee shall not exceed five times the single permit fee for any one location. 
(4)  The initial alarm permit may be obtained at any time; however, all alarm permits expire on June 30 with renewal due between May 15 and June 30 of each year following the issuance of the permit. Permits are not transferable from one user to another user, or from one address to another address and no permit refunds will be issued for disconnecting alarm service during an alarm year. It shall be the duty of the alarm user to maintain current permit information. 
(b)  No alarm system receivers shall be installed at the Lynchburg Department of Emergency Services Emergency Communications Center. 
(c)  An alarm user whose permits has been revoked may apply for a reissued alarm permit in accordance with the fee schedule in subsection 27-108 (j). 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92; Ord. No. O-93-112, 4-27-93; Ord. No. O-96-140, 5-28-96; Ord. No. O-00-009, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00; Ord. No. O-11-068, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 27-107. - Prohibition of automatic dialing devices. 
(a)  No person shall use or cause to be used any automatic telephone device or telephone attachment that directly or indirectly causes a public primary telephone trunk line of the Lynchburg Emergency Communications Center to be utilized and then reproduces a pre-recorded message or signal. 
(b)  Within 60 days after the effective date of this article all existing automatic dialing devices programmed to select a public primary telephone trunk line of the city and then reproduce any pre-recorded message or signal shall be disconnected. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92) 
Sec. 27-108. - False alarms; penalty assessments and permit revocation. 
(a)  Any alarm system which has more than two false alarms within a permit year and/or has had their permit revoked and continues to have false alarms, shall be subject to service assessments as hereinafter provided and any alarm system which has ten or more false alarms within a permit year shall be subject to permit revocation as hereinafter provided. NOTE: Section 27-108 shall not apply to newly (first time/original alarm systems) installed/activated alarm systems for the first 30 days of operation. 
(b)  Notice of service assessment: Notice from the city to any permit holder shall be deemed to have been given on the date such notice is deposited in the U.S. mail, first class postage, prepaid, and addressed to the permit holder at the address shown in the city's permit records or delivered by personal service to the premises. Failure to mail notice to an alarm business shall not impair or invalidate any notice furnished to the alarm user. The notice of service assessment shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The amount of the assessed fee and number of false alarms during the permit year. 
(2)  The dates and times that emergency personnel responded to each alarm. 
(3)  The fact that the service assessment must be paid within 30 days following the date of the notice. 
(4)  The notice of intent to revoke the permit after ten false alarms during the permit year. 
(5)  The right of appeal to the false alarm appeal's committee of which the department of emergency services director is chairman. 
(c)  If the City of Lynchburg records more than two false alarms within a permit year for any alarm system, the city shall notify the alarm user of such fact and direct that the user pay to the city a service assessment in the sum of $50.00 for the third false alarm recorded, $50.00 for the fourth, $50.00 for the fifth, $75.00 for the sixth, $100.00 for the seventh, $125.00 for the eighth, $150.00 for the ninth, $175.00 for the tenth, and $200.00 for the eleventh and all successive false alarms. After the sixth false alarm in one permit year the alarm user may be requested to submit a report to the department of emergency services, alarm coordinator, describing the actions taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms. A copy of such notification shall be sent to the alarm business providing service or inspection to the user. 
(d)  If the alarm user submits a report as requested, the alarm coordinator shall determine if the actions taken or to be taken will prevent the reoccurrence of false alarms. The city shall notify the alarm user and the relevant alarm business in writing whether the permit will be revoked at that time. If the alarm permit is not to be revoked, then notification will be provided that if any subsequent false alarms occur within the permit year, the permit may be revoked without further notice on the tenth day after the date of the notice of revocation. 
(e)  If no report is submitted as requested, or if the city determines that the actions taken or to be taken by the alarm user will not prevent the reoccurrence of false alarms, the city shall give notice to the alarm user and alarm business providing service that the permit will be revoked effective on the tenth day after the date of the notice of revocation. 
(f)  If the alarm user fails to pay a service assessment within the time provided after receipt of notification from the city as provided with this section, the city may summarily revoke the alarm user's permit through notification to the alarm user and to the alarm business providing service to the user, which notification shall be effective on the tenth day following the date of said notice of revocation. 
(g)  An alarm user whose permit has been revoked shall be furnished notification of such revocation and shall within three days after the date of said notice of revocation discontinue the use of the alarm system. It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to fail to disconnect such system within three days as herein defined and such failure shall subject the alarm user to the penalties hereinafter provided. 
(h)  For purposes of any notification to be provided under the terms of this article, such notice shall be effective if the same is mailed addressed to the alarm user at the address furnished to the city in connection with a permit application or at such other address as the alarm user may furnish in writing to the city and such notice shall be effective if mailed to the alarm business at the address provided to the city in connection with the filing of alarm user instructions, or alternatively, to the last known address of said alarm business. 
(i)  After permit revocation, the alarm user shall take steps to alleviate the false alarm problem. Alarm permits which have been revoked may be reinstated after a report is submitted describing corrective actions taken along with an alarm user application form as described in section 1-5(A) and payment of a reissued users alarm permit fee. 
First reissued users permit in original one-year period-$50.00 
Second reissued users permit in original one-year period-$100.00 
Third reissued users permit in original one-year period-$150.00 
Fourth and each reissued users permit in original one-year period-$200.00 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92; Ord. No. O-00-009, 01-11-00, eff. 01-01-00; Ord. No. O-11-068, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 27-109. - General regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally activate any alarm for any reason other than to warn of an unlawful act, fire or other emergency. The testing of an alarm or alarm system shall not constitute a false alarm when permittee notifies the appropriate monitoring company prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration, or installation of systems which would normally result in an emergency response. 
(b)  No person or business who purchases, leases, rents or uses an audible alarm system, device or service which is not connected to a central receiving station of an alarm business shall allow said alarm to sound in excess of 30 minutes. An audible alarm which has emitted an alarm signal in excess of 30 minutes is hereby declared to be a nuisance. If service is unavailable from an alarm business or agent responsible for the system, the city may cause the alarm to be disconnected with the cost therefor to be a charge payable by the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92; Ord. No. O-93-112, 4-27-93) 
Sec. 27-110. - Removal of unlawful equipment. 
    In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city may, whenever it receives knowledge of the use of any device or attachment not operated or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article, order the removal of such device or attachment. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92) 
Sec. 27-111. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  In addition to the unlawful acts hereinabove specified, it shall be unlawful for any alarm user to activate an alarm system for use within the city without first obtaining a permit as required by this article. It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to fail to disconnect an alarm system after the revocation of an alarm user's permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article. 
(b)  Enforcement: The city alarm administrator, alarm coordinator, city fire marshal and city police officers are authorized to initiate enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment, and each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The conviction or punishment of any person for violation of the provisions of this article or for failing to secure a permit as required by this article shall not relieve the person from paying the permit fee due and unpaid at the time of the conviction, nor shall payment of any permit fee prevent criminal prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this article. All remedies shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy to the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. The amount of any permit fee or service assessment shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent permit fee or service assessment. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92; Ord. No. O-11-068, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 27-112. - Confidentiality. 
    The information furnished and secured pursuant to this article shall be confidential and shall not be subject to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92) 
Sec. 27-113. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  Any party aggrieved by a decision of the alarm coordinator or his designee made pursuant to section 27-108 may, within ten calendar days of receipt of notice of the decision, appeal to the false alarm appeal's committee. A copy of the appeal request shall be sent to the alarm administrator or his designee. 
(b)  The request for an appeal shall set forth the specific objection to the decision of the alarm administrator or his designee which form the basis of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92; Ord. No. O-11-068, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 27-114. - Civil liability. 
(a)  Neither the police department nor the fire department, nor any other agency of the City of Lynchburg, shall be under any obligation or duty to accord any priority to an alarm system, or to any person by reason of this article. The City of Lynchburg specifically disclaims liability for any damages which may be caused by the failure of the City of Lynchburg to respond to an emergency or alarm, or any damages caused by a reasonable response to an emergency alarm. 
(b)  The City of Lynchburg, its officers, employees and agents shall not assume any duty or responsibility for the installation, maintenance, operation, repair or effectiveness of any privately owned alarm system, such duties or responsibilities being solely those of the alarm user and relevant alarm business. Additionally, it shall be solely the responsibility of the alarm user and relevant alarm business to silence an activated alarm and thereafter to reset the same. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92) 
Sec. 27-115. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, clause, or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-91-276, 11-12-91, eff. 1-1-92) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF LYNCHBURG, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
THE CHARTER 
AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
VOLUME II 
____________ 
Published in 1981 by Order of the City Council 
Republished in 2014 
____________ 

> 
Chapter 28 - PARKS, PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Streets and other public places, § 68 et seq. 
Cross reference- Department of recreation and cultural services, § 2-248 et seq.; museum, § 2-271 et seq.; armory, Ch. 8; city market, Ch. 13; library, Ch. 24; planning, Ch. 30; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 35; trees and vegetation, Ch. 38. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Traffic. 
(a)  Speed limit; etc. No person shall drive a vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 25 miles an hour over the roads within park enclosures, and no person shall drive within such enclosures except on the roadways; nor shall any vehicle except vehicles used exclusively for passengers be permitted to enter the park enclosures at any time, except by consent of the director of recreation and cultural services. 
(b)  Powers of city manager. The city manager shall expressly have authority and power to impose police regulations for the control of traffic and parking in the public parks and the public cemeteries as in his discretion may seem most to the public interest, including, but not by way of limitation, the power to fix a lower maximum speed limit than 25 miles an hour on the roads, or any portions thereof, within such parks or cemeteries; to prohibit other than one-way traffic upon any such road, or portion thereof; to set aside spaces on such roads in which no parking shall be permitted; and to regulate, as well as prohibit, the use of all off-the-road motorized vehicles, which classification of vehicles shall include, but is not limited to, trailbikes, minibikes and four-wheel-drive all-terrain vehicles, within such parks or cemeteries or any portion thereof; provided, however, that no such regulation shall be effective until signs are erected, or the roads otherwise marked so as to apprise an ordinarily observant person of the existence of such regulation. Thereafter, it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the requirements of such signs. 
(Code 1959, § 23-1; Ord. of 10-26-76; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81) 
Cross reference- Traffic generally, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference- Authority to fix parking regulations generally, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 28-2. - Spitting in buildings. 
    No person shall spit on the floor or sides of the pavilions or any building in any park enclosures. 
(Code 1959, § 23-3) 
Sec. 28-3. - Consumption or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages prohibited in parks, on playgrounds, school grounds and streets. 
    Any person who shall take a drink of an alcoholic beverage or who shall tender a drink thereof to another, whether accepted or not, or who possesses any uncapped or open container of any kind which contains an alcoholic beverage, at or in any public park, public playground, public street, public school ground or within any vehicle located on or in any public park, public playground, public school ground or public street shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 23-3.1; Ord. No. O-90-228, 7-10-90; Ord. No. O-92-017, 1-14-92; Ord. No. O-92-038, 2-11-92) 
Sec. 28-4. - Use of parks during certain hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the city manager or his duly authorized official, to go on or enter upon, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless otherwise provided by rules and regulations, any premises or property used or operated by the city as a public park. 
(Code 1959, § 23-4) 
Sec. 28-5. - Injury to Monument Terrace. 
    No person shall run or walk upon Monument Terrace, except the walkways and steps, or in any other way injure the same, or use as a footway any part of such portion of Monument Terrace outside of the walkways provided therein. 
(Code 1959, § 23-6) 
Sec. 28-6. - Rules and regulations. 
    Rules and regulations for individual parks and playgrounds in the city may be promulgated by the director of parks and recreation, and shall be enforced within such parks and playgrounds. Violation of such rules and regulations shall be grounds for expulsion therefrom; and shall be deemed a class 1 misdemeanor. Major policy changes shall be approved by city council. (Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81; Ord. No. O-99-246, 11-9-99) 
Sec. 28-7. - Prohibited activities in public parks and other public facilities. 
    If any person shall commit any of the following activities within any of the city parks or any other public facility that has posted signs prohibiting such activities he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(a)  No one shall use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio, receiving set, tape player, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier, or any other machine or device for the producing or the recording of sound in such a manner as to be audible at a distance of 25 feet from the location of such device or to be audible beyond the boundaries of the park or other public facility, whichever distance is less, unless such person has obtained prior written permission from the director of recreation and cultural services, the director of public works or their designee(s). 
(b)  No one shall operate any motorized vehicle of any nature whatsoever, including a moped, motorcycle, or an all terrain vehicle in any portion of a city park or other public facility other than the designated parking lot or parking area unless such person has been authorized to operate a motorized vehicle in other areas of a city park or other public facility by the director of recreation and cultural services [2], the director of public works or their designee(s). 
(c)  No one shall leave a motor vehicle or other vehicle standing or parked in any established parking area or elsewhere in the city parks and recreation areas between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., and/or during other posted periods which the city parks are closed. 
(d)  No person shall commit any other activity in a city park or other public facility which activity has been expressly prohibited by a sign or signs posted by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-89-039, § 1, 2-14-89; Ord. No. O-90-227, 7-10-90) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-89-185, adopted June 27, 1989, changed the title of this officer to "director of parks and recreation." At the city's direction, "director of recreation and cultural services" has been retained in § 28-7 above until amendment at a future date. 

Sec. 28-7.1. - Prohibited activity in city stadium. 
    If any person shall commit any of the following activities within the city stadium shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(a)  No one shall use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio, receiving set, tape player, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier, or any other machine or device for the producing or the recording of sound in such a manner as to be audible at a distance of 50 feet from the location of such device unless such person has obtained prior written permission from the director of public works or his designee. 
(b)  No person shall take a drink of any alcoholic beverages or tender a drink thereof to another, whether accepted or not, in any portion of the stadium facilities except those areas of the city stadium that have been specifically designated for the consumption of alcohol. 
(c)  No one shall leave a motor vehicle or other vehicle standing or parked in any established parking area or elsewhere in the stadium facilities during the hours that the city stadium is closed. 
(d)  No person shall commit any other activity in the city stadium which activity has been prohibited by a sign or signs posted by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-89-039, § 1, 2-14-89) 
Sec. 28-7.2. - Trespass in the city parks, city stadium or other public facilities after having been forbidden to do so. 
    Any person that remains in the city parks, the city stadium or other public facilities after having been directed by city representative(s) to leave the premises of such facilities because of such persons violation of the facilities' rules and regulations shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-89-039, § 1, 2-14-89) 
Secs. 28-8-28-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CEMETERIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Cemeteries and burials, § 38(17). 
Cross reference- Department of parks and recreation, § 2-248. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for cemeteries, Code of Virginia § 15.1-14. 

Sec. 28-18. - Use restricted. 
    The city cemetery shall be used in a manner approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. O-05-093, 7-12-05) 
Sec. 28-19. - Duties of city manager. 
    The city manager shall have charge of the city cemetery and all property of the city in and about the same. He may delegate such authority to another city employee and/or enter into a contract with a third party for cemetery management. The city manager shall establish rules and regulations regarding the operation and use of the cemetery. 
(Code 1959, § 23-15; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81; Ord. No. O-05-093, 7-12-05) 
Sec. 28-20. - Powers and duties of keepers. 
    The keeper of every cemetery, whether public or private, shall have all the powers of a member of the city police within the cemetery over which he has jurisdiction, and within 100 yards thereof, and shall keep order and preserve the peace therein, and any person guilty of disorderly conduct therein or obstructing or hindering him in the discharge of such duty shall be deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 23-18) 
Sec. 28-21. - Disturbing graves, injuring trees, etc. 
    Any person who shall disturb any grave, injure, deface or remove any tombstone, wall or fence within the limits of any cemetery, or break, cut or destroy any trees, bushes, flowers or other shrubbery within such limits, without the consent of the owner of the enclosure or square within which the same may be growing, or commit any nuisance, or do any other unlawful, indecent or improper act within such limits, shall be deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 23-19) 
Secs. 28-22-28-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY STADIUM 

Sec. 28-40. - City stadium fees. 
(a)  For the use of the football field, ten percent of the gross gate receipts, with a minimum fee of $160.00, plus the following fees: 
(1)  Preparation of field, including marking and mowing, $180.00. 
(2)  Preparation of equipment: 
Scoreboard ..... $ 25.00 
Field phones ..... 5.00 
Public address system ..... 40.00 
(3)  Game service-two city employees will be furnished without cost. For each additional employee, a fee of $50.00. 
(4)  For cleaning the premises: 
Locker rooms ..... $ 50.00 
Grounds and stands ..... 260.00 
There will be no additional fee for cleaning restrooms. 
(5)  For preparation of lights and furnishing of electricity, $45.00. 
(b)  For the use of the baseball field, ten percent of the gross gate receipts, with a minimum fee of $160.00, plus the following fees: 
(1)  For preparation of equipment: 
Scoreboard ..... $ 10.00 
Public address system ..... 10.00 
(2)  Game service-one city employee will be furnished at no additional cost. For each additional employee, $10.00. 
(3)  For cleaning the premises: 
Locker rooms ..... $ 50.00 
Grounds and stands ..... 100.00 
There will be no additional fee for cleaning restrooms. 
(4)  Preparation of lights and furnishing equipment, $25.00. 
(c)  The fees charged the public schools will be 50 percent of the above required fees. 
(Ord. No. O-88-062, § 2, 3-22-88, eff. 7-1-88) 
Chapter 29 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License fee for itinerant vendors, § 36-59; peddlers, hucksters, etc., § 36-71; street merchants, § 36-98. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 29-1. - Definition. 
    The word "peddler" as used in this chapter shall mean any individual, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motortruck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, for the sale of, as well as the selling, offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject to such sale or not or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within this city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The word "peddler" shall include the term "canvasser," "solicitor," "transient or itinerant merchant or vendor" or "transient or itinerant photographer." 
(Code 1959, § 29.1-1) 
Sec. 29-2. - Exceptions to chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course of business; 
(b)  Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling goods, wares and merchandise according to law; 
(c)  Bona fide residents of the state selling fruits, vegetables, dressed meats, fowl or farm products which were produced on land within the state, owned or controlled by such vendor; 
(d)  Solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations which have their principal place of activity within this city. 
(Code 1959, § 29.1-1) 
Sec. 29-3. - Entrance to premises restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when such premises are posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitations Allowed" or other words to such effect. 
Sec. 29-4. - Refusing to leave. 
    Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises, or his agent, to leave the same and not return to such premises, shall be deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
Sec. 29-5. - Misrepresentation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality of his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
(Code 1959, § 22-33) 
Sec. 29-6. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the city between the hours of one-half hour before sunset and 9:00 a.m. the following morning, or at any time on Sundays, except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer. 
Sec. 29-7. - Street drumming or soliciting. 
    No person shall obstruct or unduly interfere in any way with the passage of persons along any of the public highways of the city for the purpose of inducing them to purchase any article or thing, or to enter any shop, store or stall, or any hotel, boardinghouse, restaurant, garage or like establishment, or shall importune passersby to make any such purchase or to enter any such establishment or shall in any disorderly or undue manner solicit trade, custom or patronage in or along the public highways of the city, or shall solicit in any manner patronage for garage service in the street or on the sidewalk in front of any hotel in the city; provided, however, that uniformed garage attendants, with storage tickets, shall be permitted to solicit garage service in front of hotels. 
(Code 1959, § 30-30) 
Secs. 29-8-29-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 29-19. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler within this city without first obtaining a permit to do so. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 29.1-2; Ord. No. O-82-215, § 1, 10-12-82) 
Sec. 29-20. - Application. 
    Applicants for a permit under this article shall file with the chief of police a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the chief of police, which shall give the following information: 
(a)  The name and a description of the applicant; 
(b)  The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
(c)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(d)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(e)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(f)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed and the proposed method of delivery; 
(g)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(h)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
(i)  Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery; 
(j)  The last five municipalities wherein the applicant has worked before coming to this city; and 
(k)  Such other relevant information as may be required by the investigation of the applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 29.1-2; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81) 
Sec. 29-21. - Driver's license. 
    At the time of filing his application for a permit required by this article, the applicant shall present his driver's license, if he has one, to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81) 
Sec. 29-22. - False information. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with his application for a permit required by this article. 
Sec. 29-23. - Fingerprints. 
    At the time of making application for a permit required by this article, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the chief of police. 
Sec. 29-24. - Bond. 
(a)  Every applicant, not a resident of the city, or who is a resident of the city and represents a firm whose principal place of business is located outside the state, shall file with the chief of police a surety bond from a bonding or insurance company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia, running to the city in the amount of $1.000.00, with surety acceptable to and approved by the chief of police, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the applicable provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city and state law regulating and concerning the business of peddling and guaranteeing to any citizen of the city that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the peddler, and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with such peddler that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of such peddler. Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person. 
(b)  If the applicant is an agent, employee, canvasser or solicitor of a corporation authorized to do business in this state or registered under the fictitious name act of the state, such corporation or fictitious name business may furnish one bond in the amount of $1,000.00 for any and all of its agents, employees, canvassers or solicitors. 
(Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81; Ord. No. O-82-215, § 1, 10-12-82) 
Sec. 29-25. - Service of process. 
    Before any permit shall be issued under this article, there shall also be filed with the chief of police an instrument in writing, signed by the applicant under oath, nominating and appointing the chief of police his true and lawful agent, with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on the behalf of such applicant, and service of summons in any action brought upon the applicant's bond shall be deemed made when served on the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81) 
Sec. 29-26. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this article, the chief of police shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The chief of police shall complete his investigation within two weeks of receiving the application. 
(Ord. No. O-82-215, § 1, 10-12-82) 
Sec. 29-27. - Denial. 
    If, as a result of investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81) 
Sec. 29-28. - Issuance. 
    If, as a result of investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and shall deliver the permit to the applicant. As a requisite to obtaining such permit, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee of $15.00 at the time of filing his application, to cover the cost of processing such application, which fee shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81; Ord. No. O-82-215, § 1, 10-12-82; Ord. No. O-91-053, 3-26-91, eff. 7-1-91) 
Sec. 29-29. - Contents. 
    Each permit issued under this article shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the permittee, the class of permit issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the permit number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such business. 
Sec. 29-30. - Record. 
    The chief of police shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81) 
Sec. 29-31. - Display. 
    Every peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this article and doing business within the city shall display his permit upon the request of any person, and failure to do so shall be deemed a class 2 misdemeanor. 
Sec. 29-32. - Duration. 
    Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for the period of time stated therein, but in no event shall any such permit be issued for a period of time in excess of 12 months. 
Sec. 29-33. - Revocation. 
    Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the chief of police for the violation by the permittee of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation, or for the permittee giving any false or misleading information in connection with the application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. O-82-215, § 1, 10-12-82) 
Chapter 30 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-225 et seq.; building, Ch. 11; building setback lines, § 11-41; erosion and sediment control, Ch. 16; fences and walls, Ch. 17; housing and hygiene, Ch. 22; parks and public places, Ch. 28; sewers, Ch. 34; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 35; trees and vegetation, Ch. 38; water, Ch. 39; zoning, Ch. 35.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to provide for a planning commission and to define its powers, § 38(33). 

Sec. 30-16. - Composition. 
    The city planning commission shall be composed of seven members. 
(Code 1959, § 24-1) 
Sec. 30-17. - Appointment. 
    The members of the city planning commission shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 24-1) 
Sec. 30-18. - Terms. 
    In December of each year, the council shall appoint three or two members, as the case may be, to the city planning commission for terms beginning the succeeding January, to take the place of those whose terms expire. All members appointed to the commission shall serve from the January first succeeding their appointment for a term of three years, or until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1959, § 24-1) 
Sec. 30-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 30-19, limiting the service of a planning commission member to have two terms, and derived from Code 1959, § 24-1, was repealed by Ord. No. O-83-001, § 1, adopted Jan. 11, 1983. 
Sec. 30-20. - Secretary. 
    The planning commission shall have the authority to employ a secretary, with the approval of the council, whose compensation shall be fixed by the council, or the planning commission may elect to have the city planner serve as its secretary. The secretary shall keep such records and perform such duties as may be assigned him by the commission. 
(Code 1959, § 24-2) 
Sec. 30-21. - Duties and powers. 
    In addition to the powers granted under Title 15.1 of the Code of Virginia, the planning commission shall advise with the various department heads of the city as to the location of projected thoroughfares, streets and avenues, parks, and public playgrounds, their enlargement, widening, etc.; make suggestions as to the location and character of public buildings and public improvements generally; work and advise with any expert who may be employed by the city dealing with such questions; recommend to council their approval or disapproval of plans for subdivisions; recommend the opening and closing of streets, the widening of the same and the establishment of setback building lines; make plans looking to the future development of the city, both within and without the present corporate limits; and generally act in an advisory capacity to the board of zoning appeals and the city council with reference to plans for the development of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 24-3) 
Chapter 31 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Police department, § 39. 
Cross reference- Ambulance, Ch. 5; animal warden, § 7-1; bicycles, Ch. 10; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 25; offenses, Ch. 27; alarm systems, § 27-96 et seq.; taxicabs, Ch. 37. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 31-1. - Composition. 
    The department of police shall consist of a chief and such other personnel as the city council, on the recommendation of the city manager, may deem necessary for the protection of the lives and property of the citizens of the city and the proper enforcement of state laws and city ordinances and resolutions. 
(Code 1959, § 25-1) 
Sec. 31-2. - Appointment and term of chief. 
    The city manager shall appoint a chief of police, whose term of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 25-2) 
Sec. 31-3. - Duties of chief generally. 
    Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager, the chief of police shall be in direct charge of the police department. As such he shall see that the ordinances of the city are duly obeyed and enforced. He shall exercise a general supervision over the police force, and require its members to discharge their duty. 
(Code 1959, § 25-5) 
Sec. 31-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-08-148, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed § 31-4. 
Sec. 31-5. - Duties of policemen generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the police force to endeavor by all legal means to enforce the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city, and further to perform such other acts and duties as may be necessary for the preservation of peace, health and good order. 
Sec. 31-5.1. - Off-duty employment of police officers. 
    As authorized by Section 15.1-133.1 of the Code of Virginia, police officers will be permitted to engage in off-duty employment which requires the use of their police powers. The chief of police shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for off-duty employment and all off-duty employment shall be performed in accordance with such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-92-278, 9-8-92) 
Sec. 31-6. - Retention of records. 
    All records required to be kept by any person doing business within the city for inspection by the police department or any other law enforcement officer shall be retained by such person for a period of one year; provided, however, that pawnbrokers shall keep their records for a period of two years. 
Sec. 31-7. - Disposal of unclaimed property in the possession of the police department. 
    As provided in Section 15.1-133.01 and Section 15.2-1719 of the Code of Virginia, the Lynchburg Police Department is hereby authorized to (i) dispose of unclaimed personal property in its possession at public sale or (ii) to retain such property for use by the police department. As used in this section "unclaimed personal property" shall be any personal property belonging to another which has been acquired by a law-enforcement officer pursuant to his duties, which is not needed in any criminal prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner for a period of more than 60 days and which the state treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under the uniform disposition of unclaimed property act. Unclaimed bicycles and mopeds may be disposed of in accordance with Section 15.2-1720 of the state code. Unclaimed firearms may be disposed of in accordance with Section 15.2-1721 of the state code. 
    Prior to the sale or retention for use by the police department of any unclaimed item, the chief of police, or his duly authorized representative, shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property, obtain from the attorney for the commonwealth in writing a statement advising that the item is not needed in any criminal prosecution, and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once a week for two successive weeks, notice that there will be a public display and sale of unclaimed personal property. Such property, including property selected for retention by the police department, shall be described generally in the notice, together with the date, time and place of the sale and shall be available for public viewing at the sale. The chief of police, or his duly authorized representative, shall pay from the proceeds of the sale the cost of advertisement, removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens, and notice of sale. The balance of the funds shall be held by the police department for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. Any unclaimed item retained for use by the police department shall become the property of the city and shall be retained only if, in the opinion of the chief of police, there is an legitimate use for the property by the police department and that retention of the item is a more economical alternative than purchase of similar or equivalent item. 
    If no claim has been made by the owner for the property or proceeds of such sale within 60 days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and the retained property may be placed into use by the law-enforcement agency. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the city within three years from the date of the sale and, if timely application is made therefor and satisfactory proof of ownership of the funds or property is made, the locality shall pay the remaining proceeds of the sale or return the property to the owner without interest or other charges or compensation. No claim shall be made nor any suit, action, or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds or property after three years from the date of the sale. 
(Ord. No. O-97-217, 10-28-97) 
Sec. 31-8. - Distinctive uniform. 
    The chief of police shall cause to be designed and shall adopt a distinctive uniform with appropriate insignia and badge for the use of the city's police officers. Such uniform shall be worn by police offices on uniformed assignment and by other officers when appropriate and at such other times as the chief may designate. 
(Ord. No. O-01-125, 6-26-01) 
Sec. 31-8.1. - Wearing of same or similar uniforms or badges by other than police officers. 
(a)  When an official uniform and insignia have been adopted by the chief of police no security guard, private investigator or detective, conservator of the peace, special police officer or other person in the city, shall wear the uniform, badge or patch used by the police department or any uniform of similar appearance or bearing an insignia or markings similar to a police officer's uniform. The chief of police shall approve the uniforms, badges and patches worn by or issued to security guards, private investigators or detectives, conservators of the peace or special police officers prior to the wearing of such uniforms, badges and patches in the city. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-01-125, 6-26-01) 
Sec. 31-9. - Designation of police to enforce trespass violations. 
    As authorized by Section 15.2-1717.1 of the Code of Virginia, any owner, lessee, custodian, or person lawfully in charge of real property, as those terms are used in Section 18.2-119 of the Code of Virginia, may, in writing, designate the police department as a "person lawfully in charge of the property" for the purpose of authorizing police officers to forbid another to go or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises as specified in the designation. Such designation shall include a description of the land(s), building(s) or premises to which it applies and shall be kept on file in the office of the chief of police or in such other location within the police department as the chief of police deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. O-07-008, 1-09-07) 
Sec. 31-10. - Reimbursement for expenses incurred from methamphetamine lab cleanup. 
    Any person convicted of an offense for the manufacture of methamphetamine under Virginia Code Section 18.2-248 or 18.2-248.03 shall, at the time of sentencing or in a separate civil action, be liable to the city for restitution of expenses incurred in the cleanup of any methamphetamine lab related to the conviction. The amount charged shall not exceed the actual expenses incurred associated with cleanup, removal or repair of the affected property, or the replacement cost of personal protective equipment used. 
Secs. 31-11-31-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-15-064, § 1, adopted July 14, 2015, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as §§ 31-18.1-31-18.3. In order to maintain the existing style of this Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as §§ 31-19-31-21. 

Sec. 31-18. - Airport police department. 
    There is hereby established an airport police department at the Lynchburg Regional Airport. The authority of the airport police department shall be limited to real property owned, leased, or controlled by the airport. 
( Ord. No. O-15-064, § 1(31-18), 7-14-15 ) 
Sec. 31-19. - Purpose. 
    The airport police department shall protect the lives and property of the public through the enforcement of federal, state, and local laws, ordinances and regulations. 
( Ord. No. O-15-064, § 1(31-18.1), 7-14-15 ) 
Sec. 31-20. - Duties of airport director and airport police officers. 
(a)  Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager, the airport director shall appoint an airport police chief who shall be in direct charge of the airport police department, whose term of office shall be at the pleasure of the airport director. The airport police chief shall see that the federal, state, and local laws, ordinances and regulations that are applicable to the Lynchburg Regional Airport are duly obeyed and enforced. The airport police chief shall exercise general supervision over the airport police force, and require its members to discharge their duties. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the airport police officers to endeavor by all legal means to enforce the federal, state, and local laws, ordinances and regulations that are applicable to the Lynchburg Regional Airport, and further to perform such other acts and duties as may be necessary for the preservation of peace, health and good order. 
( Ord. No. O-15-064, § 1(31-18.2), 7-14-15 ) 
Sec. 38-21. - General conditions. 
(a)  The authority of the airport police department shall not supersede the authority, duties, or jurisdiction vested by law with the Lynchburg Police Department or Campbell County Sheriff's Office, including as provided in Section 15.2-1609 and Section 15.2-1704 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The airport police department, airport police chief, and airport police officers shall be subject to and comply with the Constitution of the United States; the Constitution of Virginia; the laws governing municipal police departments, including the provisions of Section 9.1-600, Sections 15.2-1705 through 15.2-1708, Section 15.2-1719, Section 15.2-1721, and Section 15.2-1722 of the Code of Virginia; and any regulations adopted by the Criminal Justice Services Board that the Department of Criminal Justice Services designates as applicable to private police departments. 
(c)  Any person employed as an airport police officer pursuant to this act shall meet all requirements, including the minimum compulsory training requirements, for law-enforcement officers pursuant to Chapter 1 (Section 9.1-100 et seq.) of Title 9.1 of the Code of Virginia. An airport police officer is not entitled to benefits under the Line of Duty Act (Section 9.1-400 et seq.) or under the Virginia Retirement System, is not a "qualified law-enforcement officer" or "qualified retired law-enforcement officer" within the meaning of the federal Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act, 18 U.S.C. § 926B et seq., and shall not be deemed an employee of the Commonwealth. 
(d)  The airport police department may use the word "police" to describe its sworn officers and may join a regional criminal justice academy created pursuant to Article 5 (Section 15.2-1747 et seq.) of Chapter 17 of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(e)  The airport police chief shall cause to be designed and shall adopt a uniform with appropriate insignia and badge for the use of the airport's police officers. Such uniform shall be worn by airport police officers on uniformed assignment and at such other times as the airport police chief may designate. When an official uniform and insignia have been adopted by the airport police chief, no security guard, private investigator or detective, conservator of the peace, special police officer or other person in the city, shall wear the uniform, badge or patch used by the airport police department or any uniform of similar appearance or bearing an insignia or markings similar to an airport police officer's uniform. 
( Ord. No. O-15-064, § 1(31-18.3), 7-14-15 ) 
Secs. 31-22-31-26. - Reserved. 
Chapter 32 - PUBLIC SCHOOLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Schools generally, §§ 38(13), 38-c. 
State Law reference- Appointment, term of school trustees, Code of Virginia, § 22.1-50; school districts, Code of Virginia, § 22.1-36 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF SCHOOL TRUSTEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local boards of school trustees generally, Code of Virginia, § 22.1-72 et seq.; board of school trustees in cities, Code of Virginia, § 22.1-50 et seq. 

Sec. 32-16. - Appointment and term. 
    On or before March 1, 1976, the council shall appoint from the electors of the city from each school district established pursuant to the state law, three school trustees, whose terms shall commence March 1, 1976. From each school district one school trustee shall be elected for a term ending June 30, 1976, one for a term ending June 30, 1977, and one for a term ending June 30, 1978. Within 30 days preceding the expiration of the terms expiring June 30, 1976, and annually thereafter, within 30 days of the expiration of the term of each trustee, the council shall appoint a successor to each such trustee in office, whose term shall commence when the term of such predecessor shall have expired and who shall hold his office for a term of three years. 
(Code 1959, § 27-1; Ord. of 2-24-76) 
Sec. 32-17. - Duties of trustees. 
    The board of school trustees shall have the care, management and control of the public school property of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 27-2) 
Sec. 32-18. - Report of expenditures; annual budget. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the board of school trustees, once in each year, and oftener if deemed necessary, to submit to the council, in writing, a classified report of all expenditures and a classified estimate of what funds will be needed for the proper maintenance or growth of the public schools of the city, and to request the council to make provisions by appropriation or levy for the same. 
(b)  It shall also be the duty of the board of school trustees, annually, on or before April 1 in each year, to submit an itemized estimate of their requirements for the succeeding fiscal year and a detailed estimate of expected revenues from all sources, together with comparative statements for the current and preceding fiscal year. 
(Code 1959, § 27-3) 
Chapter 33 - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of council in connection with railroads, § 38(10). 
Cross reference- Traffic regulations involving railroads, §§ 25-17-25-19. 
State Law reference- Railroads generally, Code of Virginia, § 56-339 et seq. 

Sec. 33-1. - Contract to construct. 
    No railroad, nor any branch to any existing railroad, shall be constructed within the corporate limits of the city, without the consent of the council; nor shall such consent be granted until a contract has been entered into between the city and the company proposing to construct such railroad, which contract shall be in such form as the city attorney may approve, and shall contain the conditions and provisions as set forth in this chapter, subject to such modifications and additions as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to such contract. 
(Code 1959, § 28-1) 
Sec. 33-2. - Permission to construct not to relieve railroad of liability. 
    The city, in granting permission to any railroad company to occupy or cross with its tracks any street, shall be deemed thereby to grant such permission only so far as it may lawfully do so, without incurring any liability to property owners for the exercise by the railroad company of the rights and privileges so granted; and such company shall be and remain liable to property owners injuriously affected by the construction or use and maintenance of such road or tracks, precisely as if such permission by the city had not been granted. 
(Code 1959, § 28-2) 
Sec. 33-3. - Railroad to indemnify city. 
    Any railroad company regulated by this chapter shall be responsible for injuries done to private property lying upon or near such streets as it may be permitted to occupy with its tracks, and shall agree and bind itself to indemnify and save harmless the city from all loss or damage by reason of any and all legal claims made against the city in consequence of the construction, maintenance or use of such railroad. 
(Code 1959, § 28-3) 
Sec. 33-4. - Repair and maintenance of streets where tracks laid. 
    Any railroad company regulated by this chapter shall reconstruct and repave all streets crossed at grade or occupied by the track authorized, and shall place the same in as good condition as they were prior to the laying of such track, and shall keep in good repair all that portion of the streets occupied by such track lying between the rails and for a distance of two feet outside thereof, all of which shall be done under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 28-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-405. 
Sec. 33-5. - Grading streets not to interfere with sewer system, etc. 
    Any railroad company regulated by this chapter shall, under the supervision of the city manager, so grade all streets occupied or crossed by its track as not to interfere with the sewer system of the city, or the surface drainage of such streets, and shall make all changes of sewer inlets, water pipes, fireplugs, gas posts, fire alarm and electric light poles and other constructions belonging to the city, or in the use of which the public is interested, which may be rendered necessary by the construction of its road. Whenever its track may be removed from any street, such company shall, under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city manager, restore such street to as good condition as before such track was located thereon. 
(Code 1959, § 28-5) 
Sec. 33-6. - Warning lights on tracks. 
    Any railroad company regulated by this chapter shall erect suitable lights along the line of its tracks at such points as the council may deem necessary to prevent accidents from trains or locomotives passing at night, and such lights shall be kept burning during the hours that the city lights are required to burn. 
(Code 1959, § 28-6) 
State Law reference- Crossing boards and lights, Code of Virginia, § 56-405.3. 
Sec. 33-7. - Bridges. 
(a)  Whenever any railroad company, canal company or other public carrier shall by the terms of its franchise, or by order of the council or on its own volition cross any street or alley above or below grade so as to separate its traffic from highway traffic, the design of the bridge or other structure shall first be approved by the city manager and shall provide for all reasonable loads and give sufficient width of driveway for highway traffic to avoid congestion, inconvenience or danger to such traffic, and should any such existing bridge or structure be so arranged or designed as to require any caution sign or signs, or should the improvement of the street or any other reason cause such sign or signs to be necessary at such location, then suitable signs shall be erected and maintained by the company at its expense; and no condition constituting a hazard, in the opinion of the city manager, shall be allowed to remain without the erection of a suitable sign more than five days, but the erection of such sign, unless specifically authorized by the city manager, shall not relieve the company from the requirement of eliminating such hazard within 30 days from notice by the city manager. 
(b)  Any bridge to carry highway traffic over any railway track, canal or other properties of any such company holding a franchise under the laws of the city shall be designed to carry the maximum load permitted by the laws of the state on the highways of the state, and any existing bridge which does not meet this requirement shall be reconstructed or otherwise made safe for the purpose, unless in the opinion of the city manager local conditions warrant his permission for a lighter load limit, in which case, suitable signs shall be maintained as required above. For the maintenance of any structure or condition in violation of the above, the company shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 and each day such condition is allowed to exist after notice to the local agent of such company shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, § 28-7) 
Sec. 33-8. - Speed limits. 
    The maximum rate of speed at which locomotive engines may be moved within the city limits shall be 45 miles an hour; provided, that on Jefferson Street the maximum speed shall not exceed ten miles per hour. 
(Code 1959, § 28-9) 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate the speed of trains, § 38(10). 
Sec. 33-9. - Flagmen. 
    Every railroad company, whose tracks are located within the city limits, shall station at such points along the line of such tracks as have been or may hereafter be designated by the council, a sufficient number of flagmen, who shall be provided with flags in the daytime, and lanterns at night, and whose duty it shall be to prevent accidents by giving due notice of the approach and passing of trains and locomotives. Any railroad company failing to comply with this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 each day such default shall continue; and should any flagman, through absence from his station, or otherwise, fail to properly discharge his duties on the approach or passing of any train or locomotive, the railroad company owning or controlling such train or locomotive shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1959, § 28-10) 
Sec. 33-10. - Loitering about tracks, depots, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play or loiter about or upon the railroad tracks, or upon the platforms of the passenger depots, or about the railroad shops in the city. Any person violating this section may be ordered to desist by any special or regular policeman, and upon his failure to do so, he may be arrested, and he shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to interfere with persons who are traveling, or with the friends meeting or accompanying such persons. 
(Code 1959, § 28-11) 
Chapter 34 - SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-225 et seq.; building, Ch. 11; housing and hygiene, Ch. 22; nuisances, Ch. 26; water, Ch. 39. 
State Law reference- Public utilities generally in connection with sewers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-292 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, all sewers running in the streets or alleys of the city or through private property that are designed or constructed to furnish sewer connection for more than one lot shall be regarded as main or public sewers, provided that the sewer is built to city standards on a recorded easement or previously recognized on city sewer maps. All sewers leading from the main or public sewers to the property on either side shall be regarded as building sewers. A sewer serving two or more buildings, constructed and paid for by property owners and not directly controlled by the city shall be regarded as a private sewer. 
(Code 1959, § 29-1) 
Sec. 34-2. - Construction and maintenance by city generally. 
    The city shall lay, construct and maintain all main or public sewers and connections with approved clean-outs and shall lay and construct all building sewers from their connection with the main or public sewers to the clean-out located at the property line of the street adjacent to the property into which the building sewer leads. 
(Code 1959, § 29-2; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 34-3. - Sewer connections to premises within the city; extensions of mains. 
(a)  A separate connection shall be required for each subdivision lot upon which a building is constructed. Only one sewer service connection will be required where multiple lots are used to construct a building. 
(b)  The city will grant the right to use the sewerage system and will extend sewer mains where in the opinion of council it is practical and economically feasible under the following methods: 
(1)  Sewer mains installed by the city in the preservation of the health and general welfare of the citizenry for reasons of public necessity, 
(2)  Sewer mains installed in response to citizen request when evidenced by petition, 
(3)  Sewer mains installed in conjunction with industrial development and/or residential subdivision development. 
(c)  Additionally, connection to the city sewerage system shall be required for the following conditions: 
(1)  Septic system failure on improved property. As authorized by Virginia Code Section 15.2-5137, the owner of any improved property that utilizes a private septic system for sewage disposal and has city sewer available as defined in subsection 34-3(c)(3), shall connect to such sewer when that septic system has failed and cannot be repaired according to Virginia Department of Health Regulations. The owner must make connection to the system by application and payment of applicable fees. The property owner will be responsible for providing the appropriate piping to connect to the city approved connection point and for the abandonment, cleaning and filling of the existing septic tank in a proper and lawful manner. The property owner must obtain appropriate permits from the city building official to install new sewer piping and appurtenances. 
The following cannot be connected to the city sewer system: septic system tanks or drain lines; effluent pump systems utilizing the existing septic tank as a holding tank; any privy or cesspool; or any other manner of private sewerage disposal. 
(2)  Septic system for new construction. Any new construction on unimproved property requiring sewage disposal shall connect to the city sewer system where available as defined in subsection 34-3(c)(3). The owner must make connection to the system by application and payment of applicable fees. It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to use a septic system or any other alternative sewage disposal system when city sewer lines are available for connection. 
(3)  Sewer availability. Sanitary sewer service is considered to be available to a property when the sewer is located: 
a.  Anywhere on the property, 
b.  In a segment of public right-of-way that is immediately adjacent to the property, 
c.  In a public right-of-way and within 50 feet of the property, or 
d.  In a public easement which abuts the property on an adjoining parcel. 
    Sewer service availability shall not be influenced by the ground topography either on a property or in relationship to adjacent right-of-way or adjacent parcels. Sewer service is considered to be available whether the service is by gravity flow or pumping. Sewer service is not available if a new public easement through another parcel is required to serve the property. 
(d)  Exceptions. The director of utilities may allow exceptions to paragraph (c) of this section provided that the owner or tenant can demonstrate that compliance with these provisions creates an extreme hardship. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity that violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, § 29-6.2; Ord. of 6-15-77; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88; Ord. No. O-12-012, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 34-4. - General terms, conditions, and provisions applicable to sewer mains extended or installed with city approval. 
(a)  Title to any sewer main extensions or service connections within the public right-of-way or requested easements shall vest in the city upon the completion of construction regardless of method of financing. 
(b)  Where public sewer systems are already installed, replacement or enlargement of the sewer pipes, when deemed necessary by the city, shall be made at the sole cost and expense of the city. 
(c)  Whenever any person owning property along the line of any sewer main in the city which has been extended, installed or purchased by the city in the preservation of the health and general welfare of the public, or by petition, but without the participation of him or a previous owner of this property, shall desire the sewer service from said main to his premises, he shall be required to do the following: 
(1)  Fulfill the criteria as outlined under subsection (g) hereof, involving sewer main connections; 
(2)  Make an additional payment of an availability charge, the purpose of which is to defray in part the cost of providing outfall lines, pumping stations and waste treatment facilities. The availability charges are as follows: 
a.  Single-family residence: 
(i)  Where 50 to 59 percent of the potential customers of the project as determined by the city engineer sign petitions requesting such project, the charge shall be $1,950.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
(ii)  Where 60 to 69 percent of said customers sign such petitions, the charge shall be $1,850.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
(iii)  Where 70 to 79 percent of said customers sign such petitions, the charge shall be $1,750.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
(iv)  Where 80 to 89 percent of said customers sign such petitions, the charge shall be $1,675.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
(v)  Where 90 to 94 percent of said customers sign such petitions, the charge shall be $1,550.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
(vi)  Where 95 to 100 percent of said customers sign such petitions, the charge shall be $1,450.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
b.  Multifamily structures and mobile home parks where a single connection is made: 
(i)  For the first five units, $980.00 each. 
(ii)  For the second five units, $730.00 each. 
(iii)  For all additional units, $490.00 each. 
Separate individual connections to each unit of a multifamily structure or mobile home park will require the same availability charge for each unit as a single-family residential unit. Separate connections serving more than one unit will require the availability charge as specified above in subsection 34-4(c)(2)b. 
c.  Commercial service: Up to 2,000 square feet of floor space, or if a maximum four-inch diameter building sewer is used, the charge shall be $1,950.00. If a connection sewer in excess of four inches in diameter is required, the following charges shall apply: 
Availability Charge: Floor Space $1,950.00 0 to 2,000 square feet $2,440.00 2,001 to 10,000 square feet $3,640.00 10,001 to 20,000 square feet $6,110.00 20,001 to 35,000 square feet $9,650.00 35,001 to 99,999 square feet As determined by city council 100,000 square feet or greater  
All availability charges for institutional service shall be as determined by city council on a case-by-case basis. 
d.  Just prior to the conclusion of each fiscal year, the city manager or his designee shall review all availability charges and connection fees, and recommend to council appropriate charges. 
e.  All extension agreements and service requests not included in original petitions shall be subject to the maximum prevailing availability charges and connection fees which are in effect at the time such agreement or request is approved by council, irrespective of the number of original petitioners. 
(d)  Whenever any property abutting a street is without a city sewer main, the owner desiring city sewer service shall be required to sign a petition for extension of sewer mains. 
(1)  Single-family and multifamily structures and mobile home parks: Upon receipt of said petition signed by at least 50 percent of the owners representing properties to be served by the sewer main extension, the city shall prepare an estimate for the installation of a sewer main. 
Such estimate shall be prepared on the basis that the location, character and size of the extension, and the plans and specifications for the extension, and the materials used in the installation, replacement, maintenance and repair of the extension shall be as specified by the city. 
(2)  Commercial service: Where the council has determined the petitioned project to be economically feasible to the city, the availability charges set forth in subsection 34-4(c)(2)c, shall be applicable. 
Where the council has determined that the petitioned project is not economically feasible to the city, the cost of the project will be apportioned by council between the city and the benefitted property owners. The entire non-city portion shall be apportioned by council between the petitioning property owners as their availability charge. Any nonsigning property owner later petitioning for service shall pay the same proportioned share for each connection as the original signers. 
(e)  The owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling that did not have access to city sewer lines prior to the extension of the line, may make arrangements to pay the availability charges in paragraph (c)(2)(a) and the connection charges in paragraph (g) of this section in installments. The city's billings and collections division may enter into a water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement with the owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling under the following conditions: 
(1)  Only an owner or occupant that actually connects their dwelling to the city's sewer system is eligible to enter into a water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement. 
(2)  The availability and connection charges and interest must be paid in full within one year. 
(3)  Interest at the rate of five percent per annum or the interest rate the city was charged for its most recent bond issue, whichever rate of interest is higher, will be charged on the unpaid balance of the availability and connection charges. 
(4)  Payments will be made on such dates and in such amounts as the billings and collections division, in its discretion, determines are appropriate. 
(5)  The unpaid balance of the availability and connection charges may be paid in full at any time without any prepayment penalty. 
(6)  The water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement cannot be assigned or assumed without the prior written consent of the billings and collections division. 
(7)  If the owners or occupants fail to make payments in accordance with the water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement, the city may discontinue water service to the property until all arrears for availability and connection fee installment payments due the city are paid in full. 
(8)  As provided in Section 15.2-104 of the Code of Virginia, or any succeeding section, the city will place a lien against the property that is served by the sewer line to secure the payment of the unpaid availability and connection charges. 
The installment plan offered by this paragraph is for the benefit of the owners or occupants of single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings and is not available to developers or builders of residential subdivisions, apartments, boarding houses, lodging houses, rooming houses or other multi-family dwellings or to commercial and institutional facilities, or similar housing units. 
(f)  Sewer main extensions involving industrial development, residential subdivision development of three or more dwelling units per lot, and/or any other planned unit or special development are excepted from this section. 
(g)  In addition to the previous applicable requirements, whenever any person owning property along the line of any sewer main in the city shall desire sewer service into his premises, he shall execute an agreement known as an "Application for Sewer." In addition thereto, the licensed plumber employed by him shall make written application therefore to the city on forms prescribed for that purpose. 
    Unless the building sewer, or connection, has been previously installed, the plumber or building contractor shall clearly indicate at the premises by a stake or otherwise the exact location of the building sewer. An applicant for any new connection must make an estimate of the size building sewer needed for all lines greater than four inches in diameter for the particular building in order that the proper size building sewer may be installed to satisfy the demand. Upon approval of the application, payment of certain fixed sewer connection fees must be made as follows: 
(1)  Four-inch diameter house building sewer-$1,330.00. 
(2)  Larger than four-inch diameter building sewer - cost plus 15%; minimum charge-$1,450.00. 
    Provided, that when any property owner grants to the city free of cost the right to construct and maintain a sewer across said property owner's property, that property owner shall be granted a credit of $100.00 to be applied against the appropriate connection charge for one connection. 
    The city will then install a building sewer leading from the main in the street to the property line, or install a sewer saddle. This requirement also applies to houses formerly occupied by one family, but which are converted into two or more apartments, with a separate sewer connection for each apartment unit. When these requirements are complied with, the city will thereupon issue a permit for the plumber named in the application to make connection with the city's sewer. All such connections and all plumbing work shall conform in all respects to the provisions of the plumbing code of the city. 
(h)  Residential subdivisions of no more than two dwelling units per lot. For all subdivisions located within the city containing no more than two dwelling units per lot, in addition to the construction of the system within the boundaries of the subdivision by the subdivider pursuant to subsection 24.1-31(a) of the city's subdivision ordinance, there shall be paid by the property owner to the city at the time of connection to the system a connection fee (without an easement credit) as required by subsection (g) for each connection, and an availability charge, the purpose of which is to defray in part the cost of providing extension lines, pumping stations and waste treatment facilities, the sum of $400.00 per lot; provided, however, that if in any subdivision development any lot is served by a connection directly to lines installed by the city, the availability charges as listed in subsection 34-4(c)(2)a, will be paid by the property owner, except, however, that where he or a previous owner of this property participated in the cost of such lines, no availability charge shall be payable. 
(i)  The owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling that did not have access to city sewer lines at the time it was constructed, may make arrangements to pay the availability charges in paragraph (c)(2)(a) and the connection charges in paragraph (g) of this section in installments. The city's billings and collections division may enter into a water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement with the owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling under the following conditions: 
(1)  Only an owner or occupant that actually connects their dwelling to the city's sewer system is eligible to enter into a water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement. 
(2)  The availability and connection charges and interest must be paid in full within one year. 
(3)  Interest at the rate of five percent per annum or the interest rate the city was charged for its most recent bond issue, whichever rate of interest is higher, will be charged on the unpaid balance of the availability and connection charges. 
(4)  Payments will be made on such dates and in such amounts as the billings and collections division, in its discretion, determines are appropriate. 
(5)  The unpaid balance of the availability and connection charges may be paid in full at any time without any prepayment penalty. 
(6)  The water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement cannot be assigned or assumed without the prior written consent of the billings and collections division. 
(7)  If the owners or occupants fail to make payments in accordance with the water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement, the city may discontinue water service to the property until all arrears for availability and connection fee installment payments due the city are paid in full. 
(8)  As provided in Section 15.2-104 of the Code of Virginia, or any succeeding section, the city will place a lien against the property that is served by the sewer line to secure the payment of the unpaid availability and connection charges. 
    The installment plan offered by this paragraph is for the benefit of the owners or occupants of single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings and is not available to developers or builders of residential subdivisions, apartments, boarding houses, lodging houses, rooming houses or other multi-family dwellings or to commercial and institutional facilities, or similar types of housing units. 
(Code 1959, § 29-6.3; Ord. of 6-14-77; Ord. of 8-8-78; Ord. of 5-22-79; Ord. No. O-81-153; § 1, 6-23-81; Ord. No. O-83-145, § 1, 6-28-83; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88; Ord. No. O-89-280, § 1, 10-10-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. O-00-017, 1-25-00; Ord. No. O-01-182, 9-25-01; Ord. No. O-02-186, 10-8-02, eff. 2-3-03; Ord. No. O-04-030, 3-9-04, eff. 1-1-05; Ord. No. O-06-036, 4-11-06, eff. 7-1-06; Ord. No. O-06-103, 8-8-06; Ord. No. O-07-046, 4-10-07, eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. O-08-046, 4-8-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. O-13-039, 3-26-13; Ord. No. O-16-031, § 1, 4-12-16 , eff. 7-1-16) 
Sec. 34-4.1. - Availability charge for city sewer service. 
    Those business firms which may be designated a "qualified business firm" pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 22, Title 59.1, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, (the Urban Enterprise Zone Act,) shall be allowed to pay the availability charge imposed by section 39-26 as follows: Commencing with the second anniversary date of the submission of the city's registered bill in the amount of the availability charge, 25 percent thereof will be due and annually thereafter on such anniversary date an additional 25 percent will be due until the charge is paid in full. 
(Ord. No. O-84-172, § 1, 6-26-84, eff. 7-1-84) 
Sec. 34-5. - Deferral of availability charges and connection fees to the city sewer system for certain persons. 
    For those owner-occupants of existing dwellings, who have an equity not exceeding $30,000.00 therein and who meet the financial eligibility requirements of the Medicaid program for group III Virginia localities, as determined by the department of human services, the availability charges and connection fees imposed by subsection 34-4(c)(2) shall, upon request, be deferred until such time as title to the property passes by sale or inheritance. Such persons shall, prior to connection with the city sewer system, execute a petition, approved by the city attorney, granting to the city a lien in the amount of the fees and charges plus all interest which may accrue. When the charges are so deferred, they shall be subject to the payment of an annual simple interest charge of six percent on the unpaid balance of such fees and charges, provided that such persons shall have the right at any time to make payments, partial or in full of the balance due for such connection. Passage of title to a spouse shall not constitute inheritance under this section. 
(Code 1959, § 29-6.4; Ord. of 10-25-77) 
Sec. 34-5.1. - Waiver of availability charges for connection to the city sewer system in certain situations. 
    City council, upon request, may waive the availability charges required by subsection 34-4(c)(2)a, of the City Code under the following conditions: 
(a)  Construction is for single-family homes only. 
(b)  Construction is within a designated redevelopment or conservation area or rehabilitation district. 
(c)  Construction is for: 
(1)  An individual who agrees to occupy the home for a minimum of ten years as his/her principle residence. If the home is sold or rented within that time, the availability fees would become due and payable; or 
(2)  A nonprofit corporation for resale to low-income persons with requirements for owner occupancy in the deed. 
(Ord. No. O-85-224, § 1, 9-10-85) 
Sec. 34-6. - Construction of building sewer connections-Generally. 
    In the event an application for connection to any main or public sewer is approved, the connection shall be constructed by the utilities division strictly in accordance with the facts stated in the application and in accordance with department of public works standards. The building sewer shall be constructed with reference to the connections as located by the utilities division. If said connection is to a main or public sewer located in city rights-of-way the utilities division shall construct the connection with clean-out to the street right-of-way line. If the connection is to a main or public sewer located in an easement, the utilities division shall make the connection to the sewer and lay approximately five feet of pipe for the building sewer to be connected. If the connection is to a main or public sewer located in an easement and is to serve an adjoining property, the utilities division shall make the connection to the sewer and construct the service line to the property line of the adjoining property and install a clean-out. The contractor shall notify the utilities division 48 hours prior to excavating building sewer trench, and said trench shall be excavated up to and including the main or public sewer in cases where the sewer is located in an easement. 
(Code 1959, § 29-7; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 34-7. - Trenches for building sewers. 
    The trench for a building sewer shall be excavated so as to meet the city installed connection at the proper angle and elevation. 
(Code 1959, § 29-8; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 34-8. - Material for building sewers laid in the streets. 
    All connections to main or public sewers shall be of first-class quality, schedule 40 pvc pipe unless laid less than 18 inches below the surface, in which event, cast-iron or ductile-iron pipe may be used. Other types of pipe may be used upon approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 29-9; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87; eff. 1-1-88; Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-9. - Injury to sewer, gas or water pipes. 
    No person, while engaged in the construction of building sewers, or otherwise, shall injure, trim, break or remove any portion of any main or public sewer or connection or do any injury to any gas or water pipe of building sewer previously laid. No penalty imposed for violation of this section shall prevent the city or any property owner from recovering any damages sustained by reason of such injury by appropriate civil action, or otherwise. 
(Code 1959, § 29-10; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-88; eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 34-10. - Removal of obstructions. 
    In case of any stoppage in the main or public sewers, the city shall remove the obstruction. If the stoppage is in the building sewer or drain, the property owner whose property it connects with the main sewer shall remove any such obstruction. In the event of failure by such owner to remove the obstruction, the city, at the expense of the owner [which shall include the cost of all materials, labor and equipment, plus 15 percent], shall remove such obstruction; provided, however, that the owner will install at his cost on the boundary between his property and the city right-of-way, an approved sewer clean-out. The city at its cost will then maintain that portion of the building sewer line on city property. An approved clean-out shall be defined as one installed by the property owner, inspected and approved by the utilities division and inspections division. That portion of the building sewer between the clean-out and the main sewer shall be inspected to determine that it is free of any obstructions, properly aligned, no defects exist in the pipe, and the pipe material meets city standards. If a clean-out installation fails to meet the above criteria, it shall be rejected and the property owner shall be notified in writing of the reason for rejection, with a copy forwarded to the plumbing inspector. Once the deficiency has been corrected the owner may request a second inspection. If the existing connection cannot be made acceptable and the property owner desires that the city maintain that portion of the service from the main or public sewer to his property line, the owner shall apply for a new connection to be installed and pay all applicable fees. A list of approved connections accepted under this section shall be maintained by the utilities division. 
(Code 1959, § 29-11; Ord. of 6-12-79; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87; eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 34-11. - Prohibited discharges into sewers. 
    No person shall be permitted to discharge into the main or public sewers or any building sewer or drain through which substances are discharged any substances which are liable to injure such sewers, or obstruct the flow of sewage, or in any manner impair their efficiency. These discharges shall include, but not be limited to, the prohibited wastes listed in Section II (Prohibited Wastes Generally) in the nondomestic and industrial user regulations and practices. 
(Code 1959, § 29-12; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87; eff. 1-1-88; Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-11.1. - Unpolluted waters prohibited in sanitary sewers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged to the sanitary sewer any unpolluted waters such as storm water, ground water, roof runoff or subsurface drainage. 
(b)  All existing connected rainleaders are to be removed from the sewer system according to the council-adopted policies and guidelines entitled "Rainleader Disconnect Program". Reconnection of rainleaders to the sewer, without prior permission from the program administrator, will not be allowed. For purposes of this section a rainleader shall be defined as any conduit that conveys stormwater into the city sewer lines. A copy of the "Rainleader Disconnect Program" policies and guidelines shall be kept in the office of the department of public works and shall be available for review upon request. Any persons reconnecting rainleaders once a disconnect is completed, will be in violation of the provisions of this section and shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Whenever a rainleader is reconnected it shall be presumed that the reconnect was done by or with permission of the property owner; provided, however, that such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95; Ord. No. O-96-092, 4-23-96) 
Sec. 34-12.1. - Schedule of sewer rates. 
(a)  The monthly sewer rates for all consumers within the city shall be $6.02 per h.c.f. of water used provided, however, that the rate of any party discharging industrial waste or processed water into the city system pursuant to an individual contract shall be as provided in such contract. 
(b)  The monthly sewer rate for customer accounts deemed "sewer only" (customers within the city without a water service connection) shall be $48.51. This rate is derived as follows: (monthly volume charge of $6.02 per h.c.f. by 7 h.c.f. + a monthly service charge of $6.37). 
(c)  In addition to the sewer rates provided in this section, a high strength waste surcharge is established for all customers with discharges in excess of 25,000 gallons per day and having biological oxygen demand and/or suspended solids concentrations in excess of normal wastewater. 
    The surcharge shall be as follows: 
(1)  For BOD concentrations in excess of 300 milligrams per liter (MG/l), $24.46 per 100 pounds. 
(2)  For suspended solids concentrations in excess of 400 milligrams per liter (MG/l), $27.66 per 100 pounds. 
(3)  Truck hauled wastes disposal charges for residential and restaurant wastes as defined in section 34-13 will be assessed at the following rates: $204.90 up to a limit of 2,500 gallons of capacity and $34.74 for each 500 gallons of capacity over 2,500 gallons. Truck hauled wastes for special contract holders shall be charged in accordance to the terms of the contracting agreement. 
(d)  Annually, the director of financial services shall compute the average of each residential customer's level of monthly water consumption in hundred cubic feet (h.c.f.) for the most recent period beginning with the first billing in November and ending with the second billing in April. By multiplying this monthly average by 1.25, a seasonal consumption limit for sewer billing shall be derived for each residential account. This limit will apply during the period for the first billing in May through the second billing in October. This adjustment shall apply only to residential bills and shall not apply to any customers using water for the purpose of manufacturing or for commercial or multifamily dwellings. 
(Ord. No. O-87-231, § 1, 10-13-87; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88; Ord. No. O-89-006, § 1, 1-10-89, eff. 7-1-89; Ord. No. O-91-043, 3-12-91, eff. 9-1-91; Ord. No. O-92-087, 3-24-92; Ord. No. O-93-281, 10-12-93, eff. 1-1-94; Ord. No. O-95-027, 2-14-95, eff. 7-1-95; Ord. No. O-95- 269, 9-26-95; Ord. No. O-96-035, 2-13-96, eff. 7-1-96; Ord. No. O-97-038, 3-11-97, eff. 7-1-97; Ord. No. O-98-014, 2-10-98, eff. 7-1-98; Ord. No. O-99-041, 3-9-99, eff. 7-1-99; Ord. No. O-00-045, 3-14-00, eff. 7-1-00; Ord. No. O-01-034, 2-13-01, eff. 7-1-01; Ord. No. O-01-061, 3-27-01, eff. 7-1-01; Ord. No. O-02-045, 3-12-02, eff. 7-1-02; Ord. No. O-03-051, 3-11-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-04-030, 3-9-04, eff. 7-1-04; Ord. No. O-05-042, 4-12-05, eff. 7-1-05; Ord. No. O-06-036, 4-11-06, eff. 7-1-06; Ord. No. O-07-046, 4-10-07, eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. O-07-075, 5-8-07, eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. O-08-046, 4-8-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. O-09-020, 4-14-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. O-10-033, 4-13-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. O-11-027, 3-22-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. O-12-032, 3-27-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. O-13-039, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. O-14-030, 04-08-14, eff. 07-01-14; Ord. No. O-15-024, § 1, 4-14-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. O-16-031, § 1, 4-12-16 , eff. 7-1-16) 
Sec. 34-13. - Charge for truck-hauled wastewaters. 
    Persons desiring to routinely discharge wastes taken from septic tanks, cesspools or other sewage containers into the sewage system of the city shall possess a valid septage haulers discharge permit. 
    Permits will be issued by the director of public works or his designee for a term not to exceed three years and will specifically identify the types of wastes which can be discharged. For purposes of waste classification, there will be two generally acceptable types of waste sources: 
Residential: Wastes collected from establishments where only household type activities have occurred. 
Restaurant wastes: Non-solid wastes collected from establishments engaged in the selling of prepared food to the general public (eq. restaurant grease pits). 
    All other types of hauled wastes will be subject to the conditions of contractual agreements between the wastewater facilities and the waste generator. 
    All persons discharging a hauled waste to the sewage system of the city will adhere to the following conditions: 
(1)  All wastes will be brought to the designated discharge location at the wastewater facilities; 
(2)  A completed manifest form, containing the appropriate signatures and identifying the source of the wastes, shall be presented to the wastewater treatment plant operator prior to discharge; 
(3)  No truck load will exceed 2,500 gallons unless prior permission has been granted by the director of public works or his designee; 
(4)  Contractual loads cannot be mixed with any other type of waste; 
(5)  All fees and charges will be accumulated over each calendar month and be billed on a monthly basis. In the case of contractual agreements payment will be subject to the conditions of the contract; 
(6)  Any truck load which contains any amount of restaurant wastes will be charged at the rate established for restaurant wastes; 
(7)  Disposal services will be suspended for customers with an outstanding monthly bill (not paid by due date); and 
(8)  Disposal costs for residential and restaurant wastes will be assessed at the rates established in subsection 12-1(b)(3). 
    To cover the administrative cost of the septic haulers discharge permit, $50.00 per year of permit term will be charged. 
(Ord. No. O-84-141, § 1, 6-12-84, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88; Ord. No. O-88-062, § 1, 3-22-88, eff. 7-1-88; Ord. No. O-90-093, 3-27-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-91-053, 3-26-91, eff. 7-1-91; Ord. No. O-93-281, 10-12-93, eff. 1-1-94; Ord. No. O-95-027, 2-14-95; Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-14. - Adjustments to sewer bill. 
(a)  The amount of sewage billed at the rates contained in section 34-12.1 shall be based on the amount of water consumed for the billing period unless contracts for the treatment of industrial wastes provide for specific terms to the contrary. Industrial, commercial, or institutional customers may apply for relief to provisions of section 34-12.1 on an annual basis provided that ample documentation is provided by March 1 of each year to the director of utilities, or his/her designee, to show that water consumed is not returned to the collection system to be treated as waste at the waste treatment plant. Alternatively, industrial, commercial, or institutional customers may apply for relief through the installation of city-owned water-only meters for uses that return little or no water to the collection system. 
(b)  All sewer bill adjustment systems intended to determine the amount of water not returned to sewer shall be designed, installed, operated, and maintained in accordance with the City of Lynchburg Sewer Bill Adjustment Program. Copies of the program shall be filed with the director of utilities, or his/her designee, and shall be made available to any customer who wishes to see them. 
(Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88; Ord. No. O-04-032, 3-9-04, eff. 4-1-04) 
Sec. 34-15. - Collection of sewage fees, charges and rents. 
    Effective on and after July 1, 1995, whenever the city utilizes the services of an attorney or a collection agency to collect any delinquent fees, rents or charges for the use and services of the city's sewage disposal system, reasonable attorney's fees or collection agency's fees shall be added to the delinquent bill. The attorney's fees or collection agency's fees shall not exceed 20 percent of the delinquent bill and may be recovered by the city by action at law or suit in equity. Attorney's fees shall be added only if such delinquency is collected by action at law or suit in equity. 
(Ord. No. O-94-302, 11-22-94) 
Secs. 34-16-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-84-169, § 2, adopted June 26, 1984, effective June 30, 1984, amended the Code by repealing Art. II of Ch. 34, §§ 34-31-34-48, pertaining to industrial wastes and derived from §§ 29.01-1, 29.01-2(a)-(e), 29.01-3(a)(1), (2), (b)-(e), 29.01-4-29.01-8 of the city's 1959 Code; and from an ordinance adopted Dec. 13, 1977. 

Secs. 34-31-34-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRETREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL AND NONDOMESTIC WASTES 

Secs. 34-49-34-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 34-49 through 34-65 were repealed by Ord. No. O-95-269, adopted Sept. 26, 1995, and were replaced by §§ 34-66-34-78. 
Sec. 34-66. - Definitions. 
(a)  Specific definitions. Unless stated otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Approval authority: The Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): That quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter, as determined by "standard methods". 
    Day: The 24-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. 
    High strength waste surcharge: That rate charged in excess of the sewer service rate for all wastewater over and above normal wastewater standards. 
    The indirect discharge or discharge: introduction of pollutants into the wastewater facilities from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
    Industrial user: A source of indirect discharge. 
    Industrial wastes: That wastewater from industrial users. 
    Interference: A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the wastewater facilities, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's VPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory or local regulations: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substance Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Local limits: Technically based limits established by the city to implement general and specific prohibited standards and to protect against pass through and interference. 
    May: Is permissible; shall is mandatory, 
    Nondomestic wastes: Wastewater from sources other than residential users. 
    Normal wastewater: Wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 400 mg/1 and BOD is not more than 300 mg/l; total phosphorus is not more than 15 mg/l; total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 18 mg/l; and total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. Also referred to as "domestic waste." 
    Person: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government entities. 
    POTW treatment plant: That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
    Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to discharge to the City of Lynchburg's wastewater facilities. 
    Pretreatment standard: Prohibited discharge standards, EPA categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
    Residential user: All premises used only for human residency and which is connected to the wastewater facilities. Residential users include, but are not limited to single family residences, apartments, townhouses, condominiums, and trailers. 
    Sanitary sewer: Any sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions. 
    Sanitary wastewater: Wastewater discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, office buildings, industrial plants or institutions. 
    Sewage: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Sewer: The structures of a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
    Sewer service charge: That rate charged for normal wastewater discharge into the city's wastewater facilities or sewerage system. 
    Standard methods: The latest edition of standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater, published by the America public health association, water pollution control federation and America water works association. 
    State: The Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    State waters: All natural waters on the surface of the ground within or bordering the state and within the state's jurisdiction. 
    Surface water: Water which occurs when the rate of precipitation exceeds the rate at which water may infiltrate into the soil. 
    Suspended solids: Shall mean the total suspended matter that either floats on the surface, or is in suspension in, water or wastewater, as determined by "standard methods." 
    VPDES: Virginia pollutant discharge elimination system permit program, as administered by the Commonwealth of Virginia, also known as the "Approval Authority". 
    Wastewater: A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industries and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water or storm water that may be present. Also referred to as "sewage." 
    Wastewater facilities: Also referred to as publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and is any devices used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Sec. 1292). 
    Wastewater facilities board of appeals: That board appointed pursuant to the provisions of section 34-79 of this article. 
    Wastewater sewer: The structures, processes, equipment and arrangements necessary to collect and transport wastewaters to the POTW treatment plant. 
(b)  General definitions. Unless the context of usage indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms in this article and not defined in subsection 34-66(a) above shall be as defined in the glossary: Water and wastewater control engineering, prepared by joint editorial board of the America Public Health Association, America Society of Civil Engineers, America Water Works Association, and Water Pollution Control Federation, copyright 1969. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-67. - Scope. 
(a)  The definitions of terms used in this article are found in section 34-66. The provisions of this article shall apply to the discharge to all wastewater facilities of the city. This article provides for use of the city's wastewater facilities, control of the quality of wastewater discharged, wastewater pretreatment, equitable distribution of costs, issuance of wastewater discharge permits, and penalties and other procedures in cases of violation of this article. 
(b)  This article shall apply to the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, and to persons outside the city who are, by contract with the city, users of the city's wastewater sewers or wastewater treatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-68. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of public works or his designee of the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-69. - High strength waste surcharge. 
(a)  All fees, penalties and charges collected under this article shall be used for the sole purpose of constructing, operating or maintaining the wastewater facilities of the city, or the retirement of debt incurred for same or payment of industrial cost recovery if required pursuant to federal law, or to recover cost associated with the construction of additional facilities and their operation and maintenance cost as necessary to treat wastes. 
(b)  All fees and charges payable under the provisions of this article are due and payable upon the receipt of notice of charges. Unpaid charges shall become delinquent and shall be subject to penalty and interest charges as provided for in this Code. 
(c)  A high strength waste surcharge is established for all customers with discharges in excess of 25,000 gallons per day and having BOD and/or suspended solids concentrations in excess of normal wastewater as provided in subsection 34-12.1(b). 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-70. - Monitoring charges. 
    The purpose of this charge is to defray the cost to the city for the testing of wastewater discharges from industrial users and customers with high strength wastes (surcharge) who have been issued industrial wastewater discharge permits. The charges will be set to ensure recovery of the projected fiscal year monitoring costs. 
    The charges will be set to ensure recovery of the projected fiscal year monitoring costs. The charges shall be as follows: 
Seven-day wastewater sampling for surcharge ..... $924.00 
Three-day wastewater sampling for surcharge ..... 485.00 
One-day wastewater sampling for pretreatment and surcharge ..... 289.00 
Three-day wastewater sampling of metal finishing for pretreatment and surcharge ..... 1,502.00 
Four-day wastewater sampling of electroplating for pretreatment and surcharge ..... 1,675.00 
Three-day wastewater sampling of pharmaceuticals for pretreatment and surcharge ..... 2,137.00 
Three-day wastewater sampling of other categories for pretreatment and surcharge ..... 866.00 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95; Ord. No. O-10-033, 4-13-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. O-16-031, § 1, 4-12-16 , eff. 7-1-16) 
Sec. 34-71. - Wastewater discharge permit charges. 
    The purpose of this charge is to defray the cost to the city for the generation and maintenance of wastewater discharge permits. The charges are set to ensure recovery of the projected fiscal year administrative cost. 
    All users requiring discharge permits shall pay a fee of $220.00 per year of permit term. 
    Users requesting a modification of an existing discharge permit shall pay a charge of $50.00 for the cost of modification. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95; Ord. No. O-10-033, 4-13-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 34-72. - Costs of damage. 
    If the drainage of discharge from any establishment causes a deposit, obstruction or damage to any of the city's wastewater facilities, the city shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor and supervision plus 15 percent overhead, shall be borne by the person causing such deposit, obstruction or damage. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-73. - Objectionable wastes prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner, on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-74. - Wastewater disposal. 
    Except as provided in the city's plumbing code, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-75. - Special agreements. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreements or arrangements between the city and any user of the wastewater facilities whereby wastewater of unusual strength of character is accepted into the system and specially treated subject to any payments or user charges as may be applicable, provided that these special agreements do not allow any violations of pretreatment standards and/or requirements, and that such agreements or arrangements can be granted by mechanisms established under the national pretreatment regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-76. - Nondomestic and industrial users regulations and practices. 
(a)  After public notice and an opportunity for informal public comment, the department of public works and the director of public works or his designee shall adopt and maintain regulations for the proper use of the wastewater facilities. These regulations shall authorize, the issuance of wastewater discharge permits, provide for monitoring and compliance determinations, require user reporting, establish local limits and other limitations or restrictions as necessary, to protect the city sewers and wastewater facilities and to meet all applicable federal and state pretreatment regulations and requirements. 
(b)  The director of public works or his designee shall enter into, on behalf of the city, appropriate agreements with political jurisdictions with wastewaters tributary to the city's sewer system to implement the requirements applicable to the city, federal or Virginia Pretreatment Requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 34-77. - Enforcement. 
    The city shall utilize, notice of violations, consent orders, administrative actions, or other actions as defined in this section, or in the nondomestic and industrial user regulations and practices Section XV, in order to provide compliance with this ordinance. These actions may include the imposition of voluntary penalties. 
    In addition to enforcement actions defined in the utilities nondomestic and industrial user regulation and practices Section XV, the following actions are authorized by this ordinance: 
(a)  Suspension of water and/or wastewater service and/or wastewater discharge permit. The city may suspend water and/or wastewater treatment services or a wastewater discharge permit. 
(1)  When determined by the city, an actual or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the wastewater treatment facilities, or causes the city to violate any condition of its VPDES permit. 
(2)  A state or federal agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into state waters, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's wastewater facilities that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment. 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater exceeding the limit established by the city; or 
b.  Discharges at an uncontrolled, variable rate or in sufficient quantity to cause an interference or pass through in the wastewater facilities; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water, sanitary sewer services, any sewer service charge, or surcharge when due; 
d.  Allows wastewater to continue to flow onto neighboring property. 
(4)  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, or city water supply, to prevent or minimize damage to the wastewater treatment facilities or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(b)  Revocation of wastewater discharge permit. Any user who violates the following conditions of this section, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having their wastewater discharge permit revoked in accordance with Section XI of the non domestic and industrial user regulations and practices: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of their discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(c)  Legal action. 
(1)  If any person violates the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements or any order or permit of the city, the director of public works or his designee may make a recommendation to the city attorney to commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief for such violation of the ordinance, the rules, regulations or permits issued thereunder, federal or state pretreatment requirements. 
(2)  If an industrial user bans the city from access to pretreatment or sampling facilities, the city has the authority to seek an injunction against the industrial user. 
(d)  Civil penalties. Any user who fails to comply with any provisions of this article and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder shall be fined through a civil action in the courts of the commonwealth not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,500.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this ordinance or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(e)  Criminal penalties. Any user who is found in a court of the commonwealth to have willfully or negligently violated an order of the city or to have willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of the article and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95; Ord. No. O-04-050, 4-13-04) 
Sec. 34-78. - Wastewater facilities board of appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby established in the city, a board to be called the wastewater facilities board of appeals which shall consist of five members. Such board shall be composed of one public works official, one engineer, two members of local industry, and one member at large from the community. The board shall be appointed by the city council, and it shall elect its own chairman from the membership. 
(b)  Term of office. The city council shall appoint initially three members for a term of three years, and two members for a term of two years, each of whom may be reappointed at the expiration of their respective terms. All future appointments shall be for two-year terms and all members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. The members shall take the oath of office prescribed by the city charter for officers of the city. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by city council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The members so appointed may be removed by city council for cause. 
(c)  Quorum. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum. No board member shall act or vote on any matter in which he has a substantial personal or pecuniary interest. 
(d)  Records. The director of public works, or designee shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reason for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(e)  Procedure. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. The board shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman, and in any event, the board shall meet within ten days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(f)  Powers and duties. Any sewer system user may initiate an appeal to the board by filing a notice of appeal. Such notice of appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the final enforcement action. No decision of the city to pursue an action in court shall be appealable pursuant to these provisions. The board shall consider, hear evidence on, and decide appeals of sewer system users enforcement actions taken by the director of public works or his designee. The board shall decide such appeals based upon the evidence and shall either (1) uphold the actions of the director of public works or his designee, or (2) reverse the actions of the director of public works or his designee, explain its reasons for doing so, and remand the matter to the director of public works or his designee for further action. 
(Ord. No. O-95-269, 9-26-95) 
Chapter 35 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city council over streets generally, § 38(9); regulation of transportation of articles through streets, § 38(18); flying kites in streets, § 38(22); streets generally, §§ 68-76. 
Cross reference- Department of community services, § 2-225 et seq.; posting signs in rights-of-way, § 3-3; signs, banners across streets, § 3-5; marking of streets, sidewalks, § 3-7; fences and walls, Ch. 17; parks and public places, Ch. 28; planning, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference- General authority regarding streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14; streets generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-363 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 35-1. - Unlawful moving of cornerstones or posts. 
    Any person who shall unlawfully move or displace, or in any manner change, deface or alter any cornerstone or post marking the corner of any street or sidewalk shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 30-4) 
Sec. 35-2. - Removal of encroachments. 
    In every case of an encroachment upon a street by a fence the city manager may require the owner or maintainer thereof to remove the same. For failure to make such removal within the time ordered the city manager shall summon the offender before the general district court, which may impose a penalty of $25.00 for each day such failure shall continue thereafter, and may cause such encroachment to be removed at the risk and cost of the party in default. All billboards now on city property, streets or alleys, or on any other property under the control of the city, shall be removed by the person who owns or erected the same. The owner of any such billboard who shall fail to comply with this provision shall be punished for violation of a class 3 misdemeanor in accordance with section 1-13. 
(Code 1959, § 30-5; Ord. of 9-7-77) 
Charter reference- Removal of encroachments upon streets, § 70. 
Cross reference- Sight obstructions by vegetation, § 38-3. 
State Law reference- Public utilities not to use streets without consent, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-375; city may permit existing encroachments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-377. 
Sec. 35-2.1. - Allowing certain encroachments to continue other than fences and billboards. 
    Owners of buildings or structures other than fences and billboards encroaching in, upon and over any public rights-of-way therein may maintain such encroachments as they exist until such buildings or structures are destroyed or removed; provided, however, that such encroachment does not interfere with the city's use of such rights-of-way nor obstruct the use of such rights-of-way by the public for travel nor constitute a public hazard and that the permitting of such encroachments to continue shall not relieve said owners of any negligence on their part on account of such encroachment. 
(Code 1959, § 30-5.1; Ord. of 7-10-79; Ord. No. O-19-029 , § 1, 5-14-19) 
Sec. 35-3. - When gutters required; emptying on street or sidewalk. 
    All houses, the eaves of which project over the sidewalk, shall be provided with gutters so that there shall be no dripping from the eaves upon the sidewalk. All gutters, the water from which empties upon a street or sidewalk, shall be so constructed as to discharge such water only at or below the surface of the ground. The owner or occupant of any house not complying with the requirements of this section, after notification to remedy the fault, shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 30-12) 
Sec. 35-4. - Drainage from gutters, etc., across footway. 
    No water from any lot, gutter or spout shall be permitted to flow across the footway of any street, except in a covered drain emptying into a storm drain. The cover of such drain shall not be above the surface of such footway. Such drain shall be of sufficient capacity to convey the water to be discharged by it, and shall be built and kept open and in good repair by the owner or occupant of the premises whence it proceeds. 
(Code 1959, § 30-13) 
Sec. 35-5. - Snow-breaks. 
    Houses which are located on the line of any street shall be provided with snow-breaks or guards on the side next to such street. The owner or occupant of any house who shall fail to comply with this section, after being notified by the city manager, shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 30-14) 
Sec. 35-6. - Removal of snow, sleet and ice from sidewalks, etc. 
    It shall be the duty of the occupant of every house or lot which abuts upon a sidewalk or footway of stone, brick or wood to have all snow removed from such sidewalk or footway within four hours after same shall have ceased falling, unless such snow shall have fallen during the night, in which case, it shall be removed by 12:00 noon the day following. The same requirements shall exist with respect to ice or sleet on sidewalks or footways, except that the same, when it cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk or footway, shall be covered, within the period of time specified, with sand, ashes or some other substance which will render it safe for travel. Whenever any house or lot is unoccupied, it shall be the duty of the owner, or the agent of the owner thereof, to have the snow or ice removed from his sidewalk or footway, as above required of occupants. The penalty for each violation of this section shall be $5.00, and every six hours that such snow or ice is allowed to remain in violation of this section shall be held to be a separate offense. For the purpose of this section the hereinafter designated officials shall be deemed the occupants of the buildings and grounds as hereinafter mentioned and shall be liable to the above-mentioned penalty. 
(Code 1959, § 30-15) 
Sec. 35-7. - Gates and doors near street line. 
    Every gate or door hereafter built in any fence or wall standing upon or within four feet of the line of any street shall be so hung as to open inward, or from the line of the street. The owner of any property on which a door or gate shall be hung contrary to this section shall be responsible for compliance with this section. 
(Code 1959, § 30-16) 
Sec. 35-8. - Obstructions generally. 
    No person shall obstruct a street, either in its driveway or sidewalk, by placing therein anything whatsoever which will hinder or obstruct the passage of persons or vehicles in any manner whatsoever. Every hour the violation of this section continues may, in the discretion of the judge of the general district court, be held a separate offense; but, this section shall be subject to the following limitations, exceptions and provisions: 
(a)  Telegraph, telephone, electric light companies and electric power furnishing companies may place such reasonable number of poles in the streets as may be requisite for their business; but, such poles shall be of such dimensions and be located or moved according to the direction and under the supervision of the city manager, and all such as may be erected on any paved street shall be painted and kept in good repair. 
(b)  No portion of the driveway or sidewalk shall be used for the storage of building material or for the erection of temporary structures in connection with the erection of any building or structure, except by permission of the city manager, who shall designate in each permit issued the space to be so occupied and the time limit of such occupancy. In streets through which a railway passes, such material, shed or house shall be so placed as not to interfere with the passage of cars thereon. When such building or wall is being erected, the sidewalk in front thereof shall not be obstructed, but for the protection of persons passing a shed or platform shall be erected over such sidewalk, which shall be at least eight feet high, and as wide as the pavement, and as long as the wall or building which is being erected, under which persons may safely walk. 
(c)  Merchants and others, while receiving goods or other articles, may place the same on the carriageway next to the curbing front of their premises; provided, that not more than five feet of such driveway, and no part of the footway, shall be so occupied; except, that on all streets in the city between Main Street and the James River, merchants and others may use the footway for the reception and delivery of such goods or other articles, if they do not interfere with the use of such footway by pedestrians. Such occupation of the footway or street shall be only for such time as may be necessary for such reception and delivery of such goods and other articles. 
(Code 1959, § 30-17) 
Sec. 35-8.1. - Structures within public rights-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any structure, building, barricade, wall, fence, tent or similar device within the public right-of-way abutting any public street, alley or sidewalk in the City of Lynchburg. This section shall not apply to mail boxes, newspaper tubes and similar devices, to bus stop shelters approved by the city or to any temporary structure placed in the public right-of-way as part of a city-supported event. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the remedies provided in section 35-9 of the City Code, the city shall have the right to petition the judge of the circuit court for a court order preventing the erection of any structure within the public right-of-way or directing the removal of any structure erected within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O-94-306, 12-13-94, eff. 2-1-95) 
Sec. 35-9. - Notification of obstructions; removal; recovery of costs. 
    It shall be the duty of the police to promptly notify the city manager of all obstructions of the streets, sidewalks, drains or culverts or the public right-of-way abutting any public street, alley or sidewalk that are not remedied at the request of the police. The city manager shall forthwith cause all such obstructions to be removed either by the persons responsible for the same or whose duty it is to remove the same, or failing in this to have the same removed at the cost of the city. If any person whose duty it is to remove any such obstruction fails or refuses to do so within five days after being notified to do so by the city manager, he shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, and when the obstruction is removed at the cost of the city, the party whose duty it was to have removed such obstruction shall be fined in addition to the penalty otherwise imposed such a sum as equals the expense incurred in and about such removal, together with 20 percent thereof in addition. 
(Code 1959, § 38-18; Ord. No. O-94-306, 12-13-94, eff. 2-1-95) 
Sec. 35-10. - Construction and use of railway lines, poles, etc. 
    When the council shall permit any person to construct sewers, lay railway lines, erect poles, stretch wires, lay pipes or do any kind of work that involves in any way the free and untrammeled use of the streets or sidewalks or the safe use of the same, either temporarily or permanently, such work shall be performed and such properties, when completed, shall be used and conducted according to such reasonable regulations as are prescribed by this chapter or may be hereafter promulgated by the council. All such work shall be so performed and all such properties shall be so used and operated as to obstruct as little as possible the ordinary use of the streets, and so as not to endanger persons or property. If any person violates this section, he shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, and if he fails to conform to it within a reasonable time after having been notified to do so by the city manager, each day's default shall constitute a separate offense. Upon such default, it shall be the duty of the city manager either to abate the nuisance caused by the violation of this section, by the destruction or removal of the properties or the discontinuance of the use of the same, or by altering the same so as to make it conform to this section. In this event, the violator of this section shall in addition to the penalty prescribed by section 1-13 be fined a sum equal to all the expenses incurred in and about the destruction, removal, discontinuance or alteration of the aforesaid works and properties. The contractor or person performing such work, as well as the owner or operator, shall be held to be within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 30-19) 
Sec. 35-11. - Mailboxes in streets. 
    Whenever any person shall desire to erect within the lines of any street or road in the city a rural free delivery mailbox, he must first make application therefor to the city manager, through the inspections division, who may issue a permit for its erection or construction. The post or support on which such box is to be fixed shall be of such material and design as may be approved by the city manager, and shall be erected at such point as the city manager may direct. The work shall be done at the cost of the applicant. In case of refusal to issue such permit, the manager shall report to the council, and the applicant may appeal to the council, whose decision shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 30-20) 
Sec. 35-12. - Protective devices. 
    When any work is being done on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or on structures abutting thereon, which may endanger persons passing thereon or thereby, barriers or other protective devices approved by the transportation engineer or the transportation engineer's designee, by application for and issuance of a right of way permit shall be erected and maintained to protect the public against any danger which may be presented to the public by reason of such work. Such barriers and devices shall be so constructed as to provide a light or other illumination during hours of darkness. Fees for right of way permits shall be set by the city manager. These fees are subject to annual review and revision by the city manager. 
    Traffic signs and traffic signals and markings placed or erected pursuant to this title shall conform in size, design, and color to those erected for the same purpose by the department of transportation. 
    The city transportation engineer may classify, designate, and mark highways and provide a uniform system of traffic control devices for such highways under the jurisdiction of the city. Such system of traffic control devices shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform to the system adopted in other states. 
    All drivers of vehicles shall obey lawfully erected traffic control devices. 
    No provision of this section relating to the prohibition of disobeying traffic control devices or violating local traffic control devices shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, any such traffic control device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
    Any violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 30-21; Ord. No. O-18-013 , 2-27-18) 
Sec. 35-13. - Retaining walls required where earth embankments abut on sidewalks. 
    Wherever earth embankments abut on any paved street or sidewalk, it shall be the duty of the owner of such property to erect suitable barriers or retaining walls to prevent loose earth or mud from falling upon such street or sidewalk. A person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, and if he fails to conform hereto within a reasonable time after having been notified to do so by the city manager, each day of default may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, § 30-22) 
Sec. 35-14. - Sidewalks to be kept clean; cleaning filling stations where drainage flows across sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person owning and occupying property abutting on a paved sidewalk to cause such sidewalk to be kept clean of dirt or filth or of dangerous or obnoxious matter and substances; and, it shall be unlawful to sweep litter or trash of any character or snow from any premises onto any of the sidewalks of the city or onto the pavement of any street in the city where the driveway thereof is paved. 
(b)  Where any area occupied by a gasoline filling station or an automobile service station is so constructed that the drainage therefrom does not flow into a sewer, but flows across the sidewalk, the operator of such station shall not wash off such area and permit the water therefrom to run across the sidewalk between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(Code 1959, § 30-23) 
Sec. 35-15. - Dangerous performances on or near streets. 
    No person shall give, do or perform, or cause to be given, done or performed, on or adjacent to any of the public streets of the city, any performance, exhibition or stunt, for compensation, direct or indirect, or for advertising purposes, which is likely to injure, damage or otherwise harm any other person or property. 
(Code 1959, § 30-24) 
Sec. 35-16. - Spitting on sidewalks, etc. 
    No person shall expectorate on any sidewalk or on the steps or doorways of any church or public building, or on the steps or doorways of private buildings, or on the floor or pavement of any railroad station, office building or other public place. 
(Code 1959, § 30-26) 
Sec. 35-17. - Coasting; snowballing. 
    No person shall slide or coast upon the snow or ice, or throw snowballs upon any street, except such as may be designated by the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 30-27) 
Sec. 35-18. - Fencing or filling excavations, etc., on private lots. 
    All holes, depressions, excavations or other dangerous places upon private lots that are below the grade of the adjoining street shall be properly enclosed with fences or walls, or be filled by the owners or occupants of such lots, so as to prevent persons or animals from falling into them. It shall be the duty of the city manager to notify the owners or occupants of premises on which such dangerous places exist, and require that fences or walls be built around them, or that they be filled up within such period as he shall deem that the exigencies of the case may require. The failure to comply with such notice shall be a class 2 misdemeanor. In case of a failure to comply with such notification, the city manager may cause such fencing or filling to be done at the expense of the city, and the sum so expended, with 20 percent thereof added as a penalty, shall be collected of such owner or occupant as other fines are collected, in addition to any penalty imposed for the violation of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 30-28) 
Sec. 35-19. - Auction sales on streets. 
    No person shall sell, or offer for sale, at public auction, on the streets or sidewalks of the city, any goods, wares, merchandise, household furniture or other article or thing whatsoever, except real estate. 
(Code 1959, § 30-29) 
Sec. 35-19.1. - Sale and display of merchandise or placement of items within public right-of-way in the downtown business district. 
(a)  In order to help encourage the growth and development of businesses in the downtown business district, a business may apply for an annual permit allowing the business to display goods, wares or merchandise, or to place showcases, menu easels, benches or tables and chairs for customers, signs and similar items within the public right-of-way adjacent to the business. 
(b)  Any business in the downtown business district that desires to place items in the public right-of-way shall make written application to the department of public works. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the business; 
(2)  A description of and the proposed location of the items; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person that will be responsible for overseeing the placement and removal of the items in and from the public right-of-way; and 
(4)  Any other information the department of public works decides is necessary to determine if the items can be safely placed in the public right-of-way. 
(c)  If, in the opinion of the department of public works, the proposed items can be located in the public right-of-way without endangering the public safety an annual permit shall be issued allowing the placement of the items in that portion of the public right-of-way that is adjacent to the business submitting the application. Such items shall be located so as not to cause any inconvenience or danger to persons using the public right-of-way or create unsightly conditions. All items placed on a public sidewalk shall be located in such a manner as to leave at least four feet of clearance between the item and edge of the curb. Items shall not be placed within three feet of any public area that is improved with flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping. A permit shall state whether or not the items can remain in the public right-of-way for a 24-hour period or must be removed at the end of the business day. A business that receives a permit to place items in the public right-of-way shall keep the permit on the premises and shall allow city representatives to inspect the permit during regular business hours. 
(d)  No item placed in the public right-of-way shall be used for the advertisement, display or sale of alcohol or tobacco products or for the consumption of any alcoholic beverage. 
(e)  A permit shall be revoked upon a finding by the department of public works that the items located in the public right-of-way cause any inconvenience or danger to persons using the public right-of-way or create an unsightly condition. A permit may also be revoked if any of the information supplied on the application is discovered to be false or misleading or if the applicant fails to maintain the insurance required in paragraph (f) of this section. Upon notification that its permit has been revoked the business, at its sole expense, shall immediately remove all items from the public right-of-way and restore the right-of-way to its former condition. If a business fails to remove items that were placed in the public right-of-way after having been notified to do so the city may remove such items at the expense of the business. 
(f)  Before placing any items in the public right-of-way the business must execute an agreement holding the city harmless against all claims for personal injury or property damage resulting from the use of the public right-of-way and must furnish the city with a certificate of insurance with general liability and property damage coverage in such amount and form as shall be approved by the city's risk management coordinator. The certificate of insurance shall include the City of Lynchburg, its officers and employees as additional insureds. 
(g)  This section shall not apply to newspaper vending machines; however, such items must be located in such a manner so as not to cause any inconvenience or danger to persons using the public right-of-way. 
(h)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-83-045, § 1, 3-8-83; Ord. No. O-97-083, 5-13-97; Ord. No. O-18-013 , 2-27-18) 
Sec. 35-20. - Care of private alleys. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of every private alley to have the same so graded as to prevent the accumulation therein of water or filth, and to keep the same constantly clean and in good order. Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, and every 24 hours that he shall so neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this section after notice of the violation from the city manager shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, § 30-31) 
Sec. 35-21. - Names and locations of streets. 
    The names and locations of streets shall be as they have been, or from time to time may be fixed or changed by resolution or ordinance of the council. 
(Code 1959, § 30-35) 
State Law reference- Alteration, vacation of streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-364. 
Sec. 35-22. - Vehicles scattering or depositing dirt, trash and other materials upon streets. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way within the city limits unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom; provided, however, that sand or any substance to increase traction or water or other substance may be applied on a roadway in the cleaning or maintaining of such roadway by the state or local government agency having such responsibilities. 
(b)  No vehicle used to transport litter or other items likely to fall or be blown from such vehicle shall be driven or moved, stopped or parked on any highway or street unless such vehicle is covered to prevent its contents from blowing, dropping or falling from such vehicle. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of every vehicle used for the transportation of dirt, sand, coal, paper, trash, garbage, manure or any other matter or material of any kind or description whatsoever, along or over any of the highways, streets, alleys or other rights-of-way of the city, to make provisions for the securing of such material in or on such vehicle in such manner that such material, or any portion thereof, will not scatter or fall on any of the aforesaid highways, streets, alleys or public rights-of-way. 
(d)  Any person operating a vehicle from which any litter has fallen or escaped, which could cause an obstruction or damage a vehicle or otherwise endanger travelers on such public property, shall immediately cause the public property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay any costs therefor. 
(e)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, for a first offense, be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. For a second or subsequent conviction within a 12-month period, he shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-85-113, § 2, 5-28-85) 
Sec. 35-23. - Loitering on and throwing objects from bridges. 
(a)  Pedestrians shall not loiter on any bridge within the city on which the city traffic engineer has posted signs prohibiting such action. 
(b)  No person shall throw any object from any bridge within the city. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-88-186, § 1, 8-9-88) 
Sec. 35-24. - Unlawful to install and/or expand communications systems without a franchise. 
    The council of the city of Lynchburg has determined that it is in the best interests of the city and its citizens to regulate and grant franchises to entities desiring to construct, operate and maintain communications systems within the public streets, alleys, public grounds or other public rights-of-way. 
    No corporation, association, person, partnership, or any other entity, whether public or private, profit or not for profit, shall construct, operate, expand or maintain a public or private communication system, any type of transmitter/receiver system, any telecommunication system, or any other system of any nature whatsoever for the purpose of transmitting or receiving voice, data, video or image signals in any of the city's streets, alleys, public grounds or other public rights-of-way without first obtaining a franchise from the Lynchburg City Council. 
    No corporation, association, person, partnership, or any other entity, which currently has a franchise from the city to maintain electric, gas, light, power, telephone, cable television, or any other services in the city's streets, alleys, public grounds, or other public rights-of-way shall expand, sell, lease or transfer their equipment and facilities to include any of the activities listed above without first obtaining a modification of their existing franchise from the city specifically permitting such activities. 
    Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor and each day such violation continues shall be punishable as a separate offense. In addition to the other penalties provided herein the city shall have the right to petition the judge of the circuit court for a court order injoining any violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-95-132, 5-23-95) 
Sec. 35-25. - Authority to enter into agreements and set fees for access to fiber optic facilities located in the public rights-of-way. 
(a)  The city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to make and/or enter into contracts or other agreements or arrangements concerning access to the city's fiber optic facilities located in the public rights-of-way, as deemed necessary; provided that the terms and conditions of such contracts shall not be contrary to the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  The city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to prescribe, revise and collect fees for access to the city's fiber optic facilities. Such fees shall take into consideration the city's cost of installing, operating, maintaining, and managing such facilities, a reasonable rate of return on the city's investment, and the intended purpose for which the user is seeking access to the facilities. 
(c)  The city manager shall file with the city clerk and make available for public inspection all schedules of fees which the city has established and which are in force at that time. 
(Ord. No. O-97-196, 9-23-97) 
Sec. 35-26. - Public rights-of-way use fee for providers of telecommunications services. 
(a)  For purposes of this section: 
    Certificated provider of telecommunication services means a public service corporation holding a certificate issued by the state corporation commission to provide local exchange or interexchange telephone service. 
    Public rights-of-way use fee means a fee charged and billed monthly to the ultimate end user of each access line of a certificated provider of local exchange telephone service, the rate of which fee shall be established annually by the Virginia Department of Transportation in the manner specified in Section 56-468.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The public rights-of-way use fee is hereby imposed on the ultimate end user of each access line, as defined in Section 56-468.1(A) of the Code of Virginia and shall be collected by each certificated provider of local exchange telephone provider service operating in the city, but not providers of commercial mobile radio services. Within two months after the end of each calendar quarter, each such certificated provider shall remit to the city's finance department the amount of public rights-of-way use fees it has billed to end users of the provider's services during such preceding quarter. Fee so collected by the certificated providers shall be deemed to be held in trust until remitted to the city's finance department. Such fees shall constitute a debt of the ultimate end user until paid to such provider. If any ultimate end user refuses to pay the public rights-of-way use fee, the local exchange service provider shall furnish the name and address of each such ultimate end user on a quarterly basis along with the remittance of fees. 
(c)  The public rights-of-way fee shall be in lieu of, and not in addition to, the permit inspection and other fees imposed by the City Code on certificated providers of telecommunications services. No certificated provider of telecommunication services shall be required to pay such permit or inspection fees or any other city fees or charges (except for zoning, subdivision, site plan and comprehensive plan fees of general application) as a condition of, or as compensation for, its use of the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall relieve any certificated provider of telecommunication services from submitting plans, applying for permits and adhering to applicable standards for construction, installation of facilities and street or roadway repairs in the manner required by the City Code and all other applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations, provided such requirements are no greater than those imposed on all other providers of telecommunications or nonpublic providers of telecommunications or nonpublic providers of cable television, electric, natural gas, water or sanitary sewer services. Any application by a certificated provider of telecommunication services to use city rights-of-way shall be granted or denied by the city manager within 45 days after receipt, and, if denied, shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the reasons for denial and the actions required to cure the denial. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall affect the type or amount of fees payable by providers of cable television services pursuant to any existing or future franchise, license or permit granted by the city. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall affect any amount payable by any provider of telecommunications services for the right to locate towers or other facilities on property of the city other than within the public rights-of-way nor shall anything prohibit the city from entering into voluntary pole attachment, conduit occupancy or conduit construction agreements with any certificated provider of telecommunications service. 
(g)  The city shall annually expend at least ten percent of the amount of the public rights-of-way use fees it receives under this section for transportation construction or maintenance purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-98-151, 6-23-98, eff. 10-1-98) 
Sec. 35-27. - Removal or relocation of equipment. 
(a)  Whenever the city shall determine it is necessary in connection with the repair, relocation, or improvement of the public rights-of-way or any public project, the city may require by written notification that any corporation, association, person, partnership, or any other entity, which currently has a franchise, license, interim license, lease or other authorization from the city to install and maintain electric, gas, light, power, telephone, cable television, telecommunications or any other services in the city's streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way or on public grounds to remove or relocate any facilities located in the public rights-of-way or on public grounds. Within 60 days after receipt of notification, unless the city extends such period for good cause shown, such corporation, association, person, partnership, or other entity shall remove or relocate its facilities to such place and under such terms and conditions as specified by the city. Such corporation, association, person, partnership, or other entity shall bear all expenses associated with the removal and relocation of its facilities except that the city will issue, without charge whatever local permits are required for the relocation of such facilities. If such corporation, association, person, partnership, or any other entity does not complete its removal or relocation within 60 days or such other period as authorized by the city, the city may take such actions as necessary to effect such removal or relocation at such corporation's, association's, person's, partnership's, or other entities' expense. If the city or its representatives remove or relocate any facilities that are located in the city's streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way or on public grounds because the owner of the facilities fails to do so in a timely manner, neither the city or its representatives shall be liable for any damages the facilities may suffer as a result of such removal or relocation. Further, any corporation, association, person, partnership, or any other entity that fails to remove its facilities in a timely manner will be responsible for any additional costs and expenses incurred by the city as a result of such corporation's, association's, person's, partnership's, or other entities' failure to remove or relocate its facilities as instructed by the city. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $2,500.00 and each day such violation continues shall be punishable as a separate offense. In addition to the other penalties provided herein the city shall have the right to petition the judges of the circuit court for a court order enjoining any violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-23-10, Ord. No. O-10-140) 
Sec. 35-28. - Unlawful to install micro-wireless and small cell facilities in the public rights-of-way or on city-owned property without a permit. 
    The Council of the City of Lynchburg has determined that it is in the best interests of the city and its citizens to regulate the installation of micro-wireless and small cell facilities within the public streets, alleys, public grounds or other public rights-of-way or upon city-owned property. 
    Therefore, no corporation, association, person, partnership, or any other entity, whether public or private, profit or not for profit, shall install micro-wireless and small cell facilities within the public streets, alleys, public grounds or other public rights-of-way within the city or upon city-owned property without first obtaining a permit from the city. The requirement of a permit also applies to the co-location of micro-wireless and small cell facilities on existing structures that are located within the public streets, alleys, public grounds or other public rights-of-way or upon city-owned property. 
    Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor and each day such violation continues shall be punishable as a separate offense. In addition to the other penalties provided herein, the city shall have the right to petition the judges of the circuit court for a court order enjoining any violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-17-060 , § 1, 7-27-17) 
Sec. 35-28.1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this ordinance, unless the context requires a different meaning, the following definitions shall apply: 
    "Co-locate" means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to a base station, building, existing structure, utility pole, or wireless support structure. "Co-location" has a corresponding meaning. 
    "Existing structure" means any structure that is installed or approved for installation at the time a wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider provides notice to a locality of an agreement with the owner of the structure to co-locate equipment on that structure. "Existing structure" includes any structure that is currently supporting, designed to support, or capable of supporting the attachment of wireless facilities, including towers, buildings, utility poles, light poles, flag poles, signs, and water towers. 
    "Micro-wireless facility" means a small cell facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
    "Small cell facility" means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet and (ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a cumulative volume of no more than 28 cubic feet, or such higher limit as is established by the Federal Communications Commission. The following types of associated equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
    "Utility pole" means a structure owned, operated, or owned and operated by a public utility, the city, or the Commonwealth that is designed specifically for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires for communications, cable television, or electricity. 
    For the definition of other terms that are used in this ordinance, see Sections 15.2-2316.3 and 56-484.26 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. O-17-060 , § 1, 7-27-17) 
Sec. 35-28.2. - Application and fees. 
    Any corporation, association, person, partnership, or any other entity desiring to install or co-locate micro-wireless or small cell facilities within the public streets, alleys, public grounds or other public rights-of-way or upon city-owned property shall make written application therefor with the city's engineering division on forms supplied by the division. The applicant shall pay a fee not to exceed $150.00 for processing a permit application. 
    In addition to the $150.00 processing fee, the applicant shall also pay zoning, subdivision, site plan, and comprehensive plan fees of general application, if any, on a wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider to attach or co-locate micro-wireless or small cell facilities on an existing structure in the right-of-way. 
    The engineering division may require a single use permit fee, as determined by the engineering division, if the installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro-wireless facilities or small cell facilities (i) involves working within the highway travel lane or require closure of a highway travel lane; (ii) disturbs the pavement, shoulder, roadway, or ditch line; (iii) includes placement on limited access rights-of-way; or (iv) requires any specific precautions to ensure the safety of the traveling public or the protection of public infrastructure or the operation thereof, and either were not authorized in or will be conducted in a time, place, or manner that is inconsistent with terms of the existing permit for that facility or the structure upon which it is attached. All work conducted within the public right-of-way shall be restored as outlined in the city's procedures manual for asphalt/concrete (street) repairs. A copy of the procedures manual for asphalt/concrete (street) repairs shall be kept in the office of the department of public works and shall be available for review upon request. It shall be the responsibility of any applicant for a permit to review the manual and become familiar with its requirements before beginning any excavation work within the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O-17-060 , § 1, 7-27-17) 
Sec. 35-28.3. - Processing of application. 
    Upon receipt of an application, and after review of the application by the city's technical review committee, the engineering division may issue a permit allowing the installation and operation of micro-wireless or small cell facilities on existing structures in the public rights-of-way, provided that the applicant (i) has permission from the owner of the structure to co-locate equipment on that structure and (ii) provides notice of the agreement and co-location to the engineering division. The engineering division shall approve or disapprove any such requested permit within 60 days of receipt of the complete application. Within ten days after receipt of an application and a valid electronic mail address for the applicant, the engineering division shall notify the applicant by electronic mail whether the application is incomplete and specify any missing information; otherwise, the application shall be deemed complete. Any disapproval of the application shall be in writing and accompanied by an explanation for the disapproval. The 60-day period may be extended by the engineering division in writing for a period not to exceed an additional 30 days. 
(Ord. No. O-17-060 , § 1, 7-27-17) 
Sec. 35-28.4. - Issuance of permit and indemnification. 
    If the engineering division approves the installation of micro-wireless or small cell facilities as stated in the application for a permit, it shall issue the permit. The acceptance of a permit shall require the recipient thereof and its successors in interest to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its employees and officials, from all claims, expenses and costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, for damages or injuries to any person or property of any nature whatsoever, arising out of the installation and operation of micro-wireless or small cell facilities for which the permit was granted. 
(Ord. No. O-17-060 , § 1, 7-27-17) 
Sec. 35-28.5. - Denial of application. 
    The engineering division may disapprove a proposed location or installation of micro-wireless or a small cell facility for the following reasons: 
(a)  Material potential interference with other pre-existing communications facilities or with future communications facilities that have already been designed and planned for a specific location or that have been reserved for future public safety communications facilities; 
(b)  The public safety or other critical public service needs; 
(c)  Only in the case of an installation on or in publicly owned or publicly controlled property, excluding privately owned structures where the applicant has an agreement for attachment to the structure, aesthetic impact or the absence of all required approvals from all departments, authorities, and agencies with jurisdiction over such property; or 
(d)  Conflict with the applicable provisions of the city's zoning ordinance regulating historic sites and structures. 
    An applicant may voluntarily submit conditions to address potential visual or aesthetic effects resulting from the placement of micro-wireless and small cell facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-17-060 , § 1, 7-27-17) 
Sec. 35-28.6. - Attachment on city-owned structures. 
(a)  If the city agrees to permit a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider to attach micro-wireless or small cell facilities to city-owned structures, the city and the wireless services or wireless infrastructure provider shall negotiate in good faith to arrive at a mutually agreeable contract terms and conditions. 
(b)  The rates, terms, and conditions for such agreement shall be just and reasonable, cost-based, nondiscriminatory, and competitively neutral, and shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws. However, rates for attachments to city-owned buildings may be based on fair market value. 
(c)  For utility poles owned by the city or the Commonwealth that support aerial cables used for video, communications, or electric service, the parties shall comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C. § 224 and implementing regulations. The good faith estimate of the government entity owning or controlling the utility pole for any make-ready work necessary to enable the utility pole to support the requested co-location shall include pole replacement if necessary. 
(d)  For utility poles owned by the city or the Commonwealth that do not support aerial cables used for video, communications, or electric service, the government entity owning or controlling the utility pole shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the utility pole to support the requested co-location, including pole replacement, if necessary, within 60 days after receipt of a complete application. Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall be completed within 60 days of written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider. 
(e)  The government entity owning or controlling the utility pole shall not require more make-ready work than required to meet applicable codes or industry standards. Charges for make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall not exceed actual costs or the amount charged to other wireless services providers, providers of telecommunications services, and nonpublic providers of cable television and electric services for similar work and shall not include consultants' fees or expenses. 
(f)  The annual recurring rate to co-locate a micro-wireless or a small cell facility on a government-owned utility pole shall not exceed the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless services provider's or wireless infrastructure provider's use of space on the utility pole. In any controversy concerning the appropriateness of the rate, the government entity owning or controlling the utility pole shall have the burden of proving that the rates are reasonably related to the actual, direct, and reasonable costs incurred for use of space on the utility pole for such period. 
(Ord. No. O-17-060 , § 1, 7-27-17) 
Sec. 35-28.7. - Relocation of facilities. 
    Whenever the city shall determine it is necessary in connection with the repair, relocation, or improvement of the public rights-of-way or any public project, the city may require by written notification that any corporation, association, person, partnership, or any other entity, which has installed micro-wireless or small cell facilities in the city's streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way or on public grounds or on city-owned property to remove or relocate any facilities located in the public rights or way or on public grounds or on city-owned property. Within 60 days after receipt of notification, unless the city extends such period for good cause shown, such corporation, association, person, partnership, or other entity shall remove or relocate its facilities to such place and under such terms and conditions as specified by the city. Such corporation, association, person, partnership, or other entity shall bear all expenses associated with the removal and relocation of its facilities except that the city will issue, without charge whatever local permits are required for the relocation of such facilities. If such corporation, association, person, partnership, or any other entity does not complete its removal or relocation within 60 days or such other period as authorized by the city, the city may take such actions as necessary to effect such removal or relocation at such corporation's, association's, person's, partnership's, or other entities' expense. If the city or its representatives remove or relocate any facilities that are located in the city's streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way or on public grounds or on city-owned property because the owner of the facilities fails to do so in a timely manner, neither the city or its representatives shall be liable for any damages the facilities may suffer as a result of such removal or relocation. Further, any corporation, association, person, partnership, or any other entity that fails to remove its facilities in a timely manner will be responsible for any additional costs and expenses incurred by the city as a result of such corporation's, association's, person's, partnership's, or other entities' failure to remove or relocate its facilities as instructed by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-17-060 , § 1, 7-27-17) 
Secs. 35-29-35-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 35-34. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3.1) 
Sec. 35-35. - Permit required; conditions. 
(a)  Any person desiring to cross the sidewalks or curbs or street right-of-way lines with any such vehicles or machinery to enter any private premises or private road or alley, shall make application to the city engineer for a permit to construct a driveway across city property to enter any such private premises or private road or alley on his premises, and when such permit is granted therefor, the persons securing such permit shall construct such crossing at their own expense of such materials as may be specified by the director of public works and shall cause the curbing, if any, to be removed for the required width of the driveway. All construction must be performed in accordance with the standards developed by the department of public works. A copy of such standards shall be kept in the office of the department of public works and shall be available for review upon request. It shall be the responsibility of any applicant for a permit to review the standards and become familiar with its requirements before beginning any construction work. 
(b)  During the installation of any utility or its appurtenances, the public utility, public service corporation and their subcontractors, independent contractors or any other entity which performs work for them under the terms of this article shall have the responsibility to install the utility and its appurtenances in accordance with all federal, state, and local laws, rules and regulations and prevailing industry standards, and shall be solely responsible for any damages that may occur due to their failure to install such utility or appurtenances in accordance with such requirements. The city does not inspect any installation for compliance with such standards, nor does it assume any responsibility for the failure of the public utility company, public service corporation, their subcontractors, independent contractors, or any other entity which performs work for the utility, to comply with such requirements. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3.1; Ord. No. O-88-062, § 1, 3-22-88, eff. 7-1-88; Ord. No. O-88-176, § 1, 7-12-88; Ord. No. O-94-318, 12-13-94, eff. 1-1-95; Ord. No. O-99-037, 2-23-99) 
Sec. 35-36. - Specifications generally. 
    The opening for driveways constructed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall have a new curb installed with a minimum radius of 30 inches connecting the driveway to the existing curb. Such construction shall be done in accordance with specifications, approved by the city engineer, and to his satisfaction, and no such crossing shall exceed 50 feet in width. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3.1) 
Sec. 35-37. - Bridges, temporary crossings. 
    No person shall be allowed to place a bridge or any other obstruction over any paved gutters or sidewalk; provided, however, that the city engineer may grant a permit to any person to put in a temporary crossing over a sidewalk for the purpose of excavating on or filling in private premises upon such conditions as may be necessary to protect such sidewalk from injury while such work is going on, to be constructed and maintained at the expense of the person to whom such permit is granted. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3.1) 
Sec. 35-38. - Pipe for drainage ditch. 
    For the crossing of any drainage ditch the owner shall provide at his expense a pipe or conduit of such size and length as may be specified by the city engineer, such pipe or conduit to be placed or installed by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3.1) 
Sec. 35-39. - Indemnification of city. 
    The acceptance of a permit issued under the provisions of this article shall bind the recipient thereof and his successors in ownership to indemnify and save harmless the city from all claims for damages to persons or property by reason of the construction and maintenance of the crossover for which the permit is granted; and, also, upon the abandonment of the use of the crossover, to restore, at his sole expense, the sidewalk and curb, or either, to its original condition within 60 days from receipt of written notice to him by the city engineer so to do. No permit shall be issued except upon the signed application therefor by the owner of the property to be served by the crossover, or his duly authorized agent; and the application shall show on its face that the applicant agrees to be so bound. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3.1) 
Sec. 35-40. - Expiration. 
    The failure to exercise a permit issued under the provisions of this article within three months after its date of issue shall operate to automatically revoke the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3.1) 
Sec. 35-41. - Maintenance of driveways. 
(a)  Duty of owner or occupant. In order to ensure the safe passage of the public it is necessary that driveways installed on city property be maintained in a safe condition. Since the installation of a driveway is for the sole benefit for the owner or occupant of the real property adjoining the driveway, it shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property adjoining any driveway installed in the public right-of-way to maintain such driveway in a safe condition. 
(b)  Notice to repair. Whenever the owner or occupant of any real property abutting a driveway fails to maintain the driveway in a safe condition such owner or occupant shall be notified by the city manager or his designee, that the driveway is unsafe and it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant to at once repair the same. In case of the failure of the owner or occupant to repair the driveway within five days after receipt of written notice, the city manager may cause such repairs to be made at the cost of the city, and the cost thereof, which shall be collected from the party in default in the same manner as taxes are collected, including the same penalty and interest applicable to delinquent taxes. 
(c)  Service of notice. The notice to repair a driveway shall be served by mailing a copy of the notice to the last known address of the property owner or to the occupant by certified mail. 
(d)  City's cost declared lien. Any and all costs incurred by the city in the repair of a driveway under the provisions of this section shall constitute a lien against the real property adjoining such driveway, which liens shall be filed, proven and collected as provided for by law. Such liens shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied. 
(Ord. No. O-88-176, § 1, 7-12-88) 
Secs. 35-42-35-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 35-51. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3; Ord. of 8-8-78) 
Sec. 35-52. - Permit required. 
    No person shall excavate within the right-of-way of any street, sidewalk, alley or any other public right-of-way or thoroughfare in the city, for any purpose whatsoever, without first obtaining a permit to do so. Any person performing any excavation work shall be responsible for making any and all repairs necessitated by such excavation work and all repairs shall be done in a workmanlike manner. In addition, any person performing any excavation work shall meet all applicable requirements of chapter 38, "Trees and Vegetation," of the Code of the City of Lynchburg, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3; Ord. of 8-8-78; Ord. No. O-84-161, § 1, 6-26-84; Ord. No. O-92-144, 5-12-92) 
Sec. 35-53. - Public utility, service companies. 
    Public utility and public service corporations which have been granted the privilege to operate in the streets of the city shall obtain an excavation permit 30 days in advance for all preplanned work and within 24 hours of starting emergency work, unless such emergency work occurs during weekends or normal city holidays, in which cases the permit shall be obtained during the next work day. Public utility and public service corporations and their subcontractors, independent contractors, and any other entity which performs any work under the terms of this article shall meet any bonding requirements set forth in the franchise granted by the city to the public utility or public service corporation. Public utility and public service corporations and their subcontractors, independent contractors, and any other entity which performs any work under the terms of the article shall provide proof of liability insurance satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3; Ord. of 8-8-78; Ord. No. O-92-144, 5-12-92) 
Sec. 35-54. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this article shall make written application therefor with the city engineer on forms supplied by him. Each individual excavation or work area will require an individual permit. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3; Ord. of 8-8-78; Ord. No. O-92-144, 5-12-92) 
Sec. 35-55. - Inspection fee; deposit. 
    Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall deposit with the city an inspection fee in accordance with the current fee schedule maintained in the city engineering department These fees are subject to annual review and revision by the city manager. If in the opinion of the city engineer a permit requires more than the usual routine administrative and inspection time, the utility shall be billed for all costs associated with this permit at a cost plus an overhead rate. 
    To ensure the restoration of the excavated area (for a minimum of one year), the applicant shall also submit a bond, certified check, or other method of surety as approved by the city attorney. The amount of said bond, certified check, or surety shall be determined by the city engineer or such other person or persons as the city may from time to time designate. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3; Ord. of 8-8-78; Ord. No. O-84-141, § 1, 6-12-84; eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-88-062, § 1, 3-22-88, eff. 7-1-88; Ord. No. O-92-144, 5-12-92; Ord. No. O-18-013 , 2-27-18) 
Sec. 35-56. - Issuance of permit and indemnification. 
    If the city engineer approves the work as stated in the application for a permit required by the provisions of this article, he shall issue such permit. The acceptance of a permit issued under the provisions of this article shall require the recipient thereof and his successors in interest to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its employees and officials, from all claims, expenses and costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, for damages or injuries to any person or property of any nature whatsoever, arising out of any excavation work for which the permit is granted. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3; Ord. of 8-8-78; Ord. No. O-95-313, 11-28-95) 
Sec. 35-57. - Denial of permit. 
    If the city engineer shall not approve for any reason the proposed work for which a permit is required under the provisions of this article (for example, because of location, materials used, construction practices, etc.), he shall return the application and deposit to the applicant. If the applicant is aggrieved by the action of the city engineer, he may appeal the same to the public works director. The decision of the public works director shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3; Ord. of 8-8-78; Ord. No. O-92-144, 5-12-92) 
Sec. 35-58. - Reconstruction, disposition of deposit. 
    All reconstruction of excavated areas within the public right-of-way shall be restored as outlined in the city's procedures manual for asphalt/concrete (street) repairs. A copy of the procedures manual for asphalt/concrete (street) repairs shall be kept in the office of the department of public works and shall be available for review upon request. It shall be the responsibility of any applicant for a permit to review the manual and become familiar with its requirements before beginning any excavation work. 
(Code 1959, § 30-3; Ord. of 8-8-78; Ord. No. O-92-144, 5-12-92) 
Sec. 35-59. - Disposition of deposit. 
    Failure to complete the work within such specified time without good cause, in the opinion of the city engineer, shall result in forfeiture of the permit holder's bond or certified check. This is not a liquidated damages provision. In addition to the forfeiture of the permit holder's bond or certified check, the city retains any and all rights and remedies which it may have against the permit holder as a result of the permit holder's failure. Upon any such failure, in addition to any other remedy, the city may complete the work and recover the cost from the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. O-92-144, 5-12-92) 
Sec. 35-60. - Identification. 
    Each excavation shall be identified by the applicant in the field as to ownership. The color codes shall comply with industry standards for marking utilities. 
(Ord. No. O-92-144, 5-12-92) 
Sec. 35-61. - Maintenance and indemnification. 
(a)  In order to protect the public safety it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any real property which abuts any sidewalk, steps, bridge, or any other crossing that has been installed in the public right-of-way for the benefit of the private property abutting the public right-of-way to maintain, at the owner or occupant's sole expense, such sidewalk, steps, bridge, or other crossing in a safe condition. 
(b)  If the owner or occupant fails to maintain such sidewalk, steps, bridge, or other crossing, within five days after receiving notice from the city, the city may cause such repairs to be made and the cost of the repairs shall be recovered from the owner or occupant in the same manner that delinquent taxes are covered. Lack of notice from the city shall not relieve the owner or occupant of the responsibility to maintain such sidewalk, steps, bridge or other crossing in a safe condition. 
(c)  Since the installation of sidewalk, steps, bridge or any other crossing covered under the provisions of this section is for the sole benefit of the owner or occupant of the real property abutting the public right-of-way in which such crossing is installed, the owner or occupant, and their successors in interest, shall indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its employees and officials, from all claims, expenses, and costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, for damages or injuries to any person or property of any nature whatsoever, arising out of the construction and maintenance of such sidewalk, steps, bridge, or other crossing. 
(Ord. No. O-95-313, 11-28-95) 
Secs. 35-62-35-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET VACATIONS 

Sec. 35-71. - Authority of council. 
    The city council, on its own motion or on application of any person, may alter or vacate streets and alleys within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 30-37; Ord. of 2-22-77) 
State Law reference- Authority to alter, vacate streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-364. 
Sec. 35-72. - Application. 
    Any person making application to council to alter or vacate a street shall file with the planning division an application of vacation and a filing fee. 
(Code 1959, § 30-37; Ord. of 2-22-77; Ord. No. O-16-106 , § 1, 9-13-16) 
Sec. 35-73. - Filing fee. 
    The filing fee for an application for the alteration or vacation of a street or alley within the city shall be $75.00. 
(Code 1959, § 30-37; Ord. of 2-22-77; Ord. No. O-90-093, 3-27-90, eff. 7-1-90) 
State Law reference- Filing fee limited, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-364.1. 
Sec. 35-74. - Notice of application when the city is appointing viewers. 
(a)  When the city is appointing viewers, notice of the application for alteration or vacation of a street or alley that has been opened to and is being used by the public as a public street or alley within the city shall be posted on a sign on the premises to be altered or vacated, in size and form approved by the city traffic engineer, at least ten days prior to the appointment of viewers by council, and shall be published at least twice, with at least six days elapsing between the first and second publication, in a newspaper published or having general circulation in the city, prior to the appointment of viewers by the council. The sign shall remain posted until final action has been taken by city council, or the application has been withdrawn. The cost of posting the sign and the cost of publishing the notice shall be paid by the applicant. 
(b)  In addition to the advertising required by paragraph (a), the planning division shall notify the owners of all property within 200 feet of the proposed alteration or vacation not less than ten days prior to the public hearing before city council. Notification shall be by first class mail to the last known address of such owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment book, and the cost of the notification shall be charged to the applicant, unless waived by the city, at the standard postal rate as determined by the United States Postal Service for each written notice. If the public hearing is continued, notice shall be re-mailed. 
(Ord. No. O-16-106 , § 1, 9-13-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-16-106 , § 1, adopted Sep. 13, 2016, amended § 35-74 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 35-74 pertained to notice of application and derived from Code 1959, § 30-37; an ordinance adopted Feb. 22, 1977; and Ord. No. O-82-185, § 1, adopted Sep. 14, 1982. 
Sec. 35-74.1. - Notice of application when the city is not using viewers. 
(a)  If the city is not appointing viewers, notice of the application for alteration or vacation of a street or alley that has been opened to and is being used by the public as a public street or alley within the city shall be posted on a sign on the premises to be altered or vacated, in size and form approved by the city traffic engineer, at least ten days prior to city council's public hearing on the application, and shall be published at least twice, with at least six days elapsing between the first and second publication, in a newspaper published or having general circulation in the city, prior to the public hearing. The sign shall remain posted until final action has been taken by city council, or the application has been withdrawn. The cost of posting the sign and the cost of publishing the notice shall be paid by the applicant. 
(b)  In addition to the advertising required by paragraph (a), the planning division shall notify the owners of all property within 200 feet of the proposed alteration or vacation not less than ten days prior to the public hearing before city council. Notification shall be by first class mail to the last known address of such owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment book, and the cost of the notification shall be charged to the applicant, unless waived by the city, at the standard postal rate as determined by the United States Postal Service for each written notice. If the public hearing is continued, notice shall be re-mailed. 
(Ord. No. O-16-106 , § 1, 9-13-16) 
Sec. 35-75. - Notice to alter or vacate a "paper" street or alley. 
(a)  The person making an application for the alteration or vacation of a street or alley in the city that has not been opened to and is not being used by the public as a public street or alley, shall cause the adjacent property owners affected thereby along the street or alley proposed to be altered or vacated to be notified by first class mail of the public hearing when the council shall consider such proposed alteration or vacation. Notification shall be mailed to the last known address of such owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment book. If the public hearing is continued, the applicant shall re-mail the notice. It shall not be necessary for the applicant to send an adjacent property owner notice of the proposed alteration or vacation of a street or alley if the adjacent property owner has signed the application expressing their support for the proposed alteration or vacation. 
(b)  In addition to the advertising required by paragraph (a), notice of the public hearing on the proposed alteration or vacation of a street or alley that has not been opened to and is not being used by the public as a public street or alley, shall be published at least twice, with at least six days elapsing between the first and second publication, in a newspaper published or having general circulation in the city, prior to the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. O-16-106 , § 1, 9-13-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-16-106 , § 1, adopted Sep. 13, 2016, amended § 35-75 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 35-75 pertained to notice to land proprietors and derived from Code 1959, § 30-37; and an ordinance adopted Feb. 22, 1977. 
Sec. 35-76. - Viewers. 
    Upon application of any person for the alteration or vacation of a street or alley in the city, the council may appoint, from an approved listing, not less than three nor more than five viewers who shall view such street or alley and report in writing to the council whether in their opinion any, and if any, what, inconvenience would result from discontinuing the same. The council shall allow such viewers the sum of $5.00 for their services, to be paid by the person making the application to alter or vacate the street or alley. 
(Code 1959, § 30-37; Ord. of 2-22-77; Ord. No. O-95-136, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 35-77. - Action by council. 
    From the report of the city's technical review committee and city council's physical development committee, and viewers, if viewers be appointed, of a street or alley to be altered or vacated under the provisions of this article, the recommendation from the city manager, and other evidence, if any, the council may alter or vacate such street or alley. The clerk of council shall cause a certified copy of the ordinance of vacation to be recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court of the city, which shall be indexed in the name of the city. Any appeal of city council's decision to alter or vacate a street or alley shall be filed within 60 days of the adoption of the ordinance with the circuit court. 
(Code 1959, § 30-37; Ord. of 2-22-77; Ord. No. O-16-106 , § 1, 9-13-16) 
Secs. 35-78-35-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUBSURFACE AREAS UNDER SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 35-85. - Specifications for openings. 
    Every cellar or area hereafter constructed which opens in a sidewalk shall have such opening covered with substantial iron grating, rough-surface iron or iron and glass, which shall be flush with the pavement, and no such opening to any existing cellar or area shall be re-covered nor shall the covering thereof be repaired or renewed, except with such material and in such manner as above required. No entrance or other opening to any cellar or area hereafter constructed in any sidewalk shall extend nearer to the curbstone than one-half the width of such sidewalk. The entrance of every cellar which opens in a sidewalk shall be covered with two doors of equal width, without joints and so constructed that when closed they shall be flush with the pavement, and when open shall each stand upright and at right angles to the pavement and be held in such position by connecting bars at the end of such doors nearest the curbline. No cellar doors shall be allowed to fall back or lie flat upon the street or sidewalk, nor to remain open any longer than necessary and while in actual use. The owner or occupant of any house the cellar or area to which does not conform to the requirements of this section who shall, after notification by the city manager, fail or refuse to comply with its provisions shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 30-6) 
Sec. 35-86. - Repair of defective covers. 
    Whenever the owner or occupant of any house to which is attached any area, cellar, vault or coalhole opening in the street shall be notified by the city manager that the covering thereof is insecure and dangerous, it shall be his duty at once to repair the same. In case of failure to repair within five days, the city manager may cause such repairs to be made at the cost of the city, and the cost thereof, with 20 percent additional as a fine, shall be collected of the party in default in like manner as fines and assessments are collected. 
(Code 1959, § 30-7) 
Sec. 35-87. - Vaults, cellars, coalholes and other subsurface areas under sidewalks. 
    Any vaults, cellars, coalholes and other subsurface areas under sidewalks shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  No such vault, cellar, coalhole or other subsurface area shall extend beyond the inner line of the curbstone. 
(b)  The outer wall nearest the driveway shall be of good building stone laid with good cement; the sidewalks shall be of good hard brick or building stone laid in cement mortar and the top shall be formed of large, flat stones, concrete or iron plates, or arched with stone or hard brick, with the crown of the arch not less than one foot below the surface of the pavement. 
(c)  Any opening into the sidewalk shall be located not more than ten inches from the curbstone and shall not exceed 18 inches in diameter, and shall be securely covered with strong and substantial grating or doors, in which gratings and doors there are to be no openings, and all appurtenances are to be flush with the sidewalk, and the top surface to be finished so as not to become slippery, and construction of all such doors and gratings shall be approved by the city manager. 
(d)  Such vaults, cellars, coalholes or subsurface areas under sidewalks hereafter constructed shall be in accordance with plans first approved by the city manager as conforming to this section. 
(e)  No vault, cellar, coalhole or other subsurface area opening into the sidewalk shall hereafter be permitted until the person applying for a permit shall furnish the inspections division of the department of community services a certificate of insurance, on forms furnished by such division for the purpose, certifying that the owner or tenant of the premises to which such subsurface area is attached has public liability insurance for personal injuries covering such subsurface area, and its opening into the sidewalk, in the amount of $15,000.00 for each person, $30,000.00 for each accident. The certificate of insurance shall show the name of the insurance company, the name of the insured, address of insured, location of insured premises, insurance policy number, date insurance policy issued, expiration date of insurance policy, limits of policy, type of insurance and a clause providing that in the case of cancellation of the insurance policy, the city shall be given ten days' notice prior to such cancellation. Any person lawfully using any existing opening into a sidewalk from a subsurface area shall, on or before January 1, 1946, comply with the provisions of this subsection. 
(Code 1959, § 30-8) 
Sec. 35-88. - Cellar, vault and coalhole openings to be kept closed. 
    Every cellar, vault or coalhole opening in a sidewalk shall be kept closed and the cover thereof securely fastened, except when the same shall actually be in use. Such cover shall not be opened or remain open, unless there is a person in immediate attendance on the sidewalk for the purpose of warning and protecting pedestrians. Any person who opens such cover or leaves such cover open in violation of the terms of this section, or any person owning or occupying any building to which any such sidewalk opening is attached, who suffers or permits the cover of such opening to be opened or left open shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 30-9) 
Sec. 35-89. - Maliciously opening cellar, vault or coalhole openings. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously open or cause to be opened any cellar, vault or coalhole opening in a sidewalk, whereby the safety of users of the sidewalk is endangered. The violation of this section shall be deemed a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 30-10) 
Sec. 35-90. - Delivery of coal over or about sidewalks; removal of particles of coal from sidewalk. 
    Whenever coal is handled or transported over or about any sidewalk in the city, the person to whom such coal is delivered shall within one hour after such coal is delivered have all particles of coal or coal dust swept or removed from the sidewalk and street in front of or near his premises; and any person delivering any coal within the fire limits in this city, before delivering such coal, shall sprinkle the same with sufficient water to prevent any coal dust or particles of coal from escaping in any direction, except on the premises of the person to whom it is delivered. No coal shall be delivered on Main Street between Rivermont Bridge and Thirteenth Street; on Church Street between Fifth Street and Twelfth Street and on Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Streets between Main and Church Streets, into, over or across the sidewalks, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless it be in sacks meeting the approval of the city; except, that where the inner edge of any coal delivery hole is a distance of four feet or more from the back of the sidewalk or building line, on the above-mentioned streets, coal may be delivered thereinto without the use of sacks at any time; provided, that suitable metal cylindrical chutes or suitable metal semicircular screens, of a design and character meeting the approval of the city, be employed at all times and in each instance during such coal delivery, such chutes or screens being rigidly fastened to or supported by the sidewalk structure so as to be stable and so located that pedestrians may at all times of such unloading pass without obstruction behind such chutes or screens; and provided, that such delivery and unloading be accomplished without the blowing of coal dust or the spilling of coal outside of the chutes or screens; and provided further, that after each load of coal is delivered, the sidewalk and pavement shall be immediately swept and cleaned of all coal dust and particles whatsoever. 
(Code 1959, § 30-11) 
Secs. 35-91-35-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STREET NAMES 

Sec. 35-101. - Compliance with article. 
    Except as provided in the city's subdivision ordinance all dedicated streets, public ways, and all private roads coming under this article, established or acquired after the twenty-sixth day of July, 1977, shall be named or renamed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(1); Ord. of 7-26-77; Ord. No. O-10-035, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 35-102. - Interpretation. 
    All cases requiring interpretation of this article shall be resolved by the superintendent of inspections unless otherwise indicated. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(6); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-103. - Additional regulations. 
    The city council may, by resolution, adopt further designations or any additional rules and regulations concerning the provisions of this article as it may deem necessary. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(7); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-104. - Suffix definitions. 
    The following street name suffix definitions shall be applied to all new street names after the twenty-sixth day of July, 1977. The city traffic engineer will resolve all cases of interpretation of the following definitions: 
    Alley or lane: A local street, usually short in length. 
    Avenue, boulevard or road: A divided or undivided arterial street with controlled access. 
    Circle: A local curved street forming all or part of a circle and having an intersection at each end. 
    Court, square or place: A local street, usually a short cul-de-sac. 
    Drive or street: A collector or local street usually several blocks in length and intersecting with other streets. 
    Expressway: A high-speed, divided highway with access fully or partially controlled and grade separations at major intersections. 
    Parkway or highway: A landscaped through street which may serve as an arterial, collector or scenic route. 
    Terrace: A local street usually short in length and with or without a terrace in the center. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(1)(b); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-105. - Criteria for names, signs. 
    All streets shall be named and signed accordingly, provided said streets meet the criteria of either of the following: 
(a)  All dedicated streets within the city limits shall encompass a minimum right-of-way of 30 feet. 
(b)  All streets dedicated or private, not covered in subsection (a), may be assigned a name provided that a name assignment has been requested by the property owners on said street, and provided further that the planning commission deems the petitioned street of sufficient significance to warrant naming. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(2); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-106. - Uniqueness of name. 
    All street names submitted for consideration after the twenty-sixth day of July, 1977, shall be unique to the city in that they shall not duplicate or sound like an existing street name. Differentiation by street name suffix will not constitute a unique street name. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(3); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-107. - Use of same name. 
    All streets running in the same direction and having a deviation of not more than 125 feet shall carry the same name unless special circumstances make this procedure impracticable. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(1)(a); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-108. - Procedure generally. 
    Except as provided in the city's subdivision ordinance the procedure for naming or renaming any street within the city limits on or after the twenty-sixth day of July, 1977, shall be as provided in sections 35-109 through 35-114. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(4); Ord. of 7-26-77; Ord. No. O-10-035, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 35-109. - Authority of council. 
    The council, by resolution, may rename or name an existing or newly established street within the city limits, provided such changes, namings and renamings are carried out in other than an arbitrary manner. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(4)(a); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-110. - Initiation of request; notice. 
    Any person or persons initiating a street naming or renaming request will be responsible for notifying all property owners on the affected street as to the proposed name. Proof of such notification shall be furnished to the planning division in the form of certified letter receipts. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(4)(b); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-111. - Review of proposed names. 
    Except as provided in section 24.1-6 and 24.1-30 of the city's subdivision ordinance proposed street names will be reviewed by the city technical review committee, planning commission and council, with the final decision resting with the council. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(4)(b); Ord. of 7-26-77; Ord. No. O-10-035, 4-27-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 35-112. - Approval of new name; recordation. 
    Upon approval of a new street name, the superintendent of inspections will cause the name to be recorded, as stipulated in this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(4)(b); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-113. - Notice of new name; numbers. 
    Upon the approval of a new street name, the superintendent of inspections will immediately notify property owners on the street as to the new name; and, if recognized numbers do not presently exist, numbers will be assigned in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(4)(b); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-114. - Subdivisions. 
    Every subdivision plat submitted for approval on or after the twenty-sixth day of July, 1977, shall bear upon its face the proper names of any and all streets, avenues and public ways hereafter dedicated to public use within the city limits and house numbers assigned to each lot. Street names and house numbers shall first have been checked by the planning division as to their appropriateness under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 30-39(5); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Secs. 35-115-35-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HOUSE NUMBERS 

Sec. 35-121. - System established; compliance. 
    There is hereby established a system for numbering buildings fronting on all streets, avenues and public ways in the city; and all houses and other buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(1); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-122. - Interpretation. 
    All cases requiring interpretation of this article shall be resolved by the superintendent of inspections unless otherwise indicated. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38 (10); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-123. - Additional regulations. 
    The council may, by resolution, adopt further designations or any additional rules and regulations as it may deem necessary. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(11); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-124. - Basic grid of city. 
    On streets running generally parallel with the James River, the odd numbers of structures shall apply to the south and west sides and the even numbers to the north and east sides. On streets running generally perpendicularly to the James River, the odd numbers shall apply to the north and west sides and the even numbers to the south and east sides. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(3); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-125. - Assignment of numbers-Streets existing on August 1, 1977. 
    Existing numbering on existing improved streets encompassed within the city limits prior to August 1, 1977, shall remain; and unnumbered structures on such streets shall be numbered in accordance with the following procedure as such need is determined by the superintendent of inspections: 
(a)  On all streets running parallel with the James River, the numbering shall commence with number "100" at First Street, increasing at the rate of 100 numbers for each block going southward and eastward, and at the rate of 100 numbers for each block in streets extending northward or westward from First Street, and with "100" at A Street, increasing at the same rate going northward and westward on all streets north or west of the Blackwater Creek and its confluence with the James River. On all streets running perpendicularly to the James River, the numbering shall commence with number "100" at Commerce Street, Elm Avenue and Johnson Street, and the James River north of A Street, and shall increase at the rate of 100 numbers for each block going southward and westward. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(6); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-126. - Same-Annexed areas after August 1, 1977. 
    This section shall become effective on and after the first day of August, 1977, to all streets in the area annexed by the city on the first day of January, 1976. 
(a)  All streets emanating from the city (prior to annexation) and continuing into the annexed area shall reflect a continuation of the existing house numbers, as recognized by the superintendent of inspections. Said continuation of numbering shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(b)  All other annexed streets shall be numbered in compliance with this article and shall commence with number "100" at the origin of such street (as determined by the superintendent of inspections) and increasing at the rate of 100 numbers for each distance of 800 feet or at the intersection of two through streets, whichever is less. Assignment of house numbers will occur at 50-foot intervals, unless existing numbers are established at longer intervals. 
Sec. 35-127. - Same-Streets dedicated after August 1, 1977. 
    Streets acquired by the city through dedication by private parties or new city, state or federal construction subsequent to the first day of August, 1977, shall be numbered in compliance with subsection 35-126(b). 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(5); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-128. - Same-Per building. 
(a)  Where any building contains more than one entrance serving separate occupants, a separate number shall be assigned to each entrance serving a separate occupant providing such building occupies a lot, parcel or tract having a frontage not less than 50 feet for each such unit. If the building is not located on a lot, parcel or tract which would permit the assignment of one number to each such entrance, numerals and letters shall be used as provided in paragraph (b) of this section. 
(b)  Where the superintendent of inspections determines that only one number can be assigned to any house or building, the owner, occupant or agent of such house or building desiring distinctive numbers for any subunit of such house or building, or for any part of the same fronting on any street, shall use the suffix (A), (B), (C), etc., with the assigned number. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(1)(a), (2); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-129. - Plat book. 
    For the purpose of facilitating correct numbering, a plat book of all streets, avenues and public ways within the city showing the proper numbers of all houses or other buildings fronting upon all streets, avenues or public ways shall be kept on file in the office of the superintendent of inspections. These plats shall be open to inspection of all persons during the office hours of the superintendent. Duplicate copies of such plats shall be furnished to the planning division and the assessor's office by the superintendent of inspections. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(7); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-130. - Assignment of specific numbers. 
    It shall be the duty of the superintendent of inspections to supply any party with the number or numbers belonging to or embraced within the limits of any lot or property as provided in this article. In case of conflict as to the proper number to be assigned to any building, the superintendent of inspections shall determine the number of such building. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(8); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-131. - Display of number. 
    The number or numbers of buildings shall be placed on existing buildings within 20 days after the assigning of the proper number by the superintendent of inspections. The cost of the number or numbers shall be borne by the property owner. Replacement of numbers shall be the responsibility of and at the expense of the property owner. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(1)(b); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-132. - Specifications for numbers. 
    The numbers to be used on buildings pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be not less than three inches in height and shall be made of a durable substance. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(1)(b); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-133. - Location of numbers. 
    Building numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the proper door of each building so that the number can be seen plainly from the street line. Whenever any building is situated more than 50 feet from the street line, the numbers shall instead be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to such building and upon a gatepost, fence, tree, post or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the street line. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(1)(c); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-134. - Buildings after July 26, 1977. 
    Whenever any house, building or structure shall be erected or located in the city after the twenty-sixth day of July, 1977, in order to preserve the continuity and uniformity of numbers of the houses, buildings and structures, it shall be the duty of the owner to procure the correct number or numbers as designated by the superintendent of inspections for his property and to immediately fasten such assigned number or numbers upon such building as provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(9); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Sec. 35-135. - Permits, approvals restricted. 
    No building permit shall be issued for any house, building or structure until the owner has applied to the superintendent of inspections for the official number of said premises. Final approval of any structure erected, repaired, altered or modified after the twenty-sixth day of July, 1977, shall be withheld by the superintendent of inspections until permanent and proper numbers have been affixed to such structure under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 30-38(9); Ord. of 7-26-77) 
Chapter 35.2 - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Zoning Ordinance of Lynchburg, Virginia, as adopted by Ord. No. O-16-018, February 23, 2016. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision was adopted by Ord. No. O-16-018. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - ZONING ORDINANCE OVERVIEW 

Sec. 35.2-1. - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of Lynchburg, Virginia" (Zoning Ordinance) and may be so cited. 
Sec. 35.2-2. - Authority, Purposes and Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Authority and Purposes. The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2200, et seq., as amended, which also establishes the purposes and focus of this ordinance. The administration of this ordinance shall be consistent with requirements of the Code of Virginia and, when Code, as it may be amended from time to time, creates a conflict with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of the Code of Virginia shall prevail. 
(b)  Coordination with the Code of Virginia. In the event that any provision of this Zoning Ordinance is inconsistent with any mandatory provision of the Code of Virginia, as enacted or as amended in the future, the provision of the Code of Virginia shall prevail. 
(c)  Jurisdiction. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all property within the corporate limits of the City of Lynchburg and to new territory that comes within the City limits by annexation, boundary adjustment or otherwise. The new territory shall be classified in the zoning district most like its previous zoning in terms of permitted uses and intensity until a study can be done to determine if a different zoning classification is more appropriate. The Council shall undertake the amendment of the Comprehensive Plan and The Zoning Map as necessary whenever new territory comes within the City limits. 
Sec. 35.2-3. - Consistency with Comprehensive Plan. 
(a)  These regulations are intended to implement the goals and policies of the City of Lynchburg Comprehensive Plan (Comprehensive Plan), as amended, and are hereby deemed to be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Any amendments or changes to these regulations shall be substantially consistent with the Comprehensive Plan as it may be amended from time to time. An amendment to the text of these regulations is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan if it substantially complies with some or all of the provisions relating to the vision, goals and policies established in the Comprehensive Plan. An amendment to the Zoning Map is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan if it is substantially consistent with some or all of the provisions relating to the Planning Framework and Future Land Use Maps of the Comprehensive Plan and with some or all of the text and policies of the Comprehensive Plan explaining and implementing these maps. 
(c)  The Zoning Ordinance and all development approvals and permits issued pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance are intended to implement and be substantially consistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 35.2-4. - Organization. 
    The Zoning Ordinance is organized in 11 articles as follows: 
(a)  Article I establishes the title, authority and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, as well as describing its applicability, organization and relationship to other ordinances and plans. 
(b)  Article II establishes the procedures for approval of development approvals and building permits, including generally applicable provisions for notice, hearing and approval, as well as requirements (e.g., purpose, applicability, procedures, review criteria and effect of approval) that are specific to each type of approval. 
(c)  Article III establishes the zoning districts, zoning map and the table of authorized uses for each zoning district. 
(d)  Article IV establishes the purpose of each base zoning district, as well as conditions applicable for site development and establishment of specified uses. 
(e)  Article V establishes the purpose and conditions applicable to each of the City's special districts, which are districts that modify the conditions applicable with the underlying or base zoning districts described in Article IV. 
(f)  Article VI establishes site development standards, which address building setbacks, structure heights, parking, landscaping, signs, lighting, transportation improvements and utilities. 
(g)  Article VII establishes standards that are applicable to specific uses that may be allowed by right or by conditional use permit in certain zoning districts. 
(h)  Article VIII provides guidance for the establishment of different development patterns, including: residential cluster, traditional neighborhood development, planned unit development, cluster commercial development, flexible space development, large-scale retail and corporate campus development. 
(i)  Article IX establishes the standards for the continuation, modification and termination of uses, sites and structures that do not conform to Zoning Ordinance requirements. 
(j)  Article X describes the responsibilities for administration of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(k)  Article XI defines specific terms and abbreviations used in this ordinance and the rules for interpreting the ordinance's language. 
Sec. 35.2-5. - Interpreting the Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-5.1. - Ordinance establishes minimum requirements. 
    In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of health, safety or the general welfare of the community. 
Sec. 35.2-5.2. - Rules of language. 
    The meaning of any and all words, terms, or phrases in the Zoning Ordinance shall be construed in accordance with Article XI of this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-5.3. - Graphics. 
    The Zoning Ordinance contains numerous graphics, pictures, illustrations, and drawings in order to assist the reader in understanding and applying the Zoning Ordinance. However, to the extent that there is any inconsistency between the text of the Zoning Ordinance and any such graphic, picture, illustration, or drawing, the text controls unless otherwise provided in the specific section. 
Sec. 35.2-5.4. - Zoning district boundaries. 
    The rules for interpreting zoning district boundaries are established in section 35.2-33 (Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries) of this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-5.5. - Cross-references. 
    Cross-references are provided for the convenience of the user of this code. Whenever the Zoning Ordinance references a section in the Code of Virginia and such section number is changed by amendment to or recodification of the Code of Virginia, the reference in the Zoning Ordinance shall automatically incorporate and refer to the new section number in the Code of Virginia, and any future amendments to the sections of the Code of Virginia are incorporated in this Zoning Ordinance are also incorporated by reference herein. Whenever a section of this Zoning Ordinance is referenced, the reference includes all subsections contained within the referenced section (e.g., section 35.2-63 includes all the provisions of sections 35.2-63.1 through 35.2-63.14). References to LBCS Codes are provided to identify the categories in which a use may be included; when a more specific use is listed with a LBCS category code that that includes other uses the intent of the text is to include only the specific use listed in the specific provision and not all uses allowed under that category code. 
Sec. 35.2-6. - Applicability. 
    All uses and development of lots, buildings or structures shall comply with this ordinance. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe or lawful condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe or unlawful by an authorized City official. 
Sec. 35.2-6.1. - Development permission required. 
(a)  Development Approvals. Except as otherwise required by this section, no development shall occur and no use shall be established or changed unless a valid development approval or building permit has been issued by the City of Lynchburg. 
(b)  Building Permits. No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, enlarged or altered by any person or organization until such person or organization has met all site plan requirements and has obtained from the City a building permit specifying the use and method of construction of such building, structure or alteration, including such information as is determined by the City Council to be necessary to the effective operation of these regulations. 
(c)  Certificate of Occupancy. No lot, building or structure shall hereafter be used by any person or organization until such person or organization has obtained from the City of Lynchburg a certificate of occupancy specifying the proposed use, the extent of the property and such other information as shall be determined by the City Council to be necessary to the effective operation of these and other duly enacted City regulations. 
Sec. 35.2-6.2. - Conformance to approvals required. 
(a)  Development Approval. The development use of any site shall conform to the terms of the applicable development approval or building permit. 
(b)  Building Permit. The construction, design and use of every building, structure or alteration shall conform to the terms of the building permit duly issued for that building, structure or alteration. 
(c)  Certificate of Occupancy. The use of any lot, building or structure shall hereafter conform to the terms of the certificate of occupancy duly issued for that lot, building or structure and to the regulations of this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-6.3. - Application of regulations during local emergency. 
    The City Council shall have the authority to waive standards within this Zoning Ordinance during local emergencies declared by federal, state or local officials. 
Sec. 35.2-7. - Coordination with Other Regulations. 
    No development approval, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless it complies with this ordinance and other pertinent regulations of the City of Lynchburg. 
Sec. 35.2-7.1. - Relationship to other regulations. 
(a)  Where a regulation contained within this Zoning Ordinance imposes higher standards than those required under another ordinance, rule or regulation, the regulation adopted under this ordinance controls. 
(b)  If the other ordinance, rule or regulation imposes higher standards, that ordinance, rule or regulation controls so long as it is consistent with this ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  All development pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to compliance with adopted building, fire and safety codes. 
Sec. 35.2-7.2. - Relationship to private agreements. 
    This Zoning Ordinance is not intended to affect any easement, covenant or other private agreement or legal relationship; except that where this ordinance is more restrictive or imposes higher standards, this ordinance shall govern. 
Sec. 35.2-7.3. - Development approvals under the prior zoning ordinance. 
    Prior development approvals shall remain in effect in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(a)  Concept plan approvals granted under the prior zoning ordinance shall remain valid under the terms of the prior ordinance as long as a final site plan has been approved, or a building permit or certificate of occupancy has been issued, or the use has been legally established within 36 months of the adoption of this zoning ordinance. Failure to secure final approval within 36 months of adoption of this zoning ordinance shall result in expiration of the prior approval and the applicant shall be required to comply with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Final site plan approvals granted under the prior zoning ordinance shall remain valid under the terms of the prior ordinance as long as a building permit or certificate of occupancy has been issued or the use has been legally established within five years of the adoption of this zoning ordinance. Failure to secure and maintain a valid building permit, secure a certificate of occupancy or establish the use within five years of adoption of this ordinance shall result in expiration of the prior approval and the applicant shall be required to comply with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Conditional use permits approved by the City Council and special exceptions granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall remain in effect subject to the terms of approval. Failure to comply with the provisions of approval as evidenced by a revocation of the approval shall require the owner or operator of the use to apply for approval under the terms of this zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Proffers and conditions that were offered, accepted and imposed under prior regulations as part of a conditional rezoning or the granting of a conditional use permit shall remain in full force and effect, until subsequent amendment to the Zoning Ordinance changes the zoning on the property covered by the conditions. 
(e)  Any use legally established under prior zoning ordinance shall be allowed to continue. If the use is not authorized by this zoning ordinance, the use shall be considered a non-conforming use unless otherwise provided by this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-8. - Administering the Zoning Ordinance. 
    Articles II and X describe the process for administration of this ordinance in detail. Unless otherwise stated, the Zoning Administrator or City Planner shall be responsible for all administrative responsibilities assigned by this ordinance. The Planning Commission shall advise the City Council, which shall be the final decision maker on amendments to the text of this ordinance, changes to the Official Zoning Map, Comprehensive Plan amendments, conditional use permits and other development approvals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make decisions on variances authorized by this ordinance and shall decide appeals to decisions made relating to interpretation of the text and maps of this ordinance. The Technical Review Committee (TRC) shall be responsible for advising the approval bodies. 
Sec. 35.2-9. - Severability. 
    Should any section, subsection, sentence, paragraph, clause or phrase of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance in its entirety or of any part thereof other than that so declared to be invalid. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES 

Sec. 35.2-10. - General Procedures. 
Sec. 35.2-10.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for filing and processing applications for development approvals required pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-10.2. - Approvals required. 
    No development approval or building permit shall be issued unless all applicable approvals are obtained in accordance with this article. Development approvals are required unless otherwise exempted to ensure substantial compliance with adopted codes, standards, and laws, and to promote substantial compliance with the Comprehensive Plan. This section describes procedural elements common to most applications. The specific procedures followed in reviewing various applications differ and are described in subsequent sections of this article. Generally, the procedures for all applications have the following common elements: 
(a)  Submittal of a complete application, including required fee payments and appropriate information and studies; 
(b)  Review of the submittal by appropriate staff, agencies, and boards; 
(c)  A decision to approve or deny; and 
(d)  Options to amend or appeal the decision. 
Sec. 35.2-10.3. - Approval body defined. 
    Zoning Ordinance approval bodies include the City Council, Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Historic Preservation Commission and any other committee, board or City staff member assigned responsibility for acting at the final stage of a development approval or building permit. 
Sec. 35.2-10.4. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by an action on a development application, or any officer, department board or bureau of the City affected by an action on a development application may appeal to the appeals body designated in Exhibit II-1 as provided in this article. 
Sec. 35.2-10.5. - Application review procedures, generally. 
(a)  Exhibit II-1 summarizes the development approval process for each type of application under this ordinance and references the sections that describe the procedures, review criteria and effects of approval. The table lists the specific type of application, the section establishing the review and approval processes, and the entities responsible for review, recommendations, approval and appeals for each type of development approval. 
(b)  Section 35.2-11 establishes the review and approval process for applications requiring action by the City Council, which includes Comprehensive Plan text and map amendments, Zoning Ordinance text and map amendments, conditional zoning map amendments, conditional use permits, planned unit developments, flood plain development and related concept plans. 
(c)  Section 35.2-12 establishes the review and approval processes for applications for variances and appeals that require action by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(d)  Section 35.2-13 establishes the review and approval processes for applications for certificates of appropriateness, which are required for development within the City's historic district. 
(e)  Section 35.2-14.1 establishes the requirement to confirm that development applications comply with zoning requirements applicable to the specific application in the zoning district in which the proposed development is located. 
(f)  Section 35.2-14.2 establishes the review and approval of site plans by the City Planner. 
(g)  Section 35.2-14.3 establishes the review and approval of sign permits by the Zoning Administrator. 
(h)  Section 35.2-14.4 establishes the review and approval process for authorized exceptions or modifications to specified Zoning Ordinance requirements. 
(i)  Section 35.2-14.5 establishes the review and approval process for temporary uses by the Technical Review Committee (TRC). 
(j)  Each of the sections referenced in paragraphs (b) through (i) above includes submittal requirements as well as approval criteria. 
(k)  Section 35.2-10.13 establishes digital submittal requirements. 
(l)  Section 35.2-10.14 summarizes notification requirements for specific actions established in this Zoning Ordinance. 
Exhibit II-1: Summary of Application Review Procedures 
Type of
Application Section Initial Review Recommendation Approval Initial
Appeals Comprehensive Plan Text and Map Amendments 35.2-11 City Planner Planning Commission City Council Circuit Court Zoning Text and Amendments 35.2-11 City Planner Planning Commission City Council Circuit Court Conditional Zoning 35.2-11 City Planner Planning Commission City Council Circuit Court Conditional Use Permits 35.2-11 City Planner Planning Commission City Council Circuit Court Planned Unit Developments, Traditional Neighborhood Developments, Cluster Commercial Developments or Corporate Campus Concept Plan 35.2-11 Technical Review Committee (TRC) Planning Commission City Council Circuit Court Final Site Plan 35.2-11 TRC TRC City Planner Zoning Board of Appeals Floodplain Development 35.2-11 TRC Planning Commission City Council Circuit Court Variances 35.2-12 Zoning Administrator Zoning Administrator Board of Zoning Appeals Circuit Court Appeals to Administrative Decisions 35.2-12 Zoning Administrator Zoning Administrator Board of Zoning Appeals Circuit Court Historic District Certificate of Appropriateness 35.2-13 Major 35.2-13 City Planner City Planner HPC City Council Minor 35.2-13 City Planner City Planner City Planner HPC Zoning Compliance 35.2-14.1 Zoning Administrator Zoning Administrator Zoning Admin- 
istrator Board of Zoning Appeals Site Plans 35.2-14.2 City Planner TRC City Planner Planning Commission Sign Permits 35.2-14.3 Zoning Administrator Not applicable Zoning Admin- 
istrator Board of Zoning Appeals Modifications/Minor Exceptions 35.2-14.4 TRC Zoning Administrator or City Planner Zoning Admin- 
istrator or City Planner Board of Zoning Appeals Temporary Use Permits 35.2-14.5 TRC TRC Zoning Admin- 
istrator Board of Zoning Appeals  
Sec. 35.2-10.6. - Burden of persuasion regarding approval. 
(a)  The applicant has the burden of producing sufficient evidence for the approval body to conclude that the standards of the applicable ordinance(s) have been met. 
(b)  The appeals body is not bound by the interpretation of City staff; it must seek to interpret the ordinance to achieve the City Council's intent when it adopted the ordinance. The appeals body shall not reverse or modify an administrative decision unless it finds that City staff erred in the application or interpretation of the terms of this ordinance or related policies adopted by the City. 
(c)  The decisions of the City Council on zoning matters are presumed to be correct and anyone who appeals such a decision has the burden of proving that Council's decision is clearly unreasonable, arbitrary or capricious, and bears no reasonable or substantial relationship to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
Sec. 35.2-10.7. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Contents. This ordinance lists the minimum submittal requirements for each application listed in this article. Requests for any development approval required by this ordinance shall be made on applications provided by the City, which may include submittal requirements, instructions for completing forms, internal procedures for filing of applications and other information. 
(b)  Applicant. Unless otherwise authorized by this Zoning Ordinance, applications for development approvals will be accepted only from the owner, contract purchaser with the owner's written consent, or the owner's agent therefor, of the property that is the subject of the development application. The City shall require evidence of the applicant's authority to submit the application when there is a reasonable basis for questioning this authority. 
Sec. 35.2-10.8. - Application processing. 
    Following the determination that an application is complete, the City shall review the application, forward the application for review to applicable advisory bodies, prepare all required reports, and, when applicable, schedule the matter for public hearing and/or decision within the time and in the manner required by this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-10.9. - Computation of time. 
    Unless otherwise specified, time periods shall exclude the first day and include the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. When the period of time prescribed is fewer than seven (7) days intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and holidays shall be excluded. 
Sec. 35.2-10.10. - Continuance. 
(a)  If the approval body receives the written request for a continuance at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing at which the application is scheduled to be heard, the applicant's request for a continuance will be automatically granted. An applicant is not entitled to more than two automatic continuances. 
(b)  If the City receives the written request for a continuance fewer than seven (7) days prior to the public hearing at which the application is scheduled to be heard, the applicant is not entitled to an automatic continuance. The approval body will consider the request for a continuance and shall only grant such request upon a demonstration by the applicant of good cause for a continuance. 
(c)  If an applicant receives a continuance, the applicant shall reimburse the City for all advertising costs associated with rescheduling the public hearing for the application. If the applicant does not reimburse the City for such costs by ten (10) days prior to the rescheduled hearing, the hearing will be cancelled and the application will be deemed withdrawn. 
Sec. 35.2-10.11. - Withdrawal of pending applications. 
(a)  An applicant may withdraw an application at any time prior to issuance or denial of a development approval. The applicant shall provide written notice of the withdrawal to the City. 
(b)  If an application is withdrawn, fees and costs will neither be refunded nor credited to any subsequent application. 
Sec. 35.2-10.12. - Applications to be complete. 
(a)  Applications to Be Complete. 
1.  No application is complete unless all of the information required herein is included. An application that includes such information is deemed complete. 
2.  Additional information may be required by the approval body if needed to decide whether or not the development will comply with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. Failure to provide additional information may result in application denial or delayed action. 
3.  Completeness review is solely for the purpose of determining whether preliminary information is sufficient to allow further processing, and shall not constitute a decision as to whether application complies with the provisions of the ordinance. 
(b)  Waiver. Any submittal requirement of this article may be waived by the City Planner or Zoning Administrator in a specific case where such requirement is found to be unreasonable or unnecessary to assess compliance with applicable regulations, rules and conditions of prior development approvals. 
(c)  Fee Payment Required. Application fees shall be paid in full prior to the provision of initial reviews of the application. 
(d)  Applicant to Pay Delinquent Taxes. Neither the City nor any of its boards or commissions will accept, process or issue final approval for any application for a variance, rezoning, conditional use permit or any other land disturbing permits, including building permits and erosion and sediment control permits, until the Applicant produces satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes, including penalty, interest and liens, which have been properly assessed against the property which is the subject of the application have been paid. 
(e)  Variances Required. Except as specifically authorized by the Planning Commission or City Council, rezoning and conditional use permit applications will be considered incomplete and will not be scheduled to be heard by the Planning Commission or City Council until all necessary variances have been obtained from the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(f)  Historic Preservation Commission Hearing Required. For applications subject to their review, the Historic Preservation Commission hearing shall be conducted prior to providing public notice for a Planning Commission hearing on a rezoning, conditional rezoning or conditional use permit. 
Sec. 35.2-10.13. - Digital submittals required. 
    All plans, building permit applications and drawings shall be submitted in hard copy and digital format specified on the application to assist in public record keeping, facilitate ongoing administration of this Zoning Ordinance and improve delivery of ongoing public facilities and services. The applicant shall bear no liability for the City's subsequent use of digital data and the City reserves the right to modify data to improve the operations of its geographic information system (GIS). 
Sec. 35.2-10.14. - Notice. 
(a)  Generally. 
1.  Notice that is consistent with Section 15.2-2204(A) of the Code of Virginia and this section is required prior to actions requiring hearings of the Planning Commission and City Council (see Exhibit II-6) and actions requiring hearings of the Board of Zoning Appeals (see Exhibit II-10). 
2.  Prior to granting a minor exception or modification, the Zoning Administrator shall give, or require the applicant to give, all adjoining property owners written notice of the request for modification and an opportunity to respond to the request within 21 days of the date of the notice. 
3.  Required notice takes the form of publications, mail and signs posted on the property subject to a development application. The City may opt to provide additional notice as a courtesy to affected property owners. 
4.  Any defective notification of a required City procedure, not otherwise required by Code of Virginia, shall not invalidate the proceedings if the defect is determined to be harmless by the approval body. 
5.  In the event that any of the notice provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are inconsistent with the notice provisions required by the Code of Virginia, the provisions of the Code of Virginia shall prevail. 
6.  The City Planner shall document the provision of notice. 
(b)  Action to be Consistent with Notice. The approval body may take any action on the application that is consistent with the notice given, including approval of the application, conditional approval (if applicable) of the application, or denial of the application. Approval of a less intensive use classification as authorized by Section 15.2-2285(C) of the Code of Virginia shall be considered consistent with the notice. 
(c)  Content of Notices. 
1.  Prior to a recommendation by the Planning Commission or adoption by the City Council of all plans or ordinances, or amendments, including Zoning Map amendments and conditional use permits, a notice shall be published according to the time and format set forth below in 35.2-10.14(d). Every advertisement shall contain a descriptive summary of the proposed action and a reference to the place or places within the City where copies of the proposed plans, ordinances or amendments may be examined. 
2.  In the case of a proposed amendment to the Zoning Map, the public notice shall state the general usage and density range of the proposed amendment and the general usage and density range, if any, set forth in the applicable part of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Exhibit II-2: Reserved 
(d)  Timing and Format of Notice. 
1.  Published Notice. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the City of Lynchburg. The notice shall state the intention of the Planning Commission to consider the proposed action for recommendation or the intention of the Council to consider the proposed action for adoption. The notice for both the local Planning Commission and the City Council may be published concurrently. The notice shall specify the time and place of hearing at which persons affected may appear and present their views, not less than five days nor more than 21 days after the second advertisement appears in such newspaper. The Planning Commission and City Council may hold a joint public hearing after public notice as set forth hereinabove. If a joint hearing is held, then public notice as set forth above need be given only by the City Council. The term "two successive weeks" as used in this paragraph means that notice shall be published at least twice in such newspaper with not less than six days elapsing between the first and second publication. 
2.  Mailed Notice. 
a.  When a proposed Zoning Map amendment, conditional use permit, variance or appeal before the Board of Zoning Appeals, or Comprehensive Plan amendment involves 25 or fewer parcels of land, written notice shall be given by the approval body, or its representative, at least five days before the hearing of the approval body, to the owner, owners, their agent, or the occupant of each parcel involved; to the owners, their agent or the occupant, of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, including those parcels with lie in other localities; and if any portion of the application property is within a planned unit development notice shall be sent to the incorporated property owners' associations within the planned unit development that have members owning property located within 2,000 feet of the application property. Notice sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of such owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall be deemed adequate compliance with this requirement. If the hearing is continued, notice shall be remailed. Costs of any notice required under this chapter shall be taxed to the applicant. 
b.  When a Zoning Ordinance amendment involves a change in the Zoning Map classification of more than 25 parcels of land or a change to the applicable Zoning Ordinance text that decreases the allowed dwelling unit density of any parcel of land, in addition to the published notice required by 35.2-10.14(c), written notice shall be given at least five days before the hearing to the owner, owners, or their agent of each parcel of land involved, provided, however, that written notice of the Zoning Ordinance amendment shall not have to be mailed to the owner, owners, or their agent of lots shown on a subdivision plat approved and recorded pursuant to the provisions of Article 6, § 15.2-2240 et seq. of the Virginia Code, where such lots are less than 11,500 square feet. One notice sent by first class mail to the last known address of such owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall be deemed adequate compliance with this requirement, provided that a representative of the approval body shall make affidavit that such mailings have been made and file such affidavit with the papers in the case. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as to invalidate any subsequently adopted Zoning Ordinance amendment or Zoning Map amendment because of the inadvertent failure by the representative of the approval body to give written notice to the owner, owners or their agent of any parcel involved. 
c.  In the case of a condominium or a cooperative, the written notice may be mailed to the unit owners' association or proprietary lessees' association, respectively, in lieu of each individual unit owner. 
d.  Whenever the notices required hereby are sent by the approval body, or their representative, such notices may be sent by first class mail; however, a representative of the approval body shall make affidavit that such mailings have been made and file such affidavit with the papers in the case. 
e.  A party's actual notice of, or active participation in, the proceedings for which the written notice provided by this section is required shall waive the right of that party to challenge the validity of the proceeding due to failure of the party to receive the written notice required by this section. 
f.  When a proposed Comprehensive Plan or amendment thereto, a Zoning Map amendment, or conditional use permit for a change in use involves any parcel of land located within 3,000 feet of a boundary of a military base, military installation, military airport, excluding armories operated by the Virginia National Guard, or licensed public-use airport then, in addition to the advertising and written notification as required above, written notice shall also be given, at least 30 days before the hearing to the commander of the military base, military installation, military airport, or owner of such public-use airport, and the notice shall advise the military commander or owner of such public-use airport of the opportunity to submit comments or recommendations. 
g.  Cost of Mailed Notice. All required notice shall be mailed by the City at the expense of the applicant for the cost of certified, registered, or first class U.S. Postal Service as appropriate. If the applicable hearing is continued, notice of the continuation date shall be mailed at the expense of the applicant unless the need for the rehearing is due solely to the City's actions. 
3.  Posted Signs. 
a.  Number and Location of Posted Signs. At least one notification sign shall be posted by the applicant within one foot of the right-of-way of a public street or road upon which the property subject to the proposed zoning decision fronts. For properties with more than 500 feet of frontage, signs shall be placed on the property by the applicant at 500-foot intervals. The City Planner may reduce the required number of signs or approve the relocation of signs in those cases for which the applicant can present sufficient justification to warrant a deviation, provided the spirit and intent of the notice requirements are observed. Grounds for deviation of the requirements may include such items as a parcel of unusual size or shape, a peculiar location, severe topography, or other extraordinary situation or condition of the property that would make the strict application of these requirements unnecessary or impractical. The justification shall document that a reduction in the number or relocation of signs would not reduce the effectiveness of the public notice. Where property does not front on an existing right-of-way, the sign shall be placed within the right-of-way of the nearest street or road. 
b.  Format of Notification Signs. Signs shall be of wood or metal, at least 48 inches by 72 inches in size and the lettering thereon shall be black letters on a white background measuring at least three inches in height. The applicant shall notify the Division of Planning in writing that the sign has been erected and where located (see sign format in Exhibit II-3). 
Exhibit II-3: Posted Sign Format 

c.  Posting of Notification Signs. Notification signs shall be posted at least 30 days prior to the initial public hearing and remain posted until final action has been taken by City Council, or the petition has been withdrawn. The applicant shall remove the sign within ten calendar days of final action on the application. If any sign remains posted longer than this ten-day period, the petitioner shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and subject to the penalties as set forth in section 35.2-102 (Violations) of this ordinance. The applicant shall provide a time and date-stamped photograph of all posted signs. 
4.  Notice for Hearings Before Multiple Hearing Bodies. If multiple hearings are required, notice shall be provided for each public hearing. If these regulations specify or permit hearings by the Historic Preservation Commission, Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals and the City Council, both hearings may be held concurrently at the sole discretion of the City. If such a joint hearing is held, public notice as specified above need be given only for the City Council hearing or whichever would be the last body to hear the matter. 
5.  Notice When Decision is Appealed by Someone Other Than the Affected Property Owner. When any applicant requesting a written order, requirement, decision, or determination from the zoning administrator, other administrative officer, or a Board of Zoning Appeals, is not the owner or the agent of the owner of the real property subject to the written order, requirement, decision or determination, written notice shall be given to the owner of the property within 10 days of the receipt of such request. The requesting applicant shall be required to give the owner written notice and to provide satisfactory evidence to the Zoning Administrator that the notice has been given. Written notice mailed to the owner at the last known address of the owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall satisfy the notice requirements of this subsection. This paragraph shall not apply to inquiries from the governing body, planning commission, or employees of the locality made in the normal course of business. 
Sec. 35.2-10.15. - Property owners' associations. 
(a)  When an applicant chooses to establish a residential cluster, planned unit, or traditional neighborhood land use development pattern in accordance with Article VIII of this Zoning Ordinance or chooses to include common open space or common facilities serving multiple owners, a property owners' association or other corporation shall be established pursuant to this section. 
(b)  The corporation or property owners' association shall be assigned responsibilities to own and maintain common open space properties and facilities, and the developer shall obtain the approval of the City Attorney as to acceptability of incorporation documents. 
(c)  The applicant must establish the property owners' association or corporation prior to the final approval, recording and sale of any lot. 
(d)  Membership in the association or corporation shall be mandatory for all residents within the cluster subdivision or other applicable development and the property owners' association or corporation shall not discriminate by race, creed or sex in its members or shareholders. 
(e)  The association or corporation documents shall set forth the purposes of the permanent organization under which common ownership is to be established; how it shall be governed and administered; the provisions made for permanent care and maintenance of the common property including necessary bonds when required by the City; and the method of assessing the individual property for its share of the cost of administering and maintaining such common property. 
(f)  The incorporation document shall set forth the extent of common interest held by the owner of each individual parcel in the tract held in common with others. 
(g)  All common property and facilities shall remain under a single entity ownership of a developer or a group of developers, and shall not be leased or sold unless provision is made which ensures participation by the properties leased or sold in the retention and maintenance of common open space and community facilities. A certificate of compliance, indicating that such arrangements have been made, shall be issued by the agent of the City prior to the sale or lease of the property by the developer. 
(h)  All common open space, properties and facilities shall be preserved for their intended purpose as expressed in the approved plat. 
(i)  All privately owned common open space designated in the approved plat shall be permanently preserved and maintained as open space. All deeds for property in a residential cluster development shall include appropriate restrictions to ensure that all open space is permanently preserved as open space as shown on the approved plat. 
(j)  All common open space as well as public and recreational facilities shall be specifically included in a phasing plan if the project is to be developed in multiple phases and shall be constructed and fully improved by the developer in accordance with the phasing plan. 
Sec. 35.2-11. - Applications Requiring Public Hearings Before City Council. 
Sec. 35.2-11.1. - Applicability. 
    The procedures in this section are applicable to the following types of development applications: 
(a)  Amendments to Comprehensive Plan text or maps, which includes the preparation or amendment of the text or maps of an area, neighborhood or corridor plan that is adopted as part of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(b)  Amendments to Zoning Ordinance text or maps (rezonings); 
(c)  Conditional amendments to Zoning Ordinance maps with proffers (conditional rezonings); 
(d)  Conditional use permits (CUPs), which include approvals of planned unit developments (PUDs), traditional neighborhood developments (TNDs), cluster commercial developments (CCDs), corporate campus developments and floodplain development permits; and 
Sec. 35.2-11.2. - Process overview. 
    The approval process for applications requiring public hearings, which include comprehensive plan text and map amendments, zoning ordinance text and map amendments, conditional zonings with proffers, and conditional use permits is summarized in Exhibit II-4. 
Exhibit II-4: Public Hearing Approvals Process Summary 
Public Hearing Process Application and Review Public Notice Planning Commission Public Hearing and Action Public Notice City Council Public Hearing and Action  
Sec. 35.2-11.3. - Applications. 
(a)  Initiation. The Planning Commission, the City Council or the owner, contract purchaser with the owner's written consent, or the owner's agent may initiate a request. 
(b)  Pre-Application Conference Recommended. Before any application is made, the applicant may schedule a pre-application conference with the City Planner to discuss applicable procedures and requirements. 
(c)  Submittal Requirements. Applicants shall provide the information listed in Exhibit II-5. 
(d)  Conditional Zoning Proffers. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of conditional zoning is to provide a method for permitting the reasonable and orderly development and use of land in those situations in which peculiar specific circumstances indicate that the existing zone ordinance district regulations are not adequate. In such instances reasonable conditions voluntarily proffered by the owner of the subject property to which such conditions are applicable for the protection of the community (which conditions are not generally applicable to other land similarly zoned) when considered with existing zoning ordinance district regulations should cause the requested rezoning to be compatible with existing zoning and uses in the area. 
2.  Application. An applicant seeking conditional rezoning shall voluntarily proffer in writing such conditions as the applicant deems appropriate. The applicant shall generally file such a proffered condition in writing at the time of filing an application to rezone a property. An applicant may file such voluntary proffers in writing prior to the public hearing before the Council. The Council may refer such later filed proffered conditions back to the Planning Commission for review. City Council may consider additional proffers, deletions, and/or amendments to all such conditions provided same have been voluntarily proffered in writing by the owner of the property which is the subject of the rezoning request. 
3.  Applications for conditional rezoning for new residential development and new residential uses. 
(i)  Defined Terms. The terms used in this subsection, shall have the meanings stated for the same terms as defined in Va. Code Ann. § 15.2-2303.4. 
(ii)  The Applicant's Proffer Statement. An applicant seeking a conditional rezoning or a proffer condition amendment for a new residential development or a new residential use shall provide a written proffer statement at the time the applicant proffers any conditions. The applicant's proffer statement shall include the information designated below. 
(iii)  Required Contents of Proffer Statement. An applicant shall include the following information in a proffer statement submitted pursuant to this subsection. 
a.  Proffers and Proffer Condition Amendments. A description and explanation of how each proffer or proffer condition amendment, whether onsite or offsite, addresses an impact that is specifically attributable to the proposed new residential development or other new residential use applied for. 
b.  Offsite Proffers. A description and explanation of how an offsite proffer addresses an impact to an offsite public facility such that: 
1.  The new residential development or new residential use creates a need, or an identifiable portion of a need, for one or more public facility improvements in excess of existing public facility capacity at the time of the rezoning or proffered condition amendment; and 
2.  Each new residential development or new residential use applied for will receive a direct and material benefit from the proffer made with respect to any such public facility improvements; and 
3.  The projected impacts on public facility capacity specifically attributable to the proposed new residential development or new residential use. 
c.  Certifications. The applicant's proffer statement shall include the following certifications: 
1.  A certification by the applicant that all proffers and proffer condition amendments are voluntary. 
2.  A certification by the applicant that the information in the proffer statement is true, accurate, and complete to the best of the applicant's knowledge. 
d.  Identification of Proffers Suggested by the City. The proffer statement shall specifically identify any proffer or proffer condition amendment that was suggested, requested, or required by the City. 
e.  Waiver of Required Contents. The Zoning Administrator or the City Planner may waive any element of the required contents of a proffer statement pursuant to § 35.2-10.12(b) of this Zoning Ordinance. 
f.  Application Fee. The City Council may require a specific application fee for a conditional rezoning application for a proposed new residential development or new residential use pursuant to § 35.2-101 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(e)  Concurrent Review Allowed. Applications for Comprehensive Plan amendments and other development approvals may be submitted and reviewed concurrently. 
(f)  Completeness Review. The City Planner shall review the application and shall determine if the application is complete pursuant to the provisions of section 35.2-10.12 (Completeness). 
(g)  Staff Review and Recommendation. Upon finding that the application is complete the City Planner shall consult with the Technical Review Committee (TRC), prepare a report making findings and recommendations on the application, and authorize notice to be provided in accordance with section 35.2-10.14 (Notice) and Exhibit II-6. 
(Ord. No. O-17-038 , § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 35.2-11.4. - Phased development. 
    If an Applicant proposes a development providing public infrastructure in two or more phases, the Applicant shall submit plans that show how the public infrastructure will be provided so that each phase of development is served by adequate public facilities as follows: 
(a)  City approval of the phasing plan shall be a condition of concept plan approval. 
(b)  The requirements of this ordinance will be satisfied with respect to each phase. 
(c)  A phasing plan shall identify the public improvements that must be completed in conjunction with each phase of development. 
(d)  Once a schedule has been approved and made part of the approval by the approval body, no land may be used, buildings occupied or lots sold except in accordance with the approved schedule unless it the City Planner and City Engineer determine that the change does not reduce the levels of service available during any phase of the development. Other changes shall require approval by the original approval body. 
Sec. 35.2-11.5. - Planning commission hearing. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and, after closing the hearing shall render its recommendation in accordance with the applicable approval criteria. 
(b)  Recommendations for Comprehensive Plan or zoning map amendments or conditional use permits may include that a lesser area be included within the amendment or that a less intensive designation or use classification be applied to all or a portion of the property upon making findings supporting such change pursuant to Section 15.2-2285(C) of the Code of Virginia. 
Sec. 35.2-11.6. - City council hearing and action. 
(a)  Hearing and Action. Following the Planning Commission recommendation, the application shall be submitted to the City Council to review at a public hearing. Following the hearing and consideration of the applicable approval criteria, the Council may approve or deny the application by an affirmative vote of at least a majority of a quorum of the City Council. 
(b)  Changes to the Area. If, in the judgment of Council, consideration should be given to changing a greater or lesser area than that proposed in an application, Council may refer such change to the Commission for report and recommendation. It shall be the duty of the City Manager, or any official designated by him, to bring to the attention of Council such instances where, in his opinion, a greater or lesser area shall be considered for change than that contained in a specific petition, and the Planning Commission may also recommend to Council that a greater or lesser area be changed, or that the zoning be changed in any other respect differently from what was proposed in the petition. 
(c)  Conditions for Conditional Rezoning. City Council may approve reasonable conditions to rezoning, provided that: 
1.  The rezoning itself must give rise to the need for the conditions. 
2.  Such conditions shall have a reasonable relation to the rezoning. 
3.  Such conditions shall not include a cash contribution to the City. 
4.  Such conditions shall not include mandatory dedication of real or personal property for open space, parks, schools, fire departments, or other public facilities not otherwise authorized by law. 
5.  Such conditions shall not include payment for or construction of off-site improvements except those provided for in section 15.2-2241 of the Code of Virginia. 
6.  Such conditions shall not include a requirement that the applicant create a property owners association under Chapter 25 (sec. 55-508 et seq.) of Title 55, which includes an express further condition that members of a property owners association pay an assessment for the maintenance of public facilities owned in fee by a public entity, including open space, parks, schools, fire departments and other public facilities not otherwise provided for in section 15.2-2241 of the Code of Virginia; however, such facilities shall not include sidewalks, special street signs or markers, or special street lighting in public rights-of-way not maintained by the Department of Transportation. 
7.  No condition shall be proffered that is not related to the physical development or physical operation of the property. 
8.  All such conditions shall be in conformity with the city's comprehensive plan as defined in section 15.2-2223 of the Code of Virginia. 
9.  The provisions of this ordinance shall not be used for the purpose of discrimination in housing. 
10.  Such conditions shall be voluntary. 
11.  In conditional rezonings involving a proposed new residential development or new residential use: 
a.  Compliance with Va. Code Ann. § 15.2-2303.4. Such conditions shall comply with Va. Code Ann. § 15.2-2303.4. 
b.  Defined Terms. The terms used in this subsection shall have the meanings stated for the same terms as defined in Va. Code Ann. § 15.2-2303.4. 
c.  Onsite and Offsite Proffers. Proffers and proffer condition amendments, whether onsite or offsite, shall address an impact that is specifically attributable to the proposed new residential development or other new residential use applied for. 
d.  Offsite Proffers. Offsite proffers shall address an impact to an offsite public facility such that: 
1.  The new residential development or new residential use creates a need, or an identifiable portion of a need, for one or more public facility improvements in excess of existing public facility capacity at the time of the rezoning or proffer condition amendment; and 
2.  The new residential development or new residential use applied for receives a direct and material benefit from a proffer made with respect to any such public facility improvements. 
(d)  Changes to Category, District or Use. The Council may approve a change to a less intensive land use category, zoning district or use than listed in the public notice without additional notice. 
(e)  Resubmittal of Denied Applications. When the Council has denied an application to amend, supplement or change these regulations, or the boundaries of any district or classification of any property, it shall not be required to consider another petition requesting the same change until at least one year has elapsed, except by the favorable vote of five members of City Council. 
Exhibit II-5: Submittal Requirements for Applications Requiring Public Hearings before City Council 
Criteria Development Application Comp. Plan Map
Amendment Zoning Text
Amendment Zoning Map
Amendment Conditional Zoning
and Proffers Conditional Use
Permit Appeal to
Certificate of
Appropriateness Completed application form ? ? ? ? ? ? Name and address of petitioner ? ? ? ? ? ? A check payable to the City of Lynchburg in the amount set forth in the fee schedule adopted by City Council ? ? ? ? ? ? A map showing the subject property (preferably a copy of the valuation map available from the department of community development, City Hall) ? ? ? ? ? Two photographs of each required notification sign posted on the property shall be provided at least ten days prior to the public hearing ? ? ? ? ? Detailed description of the request (e.g., plan map amendment including existing and proposed future land use category or rezoning, including existing and proposed zoning) ? ? ? ? ? Legal description of applicable property ? ? ? ? ? Purpose of proposed change, including intentions of petitioner for use of the property ? ? ? ? ? Documentation demonstrating the amendment's consistency with the vision, goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan ? ? ? ? ? ? Concept plan meeting the requirements of Exhibit II-16 (plans for planned unit, cluster commercial, traditional neighborhood, or corporate campus development shall demonstrate substantial compliance with the applicable objectives) ? ? ? ? Plan showing phases and planned street layout if less than the entire contiguous holdings of the applicant are shown or the project is to be developed in phases ? ? Metes and bounds description of the property subject to the application ? ? Proffers volunteered by the owner of the property ? Existing zoning and use of adjacent properties ? ? ?  
? = Required 
Exhibit II-6: Notice Requirements by Application Type 
Development Application Publication Mail Posted Comprehensive Plan/area plan text amendment ? O Comprehensive Plan/area plan map amendment ? ? ? Zoning Ordinance text amendment ? O Zoning Ordinance map amendment, including conditional zoning ? ? ? Conditional use permit, including planned unit development, traditional neighborhood development, cluster commercial development, corporate campus development or floodplain development approval ? ? ? Historic district certificate of appropriateness ? O ?  
? = Required 
O = Optional at Applicant's discretion 
(Ord. No. O-17-038 , § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 35.2-11.7. - Approval criteria. 
    Development applications may be reviewed for substantial compliance with the approval criteria established in Exhibit II-7. Except for rezoning requests submitted in accordance with the provisions herein for conditional rezonings, the Council shall not consider any representations made by the petitioner that, if the change is granted, the rezoned property will be used for only one of the possible range of uses permitted in the requested classification except as proffered as part of a conditional rezoning. Rather, the Council shall consider whether the entire range of permitted uses in the requested classification is more appropriate than the range of uses in the existing classification. 
Exhibit II-7: Development Approval Criteria 
Criteria Development Application Comprehensive Plan
Amendment Zoning Text
Amendment Zoning Map
Amendment Conditional Zoning
and Proffers Conditional Use
Permit Appeal to Certificate
of Appropriateness Health, Safety, and Welfare. The change bears a substantial relationship to the public health, safety or general welfare, or protects and preserves historical and cultural places and areas. ? ? ? ? ? ? Original Errors or Omissions: Whether there was error or omission in the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan, or in the supporting premises and findings. ? Subsequent Events: Whether events subsequent to the Comprehensive Plan adoption have invalidated portions of the Plan, changed the character of the City, or demonstrated new information, such that an amendment is acceptable. ? Consistency. The extent to which the text amendment or rezoning may be substantially consistent with some or all of the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, including applicable area, corridor, sector or other plans. ? ? Adverse Impacts on Neighboring Lands. The nature and degree of adverse impacts of the proposed development upon neighboring lands are mitigated by adopted compatibility standards and outweighed by benefits to the public health, safety and welfare. ? ? ? ? Public Policy. The extent to which the text amendment or rezoning may be substantially consistent with some or all of the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, such as the need for housing, economic development, redevelopment, or environmental protection. ? ? ? ? ? Accessibility of Public Services. In order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public the City may restrict or deny a rezoning request due to the inaccessibility of water and/or sewer lines. ? ? Suitability as Presently Zoned. For rezonings, the hearing body may consider the suitability or unsuitability of the area for its use as presently zoned. This factor, like the others, must often be weighed in relation to the other standards, and instances can exist in which the use for which land is zoned may be rezoned upon proof of a real public need, substantially changed conditions in the neighborhood, or to implement important goals, policies, and strategies stated in the Comprehensive Plan. ? ? Application Causes Need for Conditions. The application shall comply with the requirements of section 35.2-11.6(c) of this zoning ordinance ? Housing Discrimination Prohibited. The provisions of this ordinance shall not be used for the purpose of discrimination in housing. ? ? ? Only Authorized Uses Allowed. The use shall be authorized in the zoning district where the applicant seeks such permit. ? ? Adverse Effects Limited. The approval body should consider the extent to which the proposal as submitted or modified might have adverse effects on health, safety, or comfort of persons living or working in the neighborhood, and the extent to which the proposal may be injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood as compared to other uses permitted in the same district. In making such a determination, consideration shall be given to: 
(a) The location, type, and height of buildings or structures; 
(b) The type and extent of landscaping and screening on the site; and 
(c) The extent to which the proposed use is consistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. ? ? Concept Plan Compliance. The concept plan substantially complies with the specific standards for the applicable use or development pattern in the district in which the proposed development is located. ? ? Public Utilities. Electricity, sanitary sewerage, potable water and stormwater management facilities will be available and adequate to comply with adopted City standards ? ? ? ? Compliance with Special Development Criteria. The concept plan substantially complies with the objectives and other applicable criteria for the use or development pattern standards established in Articles VII and VIII of this Zoning Ordinance ? Phasing Plan. The phasing plan, if applicable is consistent with the requirements for phased conditional use development established in section 35.2-11.4 ? Applicants proffer statement pursuant to Section 35.2-11.3(d)(3) of this Zoning Ordinance ? Impacts of Use. The approval body should consider the extent to which use as approved will: 
(a) Be generally compatible with the character of the neighborhood and surrounding land uses; 
(b) Be of a size, intensity, location and design so that it does not create undue congestion or hazards for any mode of transportation; 
(c) Not be unduly noxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or gas; 
(d) Not unduly injure the use and enjoyment of the property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted or substantially diminish property values within the neighborhood; 
(e) Not unduly impede the orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted within the zoning district; 
Not be unduly detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or general welfare. The public interest and welfare supporting the proposed use shall be sufficient to outweigh the individual interests that are adversely affected by the establishment of the proposed use. ? Compliance with criteria for Cluster Commercial Development, Traditional Neighborhood Development, Planned Unit Development, or Corporate Campus Development Applications. The application is substantially consistent with the applicable criteria for approval of cluster commercial developments, traditional neighborhood developments, planned unit developments or corporate campus development, as applicable. ? Compliance with Flood Hazard Regulations. The proposed development substantially complies with the flood hazard regulations adopted in section 35.2-59 of this ordinance and have no substantially adverse effects on health, safety, or comfort of persons living or working in vicinity of the development due to encroachment or modification of the floodplain. ? Compliance with Historic District Standards. The proposed development is consistent with the intent of the historic district standards and substantially complies with section 35.2-13.6 (Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards) ? Other Factors. The hearing body may consider any other factors relevant to the application under the Laws of the Commonwealth. ? ? ? ?  
? = Required 
(Ord. No. O-17-038 , § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 35.2-11.8. - Failure to act. 
(a)  If the Planning Commission has failed to make a recommendation on a Zoning Ordinance amendment within 100 days after the first meeting of the Planning Commission on the Zoning Ordinance amendment, the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have approved the Zoning Ordinance amendment, unless the Zoning Ordinance amendment has been withdrawn by the applicant prior to the expiration of the time period. In the event of and upon such withdrawal, processing of the Zoning Ordinance amendment shall cease without further action. 
(b)  Plats, site plans, and plans of development shall be reviewed and approved according to the provisions of Va. Code §§ 15.2-2259 and 15.2-2260, as amended. 
Sec. 35.2-11.9. - Approvals. 
(a)  Effect of Approval. The approval entitles the owner of the property to proceed with development in accordance with applicable rules and regulations; it does not authorize the use, occupancy, or development of property until the applicant receives other required development approvals. 
(b)  Final Site Plan Approval Required for Conditional Use Permits. Failure to apply for final site plan and building permit approval or to establish the use within 24 months of concept plan approval pursuant to the conditional use permit or as established in the phasing plan approved by the City Council shall result in expiration of the concept plan and conditional use permit approval. 
(c)  Effect on Successors and Assigns. Unless otherwise established in the conditions, development approvals are transferable so long as the use of land or structures or any portion thereof subject to the development approval continues to comply with all applicable terms and requirements. 
(d)  Phasing Allowed. If the City Council approves both the concept plan and phasing plan, the developer may submit final site plans to the City Planner for review and approval as described in the approved phasing plan. Any development that is anticipated to require more than 12 months for completion shall show on the concept plan a phasing plan documenting the phasing sequence of the project. 
(e)  Institutional Uses. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, conditional use permits granted or assigned to any hospital, institution of higher learning, charitable organization, or any public agency or authority shall be valid for a period of 36 months. If a building permit for construction authorized by a conditional use permit granted to such a user has not been applied for within 36 months of the grant of such permit, the conditional use permit shall be void. After issuance of the first building permit for construction of any structure or improvement authorized by the conditional use permit, the conditional use permit shall remain valid as to future stages of the development approved under the permit, as shown on the approved concept plan and phasing plan if applicable, even though further construction does not commence within the time specified in the phasing plan. 
(f)  Challenges. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a conditional use permit granted by the City Council that is subject to judicial challenge shall not expire while the challenge is pending. [note: existing language suspends all time periods] 
Sec. 35.2-11.10. - Minor amendments to applications not requiring re-notification. 
    The City Council may allow minor amendments to an application without re-submittal of the entire application. For purposes of this article, minor amendments to an application include adjustments to achieve greater compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, technical codes or other applicable rules and regulations, but do not: 
(a)  Increase land area, the number of lots, dwelling units, floor area, height, impervious cover, or any additional land-use disturbance; 
(b)  Introduce different land uses than those requested in the original application; 
(c)  Conflict with adopted technical codes; 
(d)  Request greater deviation from standards than requested in the application; 
(e)  Allow any diminution in buffer or transition areas, reduction in landscaping, reduction of required yards, or any change in the design characteristics or materials used in construction of the structures; or 
(f)  Reduce or eliminate conditions attached to a final development approval unless a new notice is provided. 
Sec. 35.2-11.11. - Amendments to approved concept plans. 
(a)  The City Planner may authorize the following minor amendments to a concept plan approved during a public hearing: 
1.  Deviations arising from limited technical considerations that could not reasonably be anticipated during the approval process; 
2.  Amendments required to bring the application into compliance with adopted Building Code and Manual of Specifications and Details. 
3.  Any other change that has no material effect on the character of the approved concept plan, as determined by the City Planner, such as: 
a.  Interior street realignments and driveway relocations as long as the adjustment does not reduce the gross area of common areas or open spaces, reduce residential lot sizes, eliminate required buffers or create street alignments or driveway configurations that fail to conform with City standards; 
b.  Facility design modifications for amenities; 
c.  Relocation of landscaping materials that do not impact properties surrounding the proposed development or compatibility within the proposed development; 
d.  Adjustments to the boundaries between phases as long as each phase continues to function independently when developed; 
e.  Adjustments to the phasing plan that neither the City Planner nor City Engineer find reduce the levels of service available during any phase of the development. 
f.  Adjustment to the boundaries between land uses as long as the change does not result in an increase in overall density or intensity of development, and the change does not affect properties abutting the proposed development; and 
g.  Expansions of buffers, open spaces and landscape areas. 
(b)  All other amendments shall be considered major amendments and shall be processed in the same manner as original applications, including notice and hearings. 
Sec. 35.2-11.12. - Records. 
(a)  The City Council and Planning Commission shall keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations, and decisions by any appropriate means as prescribed by rule and consistent with the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  All development review decisions and all approved maps, plans and plats shall be maintained in the permanent files of the City Planner and shall be recorded as required by City Code and statute. 
(c)  Conditions attached to a property shall be met by the owner, successors, assigns and heirs unless the conditions are modified or eliminated through the process for Zoning Map amendments or conditional use permits as applicable. 
(d)  Records of conditional rezoning: 
1.  The zoning map shall show by an appropriate symbol the existence of conditions attached to the zoning. 
2.  The City Planner shall maintain a conditional zoning index which index shall be available in the planning division office for public inspection during regular office hours. The index shall provide ready access to the ordinance creating such conditions in accordance with the article and shall clearly list all conditions applicable to each. 
3.  Before any permits can be issued to begin construction or for the occupancy of an existing structure, the petitioner shall file and record in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, the conditions approved by City Council. 
4.  These conditions shall be indexed under the names of the landowners of the property being conditionally zoned. The petitioner shall submit a notarized letter to the Clerk of City Council, the zoning administration and the City Planner certifying that the conditions have been recorded with the Clerk of the Circuit Court. 
5.  The City Planner shall maintain the proffer statement provided by the applicant pursuant to Section 35.2-11.3(d)(3) of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-17-038 , § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 35.2-11.13. - Enforcement and guarantees for conditional zonings. 
    To ensure the intent and purpose of conditional zoning approved in accordance with this article, the Zoning Administrator is vested with all necessary authority on behalf of City Council to administer and enforce conditions attached to a conditional zoning, including: 
(a)  Ordering in writing, the remedy of noncompliance with the conditions. 
(b)  Bringing legal action to ensure compliance with the conditions, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding. 
(c)  Requiring a guarantee, satisfactory to the Council, in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of any physical improvements required by the conditions where the contract for the construction of improvements and the contractor's guarantee, in like amount and so conditioned, which guarantee shall be reduced or released by the governing body, or agent thereof, upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that construction of the improvements has been completed in whole or in part. 
(d)  Denying zoning certification with regard to the issuance of any required development approval, use, occupancy or building permit. 
Sec. 35.2-11.14. - Revocation. 
    If the owner or occupant fails to comply with the development standards or conditions of an approved conditional use permit, or if the authorized use is determined to create a nuisance in the community, City Council may revoke the conditional use permit after conducting a public hearing on the matter. 
Sec. 35.2-11.15. - Appeals. 
    Appeals to actions requiring public hearings shall be filed with the appeals body established in Exhibit II-1 (Summary of Application Review Procedures) within 30 days of the action by the approval body unless otherwise provided by the Code of Virginia. 
Sec. 35.2-12. - Variances and Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Sec. 35.2-12.1. - Applicability. 
(a)  Variances. The variance process allows for reasonable deviations from those provisions regulating the shape, size, or area of a lot or parcel of land, or the size, height, area, bulk, or location of a building or structure when the strict application of the ordinance unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property, and such need for a variance would not be shared generally by other properties, and provided such variance is not contrary to the purpose of the ordinance. It shall not include a change in use, which change shall be accomplished by a rezoning or by a conditional zoning. 
(b)  Appeals. An appeal may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator or other officer in the administration or enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance in accordance with Chapter 22 of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, as amended and this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-12.2. - Variance and appeals processes overview. 
(a)  The variance and appeals processes are summarized in Exhibit II-8. 
Exhibit II-8: Variance and Appeals Approval Process Summary 
Variance and Appeals Process Application, Review and Notice Board of Zoning Appeals Public Hearing  
(b)  Requirement for Notice of Right to Appeal. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any written notice of a violation of this Zoning Ordinance or written order of the Zoning Administrator shall include a statement informing the recipient: 
1.  Of the right to appeal the notice or order within 30 days in accordance with this section; 
2.  That the decision shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within said 30 days; 
3.  The written notice or order shall include the applicable appeal fee and a reference to where additional information may be obtained regarding the filing of an appeal; and 
4.  That the appeal period shall not commence until the statement is given. A written notice of a zoning violation or a written order of the Zoning Administrator that includes such statement sent by registered or certified mail to, or posted at, the last known address of the property owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall be deemed sufficient notice to the property owner and shall satisfy the notice requirements of this section. 
5.  The appeals shall be taken within 30 days after the decision appealed from by filing with the Zoning Administrator, and with the Board of Zoning Appeals, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. 
(c)  Notice by Administrator or Board of Zoning Appeals in Certain Matters. When an applicant requesting a written order, requirement, decision or determination from the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer or the Board of Zoning Appeals that is subject to the appeals provisions contained in Virginia Code section 15.2-2311 or 15.2-2314 is not the owner or agent of the owner of the real property subject to the written order, requirement, decision or determination, written notice shall be given by the Zoning Administrator to the owner of the property within ten days of the receipt of such request. The applicant also shall be required to give the owner such notice and to provide satisfactory evidence to the Zoning Administrator that the notice has been given. Written notice mailed to the owner at the last known address of the owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall satisfy the notice requirements of this section. This section shall not apply to inquiries from the City Council, Planning Commission or employees of the City made in the normal course of business. 
(d)  Finality of Determinations by the Zoning Administrator or Other Administrative Officer. In no event shall a written order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer be subject to change, modification or reversal by the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer after 60 days have elapsed from the date of the written order, requirement, decision or determination where the person aggrieved has materially changed his or her position in good faith reliance on the action of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer unless it is proven that such written order, requirement, decision or determination was obtained through malfeasance of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer or through fraud. The 60-day limitation in paragraph (c) shall not apply in any case where, with the concurrence of the attorney for the governing body, modification is required to correct clerical or other nondiscretionary errors. 
Sec. 35.2-12.3. - Initiation. 
    Applications for variances or appeals shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator a minimum of 30 days prior to the hearing date for the Board of Zoning Appeals at which the application will be heard. 
Sec. 35.2-12.4. - Stays of proceedings. 
    An appeal shall stay action on the matter being appealed unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, the stay would, in his opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the Zoning Administrator and for good cause shown. 
Sec. 35.2-12.5. - Staff review. 
(a)  Completeness Review. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application for completeness pursuant to the provisions of section 35.2-10.12 (Applications to be Complete). 
(b)  Submittal Requirements. The applicant shall provide items required by Exhibit II-9. 
Exhibit II-9: Variance and Appeals Application Submittal Requirements 
Submittal Requirement Variance Appeals Completed application form ? ? Name and address of petitioner ? ? A check payable to the City of Lynchburg in the amount set forth in the fee schedule adopted by City Council ? ? A map showing the subject property (preferably a copy of the valuation map available from the department of community development, City Hall) ? ? Two (2) photographs of each required notification sign posted on the property shall be provided at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing ? Detailed description of the request (e.g., the nature of the variance or the action being appealed) and the documentation justifying the granting of a variance or the grounds for an appeal ? ? Legal description of applicable property if the Zoning Administrator determines it is necessary to evaluate compliance with approval criteria ? ? Metes and bounds description of the property subject to the application if the Zoning Administrator determines it is necessary to evaluate compliance with approval criteria ? ? Existing zoning and use of adjacent properties ? ? Concept plan meeting the requirements of Exhibit II-16: Concept and Final Site Plan Application Submittal Requirements ? Documentation demonstrating compliance with the criteria in Exhibit II-11. ? Evidence demonstrating that the decision was based on a misinterpretation of the Zoning Ordinance. ?  
? = Required 
(c)  Staff Recommendation. Upon finding that the application is complete the Zoning Administrator shall consult with the Technical Review Committee (TRC) and prepare a report making findings and recommendations on the application and authorize notice to be provided in accordance with section 35.2-10.14 (Notice) and Exhibit II-10. 
Exhibit II-10: Summary of Notice Requirements 
Development Application Publication Mail Signage Variance ? ? ? Administrative Appeal ? ? O  
? = Required 
O = Optional at the applicant's discretion 
Sec. 35.2-12.6. - Board of Zoning Appeals action on variances. 
(a)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a hearing and following said hearing, shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the requested variance. In making its decision, the Board shall set forth each required finding in section 35.2-12.7 and such other findings as shall be appropriate in each specific grant of a variance, and in each denial thereof, which of the findings have not been satisfied. In any such case, each finding shall be supported by evidence in the record. 
(b)  In authorizing a variance, the Board may impose such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed structure or use as it may deem necessary in the public interest, and may require a guarantee or bond, payable to the City of Lynchburg, in such amount and for such period of time as the Board may designate, to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the property upon which a property owner has been granted a variance shall be treated as conforming for all purposes under state law and local ordinance; however, the structure permitted by the variance may not be expanded unless the expansion is within an area of the site or part of the structure for which no variance is required under the ordinance. Where the expansion is proposed within an area of the site or part of the structure for which a variance is required, the approval of an additional variance shall be required. 
(c)  The Board may grant a lesser variance than requested, but it may not grant a greater deviation from the standards than provided in public notices for the hearing. 
Sec. 35.2-12.7. - Required findings for variances. 
    No variances shall be authorized unless the Board of Zoning Appeals makes the findings listed in Exhibit II-11. 
Exhibit II-11: Required Findings for Variances 
Findings The strict application of the terms of the ordinance would unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property or that the granting of the variance would alleviate a hardship due to a physical condition relating to the property or improvements thereon at the time of the effective date of the ordinance, and findings 1-5 apply. 1. The property interest for which the variance is requested was acquired in good faith and any hardship was not created by the applicant for the variance; and 2. Granting of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and nearby properties in proximity of that geographical area; and 3. The condition or situation of the property concerned is not so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the ordinance; and 4. The granting of the variance does not result in a use that is not otherwise permitted on such property or a change in the zoning classification of the property; and 5. The relief or remedy sought by the variance application is not available through a special exception process that is authorized in the ordinance.  
Sec. 35.2-12.8. - Flood hazard considerations. 
(a)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result; 
(b)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, in conformance with the procedures listed herein; 
(c)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; 
(d)  Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(e)  The City shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of the Zoning Administrator that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance and such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
Sec. 35.2-12.9. - Lapse of variance. 
    If a building permit application for construction authorized by the variance has not been submitted within 12 months of the granting of such variance, the variance so granted shall become void. 
Sec. 35.2-12.10. - Board of Zoning Appeals actions on appeals. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the authority to hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance. The decision on such appeal shall be based on the Board's judgment of whether the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer was correct. The determination of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer shall be presumed to be correct. At a hearing on an appeal, the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer shall explain the basis for the determination after which the applicant has the burden of proof to rebut such presumption of correctness by a preponderance of evidence. The Board shall consider any applicable ordinances, laws and regulations in making its decision. For purposes of this section, determination means any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a hearing and following said hearing, may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, an order, requirement, decision or determination. The concurring vote of three members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to effect any variance from this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-12.11. - Record keeping. 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance. 
(b)  The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions on appeals. 
Sec. 35.2-12.12. - Appeals to the Circuit Court from actions of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(a)  Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, or any aggrieved taxpayer or any officer, department or board of the City of Lynchburg, may present to the Circuit Court of the City a petition specifying the grounds on which aggrieved within 30 days after the Board's decision. 
(b)  Upon the presentation of such petition, the Court shall allow a writ of certiorari to review the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served upon the secretary of the Board of Zoning Appeals or, if no secretary exists, the Chair of the Board of Zoning Appeals, which shall not be less than ten days and may be extended by the Court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the Court may, on application, on notice to the Board of Zoning Appeals and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. 
(c)  Any review of a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not be considered an action against the Board and the Board shall not be a party to the proceedings; however the Board shall participate in the proceedings to the extent required by this section. The City Council, the landowner, and the applicant before the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be necessary parties to the proceedings in the Circuit Court. The Court may permit intervention by any other person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(d)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of the portions thereof as may be called for by the writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. 
(e)  The Court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(f)  In the case of an appeal from the Board of Zoning Appeals to the Circuit Court of an order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer the findings and conclusions of the Board of Zoning Appeals on questions of fact shall be presumed to be correct. The appealing party may rebut that presumption by proving by a preponderance of the evidence, including the record before the Board of Zoning Appeals that the Board of Zoning Appeals erred in its decision. Any party may introduce evidence in the proceedings in the court. The court shall hear any arguments on questions of law de novo. 
(g)  In the case of an appeal by a person of any decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals that denied or granted an application for a variance the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be presumed to be correct. The petitioner may rebut that presumption by proving by a preponderance of the evidence, including the record before the Board of Zoning Appeals that the Board of Zoning Appeals erred in its decision. 
(h)  In the case of an appeal by a person of any decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals that denied or granted application for a special exception, the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be presumed to be correct. The petitioner may rebut that presumption by showing to the satisfaction of the court that the Board of Zoning Appeals applied erroneous principles of law, or where the discretion of the Board of Zoning Appeals is involved, the decision of the Board of Zoning appeals was plainly wrong, was in violation of the purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance, and is not fairly debatable. 
(i)  In the case of an appeal from the Board of Zoning Appeals to the circuit court of a decision of the Board, any party may introduce evidence in the proceedings in the court in accordance with the Rules of Evidence of the Supreme Court of Virginia. 
(j)  Costs shall not be allowed against the City, unless it shall appear to the court that it acted in bad faith or with malice. In the event the decision of the Board is affirmed and the court finds that the appeal was frivolous, the court may order the person or persons who requested the issuance of the writ of certiorari to pay the costs incurred in making the return of the record pursuant to the writ of certiorari. If the petition is withdrawn subsequent to the filing of the return, the locality may request that the court hear the matter on the question of whether the appeal was frivolous. 
Sec. 35.2-13. - Certificates of Appropriateness. 
Sec. 35.2-13.1. - Applicability. 
(a)  Within an historic district, no building or structure, including signs, and including non-contributing buildings and structures and signs, shall be erected, reconstructed, restored, demolished, or altered in any way that affects the external appearance of the building or structure, including such items as roofs, chimneys, fences, and color changes, unless the same is approved as being architecturally compatible with historic landmarks, buildings, or structures therein through the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness (COA) by the Historic Preservation Commission (HPC), the City Planner or by City Council. 
(b)  A certificate of appropriateness that is granted by the HPC, the City Planner or on appeal by the City Council shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  No building permit or demolition permit to authorize any erection, reconstruction, alteration or demolition that affects the external appearance of any landmark, building or structure, or part thereof in a designated historic district, shall be issued until a certificate of appropriateness is issued by the HPC or City Council. The decision of the HPC shall be final except where an appeal is made to City Council pursuant to section 35.2-13.11. No certificate of appropriateness is required when the demolition of a structure is ordered by the Building Official pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
Sec. 35.2-13.2. - Minor actions. 
    Certain minor actions, which are deemed by the City Planner not to permanently affect the character of the historic district, may be exempted from review by the HPC, but the City Planner shall be notified of the proposed actions and may review and approve the alterations administratively or refer the proposed alterations to the HPC. Such actions shall include those that, in the opinion of the City Planner, will have no more effect on the character of the district than those listed as minor works or routine maintenance in Exhibit II-12. 
Exhibit II-12: Work Classifications for Certificates of Appropriateness 
Improvement Category Required
Approval Construction, alteration, demolition or removal of buildings that requires a demolition permit Major Work Certificate of Appropriateness by HPC Construction, alteration, demolition, or removal of exterior features, any of which affect the exterior architectural appearance but do not require a building permit Major Work Certificate of Appropriateness by HPC The construction, reconstruction, restoration, or alteration of signs, fences, or walls. Major Work Certificate of Appropriateness by HPC Maintenance, including routine maintenance, such as, painting, porch repair, window/door repair, masonry repair of building components such as walls, chimneys, or foundations. Minor Work Certificate of Appropriateness by City Planner Replacing sections of siding or trim with same materials, re-roofing with the same materials. Minor Work Certificate of Appropriateness by City Planner Repainting in the same or different color scheme. Minor Work Certificate of Appropriateness by City Planner Addition or deletion of storm windows and doors, window gardens, awnings, or similar structures. Minor Work Certificate of Appropriateness by City Planner Addition or deletion skylights and solar collectors in locations not visible from a public street. Minor Work Certificate of Appropriateness by City Planner Interior work or landscape work that does not substantially alter the contour of a site or its historical character. No Certificate of Appropriateness required No Certificate of Appropriateness required  
Sec. 35.2-13.3. - Stop work orders. 
    The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to order that work be stopped and that an application for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness be filed upon determining that the action may exceed the conditions listed in Exhibit II-12. In all cases the decisions may be appealed to the HPC, and a determination shall be made by the HPC on such appeal within 30 days. 
Sec. 35.2-13.4. - Initiation. 
(a)  Application. Applicants for review involving alterations and/or additions to existing historic structures or the erection of any new structure within a historic district shall provide the submittals required by Exhibit II-13 to the City Planner at least 15 days prior to the HPC meeting at which the application will be heard. 
(b)  Staff Recommendation. Upon finding that the application is complete the City Planner shall prepare a report making findings and recommendations on the application and authorize notice to be provided in accordance with section 35.2-13.5 (Notice and HPC Hearing). 
(c)  Applications. Applications shall include the items listed in Exhibit II-13. 
Exhibit II-13: Certificate of Appropriateness Application Submittal Requirements 
Application Submittal Requirements Completed application form Name and address of petitioner Detailed description of the request (e.g., the nature of the variance or the action being appealed) Preliminary drawings and specifications, including color samples and photographs showing existing and proposed plans and exterior elevations with sufficient detail to show, as far as they relate to exterior appearances: 
a. The architectural design; and 
b. Proposed materials, textures and colors. A scaled plan of all improvements affecting appearances of exterior walls, walks, terraces, accessory buildings, lights, and other elements in sufficient detail to illustrate that the proposed change complies with City requirements. Such plan shall include parcel lines, building locations, location of proposed work, street names, north arrow and illustrations of the proposed work. Legible photographs of all sides of a structure to be reviewed for repair, alteration, or additions will be submitted to the HPC. In the event of new construction, legible photographs of the adjoining and opposite properties may be required.  
(Ord. No. O-18-049 , 6-12-18) 
Sec. 35.2-13.5. - Notice and HPC hearing. 
    Whenever the HPC finds that the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness and the exercise of the rights and privileges granted thereby will, or is likely to, materially and adversely affect the property of another within 200 feet of the subject property, the HPC shall mail notice of its intention to do so to the owner of such affected property and afford such owner an opportunity to be heard with respect thereto at a hearing to be held prior to issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. If HPC invokes this provision an additional 45 days shall be granted before the HPC must render a decision. 
Sec. 35.2-13.6. - Certificate of appropriateness review standards. 
    All decisions of the HPC shall be consistent with standards established by the Secretary of the United States Department of the Interior. Determination of consistency shall be based on a comparison with significant, similar structures within the district and the Residential or Commercial Historic Districts Design Guidelines, as adopted by City Council. The HPC shall also consider the economic feasibility and impact of the proposed repairs, alterations, additions, or new construction. In addition to using the Secretary of the United States Department of the Interior's Standards to guide decisions, the HPC, or City Council on appeal, shall consider the following items in considering the appropriateness of architectural features: 
(a)  General form and composition of proposed construction (shape of proposed structure in plan, relationship between width and height of elevation); 
(b)  Setback and placement on lot; 
(c)  Exterior construction materials (textures, patterns, and colors); 
(d)  Architectural detailing (molding on cornices, finals, and cresting on roofs, gable ornaments, lintels); 
(e)  Roof shapes; 
(f)  Windows (relationship of width to height, location) and doors; 
(g)  Height; 
(h)  Porches (shape, style, size, location) and steps; 
(i)  Walls, fences, walkways, pools, fountains, gazebos, gates, sidewalks, streets, signs, and accessory structures; 
(j)  Enclosure (materials, location, height), such as outbuildings, roofed enclosures, and similar type structures; 
(k)  Other features that have an impact on the historic and/or architectural character of the property; 
Sec. 35.2-13.7. - Action of HPC. 
(a)  Review and Action. Within 45 days of receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the HPC shall meet to review such application. The applicant shall be informed of the time and place at which the HPC will consider the application, and the applicant shall have an opportunity to be heard. The HPC shall approve or deny the application and notify the applicant within 60 days after the first meeting. 
(b)  Disapproval. If the HPC disapproves such plans, it shall state its reason for so doing and shall transmit a record of the reasons therefore in writing to the applicant. No further action shall be taken by the City Building Official to issue a construction permit. The applicant may modify his/her application in regard to the HPC's recommendations and shall have the right to resubmit his/her application to the HPC for its recommendation. 
Sec. 35.2-13.8. - Certificate issuance and action of the applicant. 
(a)  Issuance and Posting of Certificate. Within ten business days after the HPC approves a certificate of appropriateness, the City Planner shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for the work authorized. Said certificate shall be posted in a location visible from the street from the commencement of work until the work is completed. 
(b)  Any person to whom a certificate of appropriateness has been issued may commence work at his/her own risk during the 15-day appeal period provided for in section 35.2-13.11 provided that a building permit has been issued, if necessary. 
Sec. 35.2-13.9. - Validity of certificates of appropriateness. 
(a)  Expiration. Certificates of appropriateness issued by the City Planner shall expire: 
1.  If work is not commenced within 12 months of issuance of the permit; 
2.  If work is suspended or abandoned for 90 days or more after commencement excluding days when the certificate is stayed pursuant to appeal or court action; or 
3.  If work is not completed within 24 months of issuance of the permit. 
(b)  Extensions. The HPC or the City Planner may grant one or more 90-day extensions of time for completing the work authorized by the certificate of appropriateness when: 
1.  The applicant submits a written explanation of the need for additional time; 
2.  The HPC or City Planner finds that the explanation justifies the extension; and 
3.  The applicant agrees to complete the work within the extended time period or be subject to revocation of the certificate. 
Sec. 35.2-13.10. - Demolition or moving. 
(a)  Authorization Required. Subject to the provisions of this section, no historic landmark, building or structure within a historic district shall be demolished or moved until a certificate of appropriateness for the razing, demolition or moving thereof is approved by the HPC, or, on appeal (pursuant to section 35.2-13.11), by City Council after consultation with the HPC. Removal of exterior features for any reason, whether due to neglect, deterioration, damage or willful removal is a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and is subject to penalties unless it is ordered by the Building Official pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(b)  Review Process. Prior to authorizing the demolition or moving of a historic landmark building or structure within a historic district: 
1.  The applicant shall provide evidence of the attempt to sell the property for a price that is reasonably related to its fair market value. Such evidence shall satisfy the criteria listed in Exhibit II-14. 
2.  If the HPC determines that a good faith effort has been made to find a suitable buyer in accordance with the criteria in Exhibit II-14, the HPC shall approve the application for a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition or moving of the subject landmark, building or structure. 
Exhibit II-14: Evidence Documenting Efforts to Sell Subject Property or Structure 
Factor Required Evidence Good Faith Effort to Sell Sale adequately advertised as determined by the HPC, which may include, but not be limited to listing in the Multiple Listing Service, national and internet advertising to any person, firm, corporation, government or agency that gives reasonable assurance that it is willing and able to preserve and restore the landmark, building or structure and the land pertaining thereto Fair Market Value The fair market value as determined by the current assessment on the City Assessor's records or, upon the owner's request, by an appraisal committee which shall be appointed by the City Council and composed of two local licensed real estate brokers and a local banker Reasonable Time Period for Sale Price Minimum Time on Market Less than $25,000 3 months $25,000 to $39,999 4 months $40,000 to $54,999 5 months $55,000 to $74,999 6 months $75,000 to $89,999 7 months $90,000 or more 12 months No Bona Fide Contract Applicant's sworn testimony that no bona fide contract has been offered within the above reasonable time periods for sale.  
(c)  Appeals to actions of the HPC or City Council shall not affect the right of the owner to sell the property while the appeal is pending. 
Sec. 35.2-13.11. - Appeals to City Council. 
(a)  Whenever the HPC shall, in a final decision, deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the applicant for such certificate of appropriateness shall have the right to appeal to and be heard before the City Council; provided that the appeal is filed with the clerk of the City Council within 15 days after the decision by vote of the HPC, a notice in writing of his/her intention to appeal. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such notice, the clerk of the City Council shall promptly schedule a public hearing as soon as reasonably practical after complying with the requirements for published notice established in section 35.2-10.14(d)1 (Published Notice). 
(c)  Prior to the scheduled city council public hearing the applicant appealing the decision of the historic preservation commission to deny a certificate of appropriateness shall post a notification sign on the property as provided in section 35.2-10.14(d)3 (posted signs). 
(d)  Opponents to the granting of certificates of appropriateness by the HPC shall have the right to appeal to and be heard before the City Council, provided there is filed with the clerk of the City Council within 15 days after the decision by vote of the HPC a written petition, signed by at least 25 registered voters of the City, indicating their intention to appeal. Upon receipt of such notice, the clerk of the City Council shall promptly schedule a public hearing as soon as it is reasonably practical for City Council after complying with notice requirements. Published notice of the hearing shall be given as provided by section 35.2-10.14(d)1 (Published Notice) of this Zoning Ordinance. Costs of advertising appeal hearings requested by said opponents will be paid by the opponents in the amount set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the City Council. 
(e)  On any such appeal, the final decision of the HPC appealed from shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal to City Council, except that the filing of such appeal shall not stay the decision of the HPC if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish a historic landmark, building or structure. The City Council shall conduct a full and impartial public hearing on the matter and apply the same criteria as the HPC before rendering any decision. The City Council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the HPC, in whole or in part. The decision of City Council, subject to the provisions of section 35.2-13.12, shall be final. If approved, a certificate of appropriateness, signed by the clerk of the City Council, shall be issued to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O-18-049 , 6-12-18) 
Sec. 35.2-13.12. - Appeal to the circuit court. 
    Within 30 days after any final decision is rendered by City Council pursuant to this section, an aggrieved party may appeal as a matter of right to the circuit court for the City by filing a petition at law setting forth the alleged illegality of the action by City Council. The filing of the said petition shall stay the decision of the City Council pending the outcome of the appeal to circuit court, except that the filing of such petition shall not stay the decision of City Council if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish a historic landmark, building or structure. The court may reverse or modify the decision of the City Council, in whole or in part, if it finds upon review that the decision of the City Council is contrary to law or that its decision is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion, or it may affirm the decision of the City Council. 
Sec. 35.2-14. - Staff Issued Development Approvals. 
Sec. 35.2-14.1. - Zoning compliance determination required. 
(a)  To facilitate the development and use of land within the City of Lynchburg, the City empowers the City Planner, Zoning Administrator and other City staff to review and act on a variety of development approvals. Each of the following development approvals may be granted by staff subject to submittal of the complete application that demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and other applicable policies, rules and regulations. 
(b)  Before the City issues a building permit, certificate of occupancy, business license or other development approval, the Zoning Administrator shall confirm that the proposed application complies with applicable zoning district requirements. 
Sec. 35.2-14.2. - Site plans. 
(a)  Applicability. Site plan review is intended to ensure that the following types of development are designed to enable sites to function well for their intended use while achieving compatibility with surrounding properties, natural resources and the infrastructure that serves the neighborhood: 
1.  Applications for zoning map amendments (rezonings); 
2.  Applications for conditional use permits; 
3.  Applications for development or modifications of commercial and industrial facilities that involve a change in the building footprint or increases in off-street parking; 
4.  Applications for development, modification or expansion of parking lots, excluding resurfacing, repainting and other routine maintenance; 
5.  Applications for development or modifications of institutional facilities, such as schools, hospitals and clubs that involve a change in the building footprint or increases in off-street parking; 
6.  Applications for development or modification of residential developments, involving more than two dwelling units in one building or on one lot; 
7.  Applications for development or modifications of planned unit, traditional neighborhood, cluster commercial or corporate campus developments; and 
8.  Applications for variances. 
(b)  Types of Site Plans. The two types of site plans and the specific circumstances for which they are required are summarized in Exhibit II-15. 
Exhibit II-15: Types of Site Plans 
Type of
Site Plan When Required Review/Approval Body Concept Plan To accompany all rezoning and conditional use permit applications. TRC/Planning Commission/City Council Final Site Plan To accompany applications for building permits and required as a condition for final approval of planned unit, traditional neighborhood, cluster commercial or corporate campus developments TRC/City Planner  
(c)  Initiation and Review. 
1.  The applicant shall submit a complete site plan application to the City Planner. A pre-application conference is recommended, but not required. 
2.  The City Planner shall review site plans for general completeness and compliance with adopted plans, regulations or conditions established through a prior development approval. If the application is incomplete, the City Planner shall notify the applicant in writing of items required to complete the application. 
3.  The City Planner shall distribute copies of the completed application to the Technical Review Committee and other agencies as applicable. 
4.  Within 30 days of submittal of a complete application, the City Planner shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  If the site plan is required for action by the City Council, Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals or other body, the City Planner shall submit the site plan with recommendations to the applicable approval body. 
b.  If the City Planner is the approval authority: 
1.  Approve the site plan subject to Technical Review Committee comments and based on applicable rules, regulations and conditions of prior development approvals; or 
2.  Disapprove the site plan and return a copy to the applicant along with written comments identifying the changes required to comply with applicable rules, regulations or conditions of prior development approvals. 
(d)  Site Plan Submittal Requirements. Applications for concept plan and final site plan approvals shall include the items listed in Exhibit II-16. 
Exhibit II-16: Concept and Final Site Plan Application Submittal Requirements 
Application Submittal Requirements Concept Final Completed application form ? ? Name and address of petitioner ? ? Name and address of person(s) preparing the site plan ? ? A check payable to the City of Lynchburg in the amount set forth in the fee schedule adopted by City Council ? ? Scale, north point, legends and date of last revisions ? ? Vicinity map at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch equals six hundred (600) feet, showing all streets and property within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subject property; ? ? A map showing the subject property (a copy of the valuation map available from the department of community development, City Hall) ? ? Legal description of applicable property ? ? Parcel lines and dimensions (metes and bounds illustrated for rezonings) ? ? Existing zoning and use of adjacent properties ? ? Current zoning boundaries, including surrounding areas to a distance of three hundred (300) feet ? Name and address of owners of record of all adjacent properties ? Location of buildings existing on the tract to be developed and on adjacent tracts within a distance of one hundred (100) feet, indicating whether existing buildings on the tract are to be retained, modified or removed ? Existing and proposed topography at 10 ft. contour intervals (5 ft. contours required for concept plans for planned unit, cluster commercial, traditional neighborhood, or corporate campus developments) ? Proposed contour lines at 2 ft. contour intervals ? Locations of watercourses ? Location of watercourses, marshes, rock outcroppings, wooded areas and single trees with a diameter of ten (10) inches measured three (3) feet from the base of the trunk ? Locations of regulatory floodplains and floodways ? Proposed dust control and phasing for erosion and sediment control measures ? Generalized stormwater management measures ? Final erosion and sediment control and stormwater management plans ? Location of existing and proposed utility lines, indicating where they already exist ? ? Documentation (on plan) of capacity and availability of water, sanitary sewer, and stormwater facilities ? Location of proposed water mains, fire hydrants, pipe sizes and grades ? Location of proposed storm and sanitary sewer systems, both surface and subsurface, showing pipe sizes, grade, flow and design loads ? Proposed location and materials for disposal of refuse and other solid waste; ? ? Recreation and/or open spaces and proposed recreational improvements; ? ? Proposed buildings and structures to include: ? ? a. Proposed Uses; b. Distance between buildings; c. Number of stories; d. Area in square feet of each floor; e. Number of dwelling units or guestrooms; and f. Maximum heights of structures. Elevations of buildings to be built or altered on site ? Proposed location and type of outdoor lighting ? Location, design, direction of, power and time of use of outdoor lighting ? Location of proposed signs; ? Location, size and design of proposed signs ? Location of outdoor storage areas ? Location and screening details for outdoor storage areas ? Existing and proposed curb lines and sidewalks; ? Proposed streets and other ingress and egress facilities (indicating curb lines, sidewalk lines and public right-of-way lines) ? Illustrative cross-sections of streets, showing the general distribution of space for various transportation modes and amenities ? Detailed cross-sections and profiles of streets, showing full design specifications ? Layout of off-street parking, truck loading and paving details (required for concept plan for any planned unit, cluster commercial, traditional neighborhood, or corporate campus development) ? Location and type of proposed landscaping and specifically note any situation where requirements of landscape ordinance will not be met ? Landscaping plan with the following information: ? a. The location, size, height at planting, and botanical name of all required landscaping. b. The location, size, and botanical name of any existing landscaping proposed to be used or required to satisfy any portion of the landscaping ordinance. c. The dimensions of all required landscape islands. d. Calculations of the minimum landscape area and the number of plants required. e. A tree protection detail as specified in "STD & SPEC 3.38, Tree Preservation and Protection," in the 1992 edition of the Virginia erosion and sediment control handbook for all landscaping proposed or required to be preserved to satisfy the requirements of the landscaping ordinance. f. View Tree Protection Details. g. A planting detail for all trees, shrubs, and ground cover used to satisfy the requirements of the landscaping ordinance. h. A planting, fertilization, and watering schedule for all trees, shrubs and or ground cover used to satisfy the requirements of the landscaping ordinance. The schedule shall cover a period of one year after installation of the required landscaping. i. A description of soil amendments necessary to support the growth of all required trees and shrubs. Location of other existing and proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts, detention ponds, retaining walls and fences (required for concept plans for any planned unit, cluster commercial or traditional neighborhood development) ? For site plans prepared for approval of a Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND), the plans shall: ? ? a. Identify core areas, transitional areas, neighborhood edge areas and satellite areas; b. Identify the locations of proposed parks, squares, common open spaces and civic user sites; c. Tabulate the minimum and maximum dwelling units by residential type and the minimum and maximum non-residential square footage by type; d. Calculate the percentages of land area covered by the various land uses in compliance with section 35.2-82.4 (Permitted Uses in Traditional Neighborhood Developments) (ranges of percentages may be used for the concept plan; e. Include written and illustrated set of guidelines that shall include dimensional and qualitative specifications for  Building height, setback, and bulk standards by land use type and general area;  Illustrations of proposed TND blocks showing potential mixes of uses and illustrative building, parking, and alley layouts (examples of the type of illustrations required are retained by the City Planner);  Descriptions and illustrations of screening/buffering/transitions to be provided between residential and commercial/service/industrial uses.  Standards for the landscaping and lighting of streets and off-street parking and loading areas and for screening of views of off-street parking and loading areas from public streets.  Architectural guidelines for all building types; such guidelines need not set specific floor plans or elevations, but shall describe in general the style and materials of buildings. f. Land use information including the acreage of each land use as well as the square footage of non-residential uses and the proposed number of development units by type; g. A written description of how the site plan demonstrates compliance with the applicable development pattern objectives; h. Architectural renderings of each structure type; i. A statement regarding the timing of construction of common or public facilities; and j. A general statement as to how parks, squares, common open spaces and common facilities are to be owned and maintained, and in particular which are to be public and dedicated to the City and which are to be private and maintained by a property owners association. For site plans prepared for approval of planned unit, or cluster commercial), the plans shall include: ? ? k. Land use information including the acreage of each land use as well as the square footage of non-residential uses and the proposed number of development units by type; l. A written description of how the site plan demonstrates compliance with the applicable development pattern objectives; m. Architectural renderings of each structure type; n. A statement regarding the timing of construction of common or public facilities; and o. A general statement as to how parks, squares, common open spaces and common facilities are to be owned and maintained, and in particular which are to be public and dedicated to the City and which are to be private and maintained by a property owners association.  
? = Required 
(e)  Building and Certificates of Occupancy. No building permit shall be issued for a building located in an area in which site plan review is required unless the construction proposed by such building permit conforms to the approved final site plan. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued in such an area for a building or use that does not conform to the approved site plan. 
(f)  Appeals. 
1.  An appeal of any decision made by the City Planner concerning concept plan review may be made to the Planning Commission. The action of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council. 
2.  An appeal of any decision made by the City Planner concerning final site plan review may be made to the Planning Commission. The action of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-14.3. - Sign permits. 
(a)  Applicability. A sign permit shall be required prior to the construction, erection, installation, attachment or modification of any permanent or temporary sign that is not specifically exempted from the requirement for a sign permit. 
(b)  Procedures. The process for applying for a sign permit and the standards for signs are established in section 35.2-64 of this Zoning Ordinance. The application shall include the information included in Exhibit II-17. 
Exhibit II-17: Sign Permit Application Submittal Requirements 
Application Submittal Requirements Completed application form Name and address of petitioner A check payable to the City of Lynchburg in the amount set forth in the fee schedule adopted by City Council A map showing the subject property (preferably a copy of the valuation map available from the department of community development, City Hall) Legal description of applicable property The location and dimensions of the sign Proposed lighting, if any Elevation drawings of the sign Plans demonstrating compliance with applicable building and electrical codes  
Sec. 35.2-14.4. - Minor exceptions. 
(a)  Purpose. Minor exceptions, also referred to as modifications in section 15.2.2286(A)(4) of the Code of Virginia, provide administrative relief and expeditious review of minor deviations from the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance under specified circumstances. Minor exceptions do not involve a public hearing unless the Zoning Administrator's or City Planner's decision is appealed by the applicant to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(b)  Types of Administrative Relief. Administrative relief may be granted by the Zoning Administrator for any of the minor exceptions identified in Exhibit II-18. Administrative relief may be granted by the City Planner for any of the minor exceptions identified in Exhibit II-19. 
Exhibit II-18: Minor Exceptions By Zoning Administrator 
Exception Description Cross-Reference Building Setback Reduction Reductions of building setbacks to reflect neighborhood norms, to protect existing trees or achieve other purposes of this Zoning Ordinance 35.2-61.3(f) Loading Berth Waiver of zoning berth requirements when there is no practical way to provide a side or rear yard loading berth that is consistent with the applicable zoning district purposes 35.2-62.5(g) Sidewalks Waiver or reduction of sidewalk requirements per Section 35.2-67 35.2-67.1  
Exhibit II-19: Minor Exceptions by City Planner 
Exception Description Cross-Reference Commercial Design Review Guidelines The City Planner may grant exceptions to the City's Commercial Design Review Guidelines for buildings in the B-4 district that are adjacent to structures that are inconsistent with historic development patterns 35.2-47.4(d) Parking Surfaces Subject to the recommendation of the TRC, alternative dust free parking lot surfaces may be allowed 35.2-62.3 Parking Spaces The minimum number of spaces may be reduced where uses sharing parking have different peak demands, where mass transit service is available or where existing standards would result in a parking surplus 35.2-62.4 Landscaping and Buffers The City Planner may approve alternative landscaping layouts that achieve the purposes of the landscaping requirements 35.2-63.14 Minor Amendments Subject to specific conditions of approval, the City Planner may approve minor amendments to a concept plan approved by the City Council 35.2-11.10  
(c)  Initiation and Review. The applicant shall file a completed application with the Zoning Administrator. The application for a minor exception shall include the items listed in Exhibit II-20. 
1.  The Zoning Administrator shall provide mailed notice of the request for such an exception to the adjacent property owners. 
2.  The adjoining and adjacent property owners shall be given an opportunity to respond to the request within 21 days of the date the notice is mailed. 
3.  If any adjoining or adjacent property owner objects to the said request within the time specified above, the request shall be transferred to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a decision. 
4.  The cost of this notification shall be charged to the applicant, unless waived by the City, at the standard rate as determined by the City Council's current fee schedule for each written notice. 
Exhibit II-20: Minor Exception Application Submittal Requirements 
Application Submittal Requirements Completed application form Name and address of petitioner A check payable to the City of Lynchburg in the amount set forth in the fee schedule adopted by City Council A map showing the subject property (preferably a copy of the valuation map available from the department of community development, City Hall) Legal description of applicable property A description of each exception and the reasons each exception is needed A final site plan illustrating the exception Proposed mitigation measures, if necessary to ensure compatibility with abutting properties  
(d)  Criteria. Minor exceptions or modifications may be granted when the City Planner or Zoning Administrator, as applicable, finds in writing that the application meets the following criteria: 
1.  The strict application of the ordinance would produce undue hardship; 
2.  Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; and 
3.  The authorization of the modification will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the zoning district will not be changed by the granting of the modification. 
(e)  Action. After a review period of not more than 45 days, the Zoning Administrator shall approve or disapprove any application for administrative relief and provide written documentation justifying the action. 
(f)  Appeals. Appeals to the decision of the Zoning Administrator or City Planner on a minor exception or modification shall be made to the Board of Zoning appeals in accordance with section 35.2-12 of this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-14.5. - Temporary use permits. 
(a)  Purpose. Temporary use permits authorize the establishment of authorized uses for a limited time period and subject to conditions that protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Temporary use permits do not involve a public hearing unless the Zoning Administrator's decision is appealed by the applicant to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(b)  Applicability. A Temporary Use Permit shall be required prior to the establishment of a temporary amusement, carnival, tent revival or any other temporary use authorized by this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Initiation and Review. The applicant shall file a completed application with the Zoning Administrator, who, after consulting with the TRC, shall approve the application subject to compliance with the criteria established in paragraph (d) of this section. 
(d)  Approval Criteria. The Zoning Administrator shall approve the temporary use permit subject to the following criteria: 
1.  The proposed use is authorized in the district in which it is to be established; 
2.  The proposed use complies with the conditions established for the applicable district in Articles III and IV, as well as the conditions for the use established in Article VII of this Zoning Ordinance; 
3.  The applicant agrees to mitigation measures that the TRC finds necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS, MAPS AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 35.2-30. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to establish and adopt zoning districts and an official Zoning Map to govern the use of land and water in the City in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, other adopted plans and the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-31. - Overview and Applicability. 
    This article establishes base and overlay zoning districts; the Official Zoning Map, as well as the rules for its maintenance, amendment, interpretation and replacement; the use matrix, which identifies the land uses and the types of approvals required for each authorized land use; and the rules for interpretation of the use matrix. 
Sec. 35.2-32. - Zoning Districts and Official Zoning Map Established. 
    The City of Lynchburg is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as provided herein and as shown on the "Official Zoning Map of Lynchburg, Virginia," which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance, bearing the effective date of this ordinance and any map amendment thereto, and certified by the Clerk of City Council. The Official Zoning Map shall be maintained on the City's geographic information system (GIS) under the guidance of the City Planner. Exhibit III-1 lists the base and special districts established for the City of Lynchburg and provides links to the sections of this ordinance that establish the regulations applicable within each zoning district. Article IV establishes the base zoning districts. Article V establishes the special zoning districts that include regulations that overlay and modify the regulations applicable in the base zoning districts. 
Exhibit III-1: Zoning Districts Established 
Base Zoning Districts Section "R-C" Conservation District 35.2-40 "R-1" Low-Density Residential District 35.2-41 "R-2" Low-Medium Density Residential District 35.2-42 "R-3" Medium-Density Residential District 35.2-43 "R-4" Medium-High Density Residential District 35.2-44 "B-1" Limited Business District 35.2-45 "B-3" Community Business District 35.2-46 "B-4" Urban Commercial District 35.2-47 "B-5" General Business District 35.2-48 "IN-1" Institutional District 1 35.2-49 "IN-2" Institutional District 2 35.2-50 "I-1" Restricted Industrial District 35.2-51 "I-2" Light Industrial District 35.2-52 "I-3" Heavy Industrial District 35.2-53 Special Zoning Districts "FSC" Fifth Street Corridor Overlay District 35.2-55 "SC" Scenic Corridor Overlay District 35.2-56 "AS" Airport Safety Overlay District 35.2-57 "HD" Historic District 35.2-58 "FW" Floodway District, "FF" Floodway Fringe District, and AFP Approximated Flood Plain District 35.2-59  
Sec. 35.2-33. - Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries. 
Sec. 35.2-33.1. - Determination of boundaries. 
    Unless zoning district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions or otherwise clearly shown or described, and where uncertainty exists with respect to any zoning district boundary as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines, section lines or tract lines shall be construed to follow such lines. 
(b)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way shall be construed to follow such centerlines. Where the street, alley or right-of-way has been vacated through official action of the governing body, the adjacent zoning district boundary shall be reconfigured to follow the centerline of the vacated right-of-way. 
(c)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
(d)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limit lines shall be construed to follow such City limit lines. 
(e)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. 
(f)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of canals, streams or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(g)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to features described in paragraphs (a) through (f) above shall be construed as parallel to such features at the distance from the feature indicated on the zoning map. If a distance is not indicated on the zoning map, the distance shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(h)  If no distance, angle, curvature, description or other means is given to determine a boundary line accurately and the foregoing provisions do not apply, the same shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. In case of subsequent dispute, the matter shall be referred to the Board of Zoning Appeals, which shall determine the boundary. 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-33.2. - Parcels divided by district lines. 
    Whenever a single parcel of is located within two or more different zoning districts, the applicable zoning district regulations shall apply to each portion of the lot. 
Sec. 35.2-34. - Authorized Uses. 
Sec. 35.2-34.1. - Tables of authorized uses established. 
    Land uses within this Zoning Ordinance are arranged in accordance with the Land Based Classification Standards (LBCS) developed under the leadership of the American Planning Association (see https://www.planning.org/lbcs/background/ for detailed documentation of this classification system). LBCS was developed to replace a variety of other coding system by focusing on structure type, function, activity, site or ownership. This Zoning Ordinance uses structure codes for certain residential uses (indicated with "S" next to code number) and function codes for other uses. 
    Exhibits in the regulations for each district list the principal uses authorized within each zoning district established in section 35.2-32. Appendix A includes the entire matrix for all zoning districts. Uses are arranged in accordance with the LBCS, which shall be used to define land uses unless otherwise defined in Article XI of this Zoning Ordinance. All uses are subject to the procedures and standards of this Zoning Ordinance and other applicable rules and regulations. 
(a)  LBCS Hierarchy. The LBCS function codes establish a four-digit hierarchy of uses with digits to the right expressing greater specificity. Where no entry appears in the zoning district columns (for example 1000, 1100 and 1110), the uses described more specifically in the rows below (1111 and 1112 in the above example) indicate whether or not a specific use is authorized. Where an entry appears in the zoning district columns for a general use (for example 2520) and also for a more specific use (for example 2521) within the same classification, the more specific code and its entry shall govern. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. A "P" indicates the listed use is allowed by right within the respective zoning district subject to issuance of a permit in accordance with established procedures. Some permitted uses are subject to specific conditions established in the Zoning District Use Standards in Articles IV and V or other Specific Land Use Standards in Article VII, or elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. A "C" indicates the listed use is allowed within the respective zoning district only after approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
(d)  Prohibited Uses. Unlisted uses are prohibited within the respective zoning district unless specifically authorized through approval of a planned unit development, cluster commercial development, traditional neighborhood development or corporate campus. 
(e)  Accessory Uses. Uses that are secondary and customarily accessory to the principal uses are addressed in section 35.2-71 (Accessory Structures and Uses) and zoning district use regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-34.2. - Interpretation of tables of authorized land uses. 
(a)  Uses Not Specifically Listed. In the case where a use is not listed in the district use matrix in Appendix A, either as a specific LBCS classification or as an example, and such use is not otherwise prohibited by law, the Zoning Administrator shall determine, as set forth below, whether a substantially similar use exists in the use matrix. If the Zoning Administrator determines that a substantially similar use exists, then the regulations governing that use shall apply to the particular use not listed. In making the determination, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the national standards underlying the LBCS while also considering the City's particular needs for zoning and land use classification, and shall apply to the following rules of construction: 
1.  If a use is listed as a general classification in the use matrix (Appendix A: Table of Authorized Land Uses) while a more specific classification within the same industry classification is also listed, the specific classification shall govern. 
2.  Because the list of permissible uses set forth in the use matrix cannot be all-inclusive; those uses that are listed shall be interpreted by the Zoning Administrator to include other uses that have similar impacts to the uses listed in the Table of Authorized Land Uses. 
3.  If the Zoning Administrator cannot interpret a use as substantially the same as a use listed in the Table of Authorized Land Uses, that use shall be prohibited. The Zoning Administrator shall not interpret the Table of Authorized Land Uses to allow a use in one zoning district when the use in question is more closely related to another specified use that is permissible in other zoning districts. 
4.  The Zoning Administrator may determine whether the use is substantially the same as a use listed in the Table of Authorized Land Uses by analyzing the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS), United States, 2007 or latest edition for guidance. 
5.  In analyzing the NAICS, the Zoning Administrator may determine that the use is substantially the same as a use listed in the Table of Authorized Land Uses by considering the industry description and illustrative examples of the most specific NAICS classification that may apply to the use, and the Zoning Administrator may compare uses across similar levels of specificity within the same NAICS classification and between NAICS and LBCS classifications. 
(b)  City Uses. Use of land or facilities owned or leased by, or subject to easements granted to the City of Lynchburg shall not be subject to the use limitations established in this Zoning Ordinance. As a matter of policy, the City will endeavor to comply with standards applicable to similar uses. 
ARTICLE IV. - BASE ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 35.2-40. - Conservation District (R-C). 
Sec. 35.2-40.1. - R-C District purpose. 
    The R-C district is intended to provide for very low intensity development in areas not served by City sewer and water supply systems, and areas with special natural characteristics that limit land uses and development to protect the City's environmental health. This district encompasses sensitive land in stream valleys and areas of steep slope, which should be retained as open spaces with passive recreational uses, with only essential public facilities that cannot reasonably be located outside the district and very low intensity land uses. 
Sec. 35.2-40.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-1 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-1: Authorized Uses in RC District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval Type    single-household detached 1111 Typical single-household dwelling P    modular home 1114 P    manufactured home 1115 C   Bed & Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home C   Markets for farm produce or crafts 2199 Markets and truck gardens. Note that limited to goods produced on site in the RC district. P    wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers C    telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P    Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C   Public Utilities Services, Major 4315, 4329, 4339, 4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C   Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315, 4329, 4339, 4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P    electric substations 4316 C   Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331 - 4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations C   Wastewater treatment plants 4348 C Museums and Other Special Purpose Recreational Institutions 5200 Public and private museums, historical sites, and similar establishments C   shooting ranges, outdoor 5376 C Camps, Camping, and Related Establishments 5400 Operate sites to accommodate campers and their equipment, provide overnight recreational camps, may provide cabins, food services, washrooms, spaces for overnight parking or recreational vehicles C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P   group home small   6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P   group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities C   home 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) individuals in a residence P Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens P Commercial orchards 9130 Includes fruit and nut trees for commercial production P   Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Commercial greenhouse production P   Greenhouse - sales of products grown on premises 9142 P   Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see R-C Use Standards in section 35.2-40.3) P  
Sec. 35.2-40.3. - R-C District use standards. 
    The following standards apply in addition to the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  Agricultural Uses. The raising of cattle, goats, horses or other large farm animals, and/or five or more poultry or game animals will be permitted on lots of ten acres or more. Any structure for housing or feeding one or more such animals must be at least 200 feet from any street or lot line but shall not include any commercial poultry farm or hog farm, and provided further that livestock and poultry shall be kept within secure enclosures and shall not be allowed to roam at large. 
(b)  Water Quality Standards. To achieve the purpose of this district, storage of hazardous materials shall not be allowed within this zoning district, parking lots shall be located outside the district boundaries and outdoor storage of vehicles is prohibited. 
(c)  Conditional Uses. Prior to authorizing a conditional use permit within the R-C district, the City Council shall make the following findings: 
1.  Parking lots do not encroach upon the R-C district except as necessary to serve the approved use when designed to minimize negative impacts on the volume and quality of stormwater runoff; 
2.  Land and vegetation disturbance and building areas in the R-C district will be minimized to minimize any potential adverse effect on the quality of runoff; and 
3.  Outdoor storage of materials that are potentially detrimental to water quality will be prohibited. 
(d)  Occupancy. Not more than three unrelated individuals may occupy a dwelling unit in the R-C district unless allowed pursuant to a use authorized by conditional use permit. Occupancy for non-conforming duplex and multi-household dwellings shall not exceed three unrelated individuals per dwelling unit. 
(e)  Accessory Uses. Accessory uses and structures shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-71. Farm produce markets and truck gardens are permitted to sell only products grown on the premises. Parking for authorized uses shall be allowed subject to design and construction that minimizes the negative impacts on the volume and quality of stormwater runoff. 
Sec. 35.2-40.4. - R-C District development standards. 
    Dimensional standards for the R-C district are summarized in Exhibit IV-2. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(a)  Building Height. In addition to the required minimum setback of 50 feet, no portion of a building shall exceed one foot of height above average grade at the foundation of the building for each two feet of distance from the property line or street right-of-way line. No portion of any property may be divided from the lot in the future in such a way as to bring the property into nonconformance with this regulation. 
(b)  Non-Conforming Lots. Lots of record having less area or less width than herein required on or before December 12, 1978, may be occupied by single-household dwellings only. 
(c)  Planned Unit Development. The R-C district development standards may be modified through a planned unit development, which is approved through the conditional use permit approval process. 
(d)  Clearing and Grading. Clearing and grading should be minimized and done in accordance with an approved Erosion and Sediment Control/Stormwater Management Plan. 
Exhibit IV-2: Summary of R-C Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Cross-Reference Maximum Height see paragraph (a) above 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback (dimension A) 50' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) 50' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior (dimension C) 50' 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) 50' 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width at front property line (dimension E) and front setback line (dimension F) 150' 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot area 10 acres per dwelling  Maximum lot coverage 10% 35.2-61.4  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Low Density Residential Districts (R-1). 
Sec. 35.2-41.1. - R-1 District purpose. 
    The R-1 district is intended to provide for residential development at low densities, together with public uses, institutional uses and private recreational facilities that are in scale with single-household residences. 
Sec. 35.2-41.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-3 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-3: Authorized Uses in R-1 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type single-household detached 1111 Typical single-household dwelling P modular home 1114 P manufactured home community 1116 Includes manufactured home subdivision and manufactured home parks with 5 or more lots or sites C Housing Services 1200 Housing and custodial services for those who cannot care for themselves. Includes nursing and retirement homes, congregate living, assisted and continuing care living, but excludes rehab uses in LBCS #6520) C Bed & Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home C   boarding house 1321 C   dormitory, sorority or fraternity house 1323 Allowed only as accessory uses to and owned by a college or university C art galleries 2142b Excludes art supply sales and retail framing services C pet cemetery 2723 C wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers C telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services C Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   electric substations 4316 C Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations C Museums and Other Special Purpose Recreational Institutions 5200 Public and private museums, historical sites, and similar establishments C Country Club 5340
&
6830 Operate private country clubs, with tennis courts and golf courses along with dining facilities and other recreational facilities; includes civic, social and fraternal organizations without dwellings C   outdoor recreation 5372,
5373
&
5374 Includes for profit golf courses, archery ranges, outdoor volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities, recreational courts, recreational day camp and horseback riding C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P Nursery or preschool 6110 C Grade school 6120 Comprises all public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level; includes adult education services not addressed elsewhere C College or university 6130 C Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P group home small 6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities C Hospital 6530 C home day care 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) children or adults in a residence P   small 6562b Day care for six (6) to twelve (12) individuals in a residence C   large 6562c Provide care for more than 12 individuals C Religious institutions 6600 C   free-standing cemetery 6722 C   columbarium 6724 C Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens P Commercial orchards 9130 Includes fruit and nut trees for commercial production P   Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Commercial greenhouse production P   Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see district standards) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes temporary carnivals and circuses sponsored by non-profit organizations (see section 35.2-72.23) P residential cluster development 9951 See section 35.2-80 P traditional neighborhood development 9952 See section 35.2-82 C planned unit development 9953 See section 35.2-83 C  
Sec. 35.2-41.3. - R-1 District use standards. 
    The following standards supplement the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  Not more than one single-household detached dwelling may be established on each lot. 
(b)  One accessory dwelling unit may be established in addition to the principal dwelling unit on lots on which the owner resides, subject to the occupancy standards of this section and section 35.2-60.2(e), when: 
1.  The accessory dwelling unit is located in the principal dwelling, there is one main entrance located in the front of the building and the building has no outside characteristics, such as outside stairs, other than those common to a single-household dwelling; or 
2.  The accessory dwelling is located in accessory building and complies with the standards of section 35.2-71.3. 
(c)  As provided in section 35.2-60.2(e) not more than three (3) unrelated individuals may occupy a dwelling unit in the R-1 district unless allowed pursuant to a use authorized by conditional use permit (i.e., bed and breakfast, boarding house, dormitories/sororities/fraternities, and large group homes). 
(d)  Except as specifically authorized for home occupations, no residential lot or structure shall be used for commercial or industrial purposes. 
(e)  Accessory uses and structures shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-71. A large day care center may be established pursuant to section 35.2-72.8 as an accessory use to any approved institutional use. 
Sec. 35.2-41.4. - R-1 District development standards. 
(a)  Development Standards Summarized. Dimensional standards for the R-1 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-4. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(b)  Development Patterns. The R-1 district development standards may be modified through the approval of a residential cluster development, planned unit development or traditional neighborhood development through the conditional use permit process. 
(c)  Neighborhood Norms. Front and side setbacks may be reduced in accordance with the neighborhood norm provisions of section 35.2-61.3. 
Exhibit IV-4: Summary of R-1 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Cross-Reference Maximum Height 40' 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback (dimension A) 40' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) 15' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior (dimension C) 40' 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) 50' 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width at front property line (dimension E) and front setback line (dimension F) 100' Minimum lot area (square feet) 15,000, and 7,500 per dwelling unit or boarding unit  Maximum net density (dwelling units per acre/dwelling units per acre including accessory dwelling units and boarding units) 2.90/5.80 35.2-61.4 Maximum lot coverage 20.2% 35.2-61.4  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-42. - Low-Medium Density Residential Districts (R-2). 
Sec. 35.2-42.1. - R-2 District purpose. 
    The R-2 district is intended to provide for residential development at low densities, together with public uses, institutional uses and private recreational facilities that are in scale with single-household residences. This district is intended to allow higher densities than the R-1 district where supported by adequate infrastructure and compatible with site conditions. 
Sec. 35.2-42.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-5 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-5: Authorized Uses in R-2 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type single-household detached 1111 Typical single-household dwelling P modular home 1114 P manufactured home community 1116 Includes manufactured home subdivision and manufactured home parks with 5 or more lots or sites C Housing Services 1200 Housing and custodial services for those who cannot care for themselves. Includes nursing and retirement homes, congregate living, assisted and continuing care living, but excludes rehab uses in LBCS #6520) C Bed & Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home C   boarding house 1321 Non-transient lodging that may include meals and is owner occupied C   dormitory, sorority or fraternity house Allowed only as accessory uses to and owned by a college or university C art galleries 2142b Excludes art supply sales and retail framing services C pet cemetery 2723 C wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound, or video, cell towers C telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services C Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   electric substations 4316 C Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations C Museums and Other Special Purpose Recreational Institutions 5200 Public and private museums, historical sites, and similar establishments C Country Club 5340
&
6830 Operate private country clubs, with tennis courts and golf courses along with dining facilities and other recreational facilities; includes civic, social and fraternal organizations without dwellings C   outdoor recreation 5372,
5373
&
5374 Includes for profit golf courses, archery ranges, outdoor volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities, recreational courts, recreational day camp and horseback riding C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P Nursery or preschool 6110 C Grade school 6120 Comprises all public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level; includes adult education services not addressed elsewhere C College or university 6130 C Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services C   group home small 6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P   group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities C Hospital 6530 C home day care 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) children or adults in a residence P   small 6562b Day care for six (6) to twelve (12) individuals in a residence C   large 6562c Provide care for more than 12 individuals C Religious Institutions 6600 Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, convents and monasteries C   free-standing cemetery 6722 C   columbarium 6724 C Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens P Commercial orchards 9130 Includes fruit and nut trees for commercial production P   Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Commercial greenhouse production P   Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see district standards) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes temporary carnivals and circuses sponsored by non-profit organizations (see section 35.2-72.23) P residential cluster development 9951 See section 35.2-80 P traditional neighborhood development 9952 See section 35.2-82 C planned unit development 9953 See section 35.2-83 C  
Sec. 35.2-42.3. - R-2 District use standards. 
    The following standards supplement the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  Not more than one single-household detached dwelling may be established on each lot. 
(b)  One accessory dwelling unit may be established in addition to the principal dwelling unit on lots on which the owner resides, subject to the occupancy standards of this section and section 35.2-60.2(e), when: 
1.  The accessory dwelling unit is located in the principal dwelling, there is one (1) main entrance located in the front of the building and the building has no outside characteristics, such as outside stairs, other than those common to a single-household dwelling; or 
2.  The accessory dwelling is located in accessory building and complies with the standards of section 35.2-71.3. 
(c)  As provided in section 35.2-60.2(e), not more than three unrelated individuals may occupy a dwelling unit in the R-2 district unless allowed pursuant to a use authorized by conditional use permit (i.e., bed and breakfast, boarding house, dormitories/sororities/fraternities, and large group homes). Occupancy for non-conforming duplex and multi-household dwellings shall not exceed three unrelated individuals per dwelling unit. 
(d)  Except as specifically authorized for home occupations, no residential lot or structure shall be used for commercial or industrial purposes. 
(e)  Accessory uses and structures shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-71. A large day care center may be established pursuant to section 35.2-72.8 as an accessory use to any approved institutional use. 
Sec. 35.2-42.4. - R-2 District development standards. 
(a)  Development Standards Summarized. Dimensional standards for the R-2 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-6. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(b)  Development Patterns. The R-2 district development standards may be modified through the approval of a residential cluster development, planned unit development or traditional neighborhood development through the conditional use permit process. 
(c)  Neighborhood Norms. Front and side setbacks may be reduced in accordance with the neighborhood norm provisions of section 35.2-61.3. 
Exhibit IV-6: Summary of R-2 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Cross-Reference Maximum height 40' 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback (dimension A) 30' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) 8' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior (dimension C) 30' 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) 30' 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width at front property line (dimension E) and front setback line (dimension F) 75' 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot area (square feet) 10,000, with 5,000 per boarding unit  Maximum net density (dwelling units per acre/dwelling units per acre including accessory and boarding units) 4.35/8.7 35.2-61.4 Maximum lot coverage 20% 35.2-61.4  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-43. - Medium Density Residential Districts (R-3). 
Sec. 35.2-43.1. - R-3 District purpose. 
    The R-3 district is intended to provide for residential development and other compatible uses at medium densities in areas with adequate infrastructure and access to public and commercial services. In addition to small-lot single-household development, duplexes and other compatible housing types may be allowed, as are public and institutional uses that are in scale with neighborhood uses. 
Sec. 35.2-43.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-7 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-7: Authorized Uses in R-3 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type 1111 Typical single-household dwelling P single-household semi-detached 1112 One of two dwelling units separated by a party wall P single-household attached (townhouse) 1113 Each unit on a separate lot; fire wall may protrude from roof or roofs may be staggered C modular home 1114 P manufactured home community 1116 Includes manufactured home subdivision and manufactured home parks with 5 or more lots or sites C Two-household (duplex) 1120 P Housing Services 1200 Housing and custodial services for those who cannot care for themselves. Includes nursing and retirement homes, congregate living, assisted and continuing care living, but excludes rehab uses in LBCS #6520) C Bed & Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home C   boarding house 1321 Non-transient lodging that may include meals and is owner occupied C   rooming house 1322 Transient or non-transient lodging that may include meals C   dormitory, sorority or fraternity house 1323 Allowed only as accessory uses to and owned by a college or university C art galleries 2142b Excludes art supply sales and retail framing services P Parking lot and parking garage 2640 See district standards C pet cemetery 2723 C wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers C telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services P Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   electric substations 4316 C Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations C Museums and Other Special Purpose Recreational Institutions 5200 Public and private museums, historical sites, and similar establishments P Country Club 5340
&
6830 Operate private country clubs, with tennis courts and golf courses along with dining facilities and other recreational facilities; includes civic, social and fraternal organizations without dwellings C   fitness and recreational sports center 5371 Aerobic dance or exercise center, gymnasium, physical fitness center, health and athletic club, indoor handball, racquetball, volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities conducted inside a building C   outdoor recreation 5372,
5373
&
5374 Includes for profit golf courses, archery ranges, outdoor volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities, recreational courts, recreational day camp and horseback riding C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P Nursery or preschool 6110 C Grade school 6120 Comprises all public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level; includes adult education services not addressed elsewhere C College or university 6130 C   general technical schools 6141-
6143,
6145,
6147 Offer courses in office procedures, administrative skills, and basic office skills; dance, art, drama, and music; athletic activities C Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P   group home small 6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P   group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities C Hospital 6530 C child and adult day care 6562 Provide day care for children and adults   Home day care 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) individuals in a residence P   small 6562b Day care for six (6) to twelve (12) individuals in a residence C   large 6562c Provide care for more than 12 individuals C Religious Institutions 6600 Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, convents and monasteries C   free-standing cemetery 6722 C   columbarium 6724 C Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens P Commercial orchards 9130 Includes fruit and nut trees for commercial production P   Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Commercial greenhouse production P   Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see district standards) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 includes temporary carnivals and circuses sponsored by non-profit organizations (see section 35.2-72.23) P residential cluster development 9951 See section 35.2-80 P traditional neighborhood development 9952 See section 35.2-82 C planned unit development 9953 See section 35.2-83 C  
Sec. 35.2-43.3. - R-3 District use standards. 
    The following standards supplement the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  Accessory uses and structures shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-71. 
(b)  Not more than three unrelated individuals may occupy a dwelling unit in the R-3 district unless allowed pursuant to a use authorized by conditional use permit (i.e., bed and breakfast, boarding house, dormitories/sororities/fraternities, and large group homes). 
(c)  Except as specifically authorized for home occupations, no residential lot or structure shall be used for commercial or industrial purposes. 
(d)  Accessory uses and structures shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-71. 
(e)  Off-street parking lots may be established provided that they: 
1.  Serve permitted uses in medium density residential districts located within 200 feet of the lot to be used for off-street parking. 
2.  Are on lots adjacent to and serve an authorized commercial use in a commercial district and subject to an approved conditional use permit. 
Sec. 35.2-43.4. - R-3 District development standards. 
(a)  Development Standards Summarized. Dimensional standards for the R-3 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-8. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(b)  Semi-detached or Detached Dwellings. For semi-detached or detached dwellings, the minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet and the minimum lot width shall be 30 feet. The minimum side setback shall be five feet except that there is no minimum side setback required along the party wall between adjoining units (see illustration below). Semi-detached or detached dwellings located on lots less than 8,000 square feet are not permitted accessory units. 
Semi-detached Dwellings 

(c)  Neighborhood Norms. Front and side setbacks may be reduced in accordance with the neighborhood norm provisions of section 35.2-61.3. 
(d)  Development Patterns. The R-3 district development standards may be modified through the approval of a residential cluster development, planned unit development or traditional neighborhood development through the conditional use permit process. 
Exhibit IV-8: Summary of R-3 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Cross-Reference Maximum height (see paragraph (a) above) 40' 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback (dimension A) 30' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) 5' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior (dimension C) 30' 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) 30' 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width at front property line (dimension E) and front setback line (dimension F) 60', 30' per 43.4(b) 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot size (square feet) - see paragraphs a and b of this section for additional standards 4,000 per dwelling unit or boarding unit (also see paragraphs (b) & (c) above)  Maximum net density (dwelling unit or boarding units per acre) Maximum lot coverage 30%  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-44. - High Density Residential District (R-4). 
Sec. 35.2-44.1. - R-4 District purpose. 
    The R-4 district is intended to provide for residential and other compatible uses at high densities in locations with adequate infrastructure and proximity to necessary services and employment. R-4 districts may include any type of housing, as well as public uses, institutional uses, private recreation and limited retail and service uses, when accessory to a multi-household development. 
Sec. 35.2-44.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-9 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-9: Authorized Uses in R-4 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type single-household detached 1111 Typical single-household dwelling P single-household semi-detached 1112 One of two dwelling units separated by a party wall P single-household attached (townhouse) 1113 Each unit on a separate lot; fire wall may protrude from roof or roofs may be staggered P modular home 1114 P manufactured home community 1116 Includes manufactured home subdivisions and manufactured home parks with 5 or more lots C Two-household (duplex) 1120 P Three or More Households 1130 Includes triplexes, four-plexes, and other multi-household dwellings P Housing Services 1200 Housing and custodial services for those who cannot care for themselves. Includes nursing and retirement homes, congregate living, assisted and continuing care living, but excludes rehab uses in LBCS #6520) C Bed & Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home C   boarding house 1321 Non-transient lodging that may include meals and is owner occupied C   rooming house 1322 Transient or non-transient lodging that may include meals C   dormitory, sorority or fraternity house 1323 Allowed only as accessory uses to and owned by a college or university C art galleries 2142b Excludes art supply sales and retail framing services P Parking lot and parking garage 2640 See district standards C pet cemetery 2723 C wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers C telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services P Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P electric substations 4316 C Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations C Museums and Other Special Purpose Recreational Institutions 5200 Public and private museums, historical sites, and similar establishments P Country Club 5340
&
6830 Operate private country clubs, with tennis courts and golf courses along with dining facilities and other recreational facilities; includes civic, social and fraternal organizations without dwellings C   fitness and recreational sports center 5371 Aerobic dance or exercise center, gymnasium, physical fitness center, health and athletic club, indoor handball, racquetball, volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities conducted inside a building C   outdoor recreation 5372,
5373
&
5374 Includes for profit golf courses, archery ranges, outdoor volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities, recreational courts, recreational day camp and horseback riding C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P Nursery or preschool 6110 C Grade school 6120 Comprises all public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level; includes adult education services not addressed elsewhere C College or university 6130 C   general technical schools 6141-
6143,
6145,
6147 Offer courses in office procedures, administrative skills, and basic office skills; dance, art, drama, and music; athletic activities C Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P   group home small 6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P   group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities C Hospital 6530 C child and adult day care 6562 Provide day care for children and adults   home 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) individuals in a residence P   small 6562b Day care for six (6) to twelve (12) individuals in a residence C   large 6562c Provide care for more than 12 individuals C Religious Institutions 6600 Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, convents and monasteries C   free-standing cemetery 6722 C   columbarium 6724 C Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens P Commercial orchards 9130 Includes fruit and nut trees for commercial production P   Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Commercial greenhouse production P   Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see district standards) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes temporary carnivals and circuses sponsored by non-profit organizations (see section 35.2-72.23) P residential cluster development 9951 See section 35.2-80 P traditional neighborhood development 9952 See section 35.2-82 C planned unit development 9953 See section 35.2-83 C  
Sec. 35.2-44.3. - R-4 District use standards. 
    The following standards apply In addition to the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  Commercial uses allowed in the B-1 district shall be allowed as accessory uses to multi-household development subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Uses shall not exceed five percent of the gross floor area of the multi-household development in which they are located. 
2.  The uses shall be limited to uses allowed within the B-1 zoning district. 
3.  No drive-in or drive-through services are permitted. 
4.  All such uses shall be limited to the ground floor of the structure in which they are located. 
(b)  Not more than three unrelated individuals may occupy a dwelling unit in the R-4 district unless otherwise approved by a conditional use permit. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-71. 
Sec. 35.2-44.4. - R-4 District development standards. 
    Dimensional standards for the R-4 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-10. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(a)  Lots abutting R-1, R-2 or R-3 Districts. Multi-household buildings on lots that abut lots in a R-1, R-2 or R-3 district shall not exceed two stories within 100 feet of the property line of said abutting lots. See section 35.2-61.2 for additional height requirements and section 35.2-61.3 for additional setback requirements for lots abutting R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts. 
(b)  Density and height bonuses. The net density and height may be increased to up to 29 dwelling units per acre and up to 60 feet in height subject to achievement of the design standards listed in Exhibit IV-11 and the provisions of paragraph (a). 
(c)  Development patterns. The R-4 district development standards may be modified through the approval of a residential cluster development, planned unit development or traditional neighborhood development through the conditional use permit process. 
Exhibit IV-10: Summary of R-4 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Cross-Reference Maximum Height 40' 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback from right-of-way (dimension A) 30' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) 5' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior from right-of-way (dimension C) 30' 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) 25' 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width at front property line (dimension E) and front setback line (dimension F) 50', 30' for detached or semi-detached dwellings 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot size (square feet) 6,000, with 2,000 for each dwelling unit or boarding unit  Maximum net density (dwelling unit or boarding units per acre) Maximum lot coverage 30% 35.2-61.4  
Exhibit IV-11: Density Bonuses in the R-4 District 
Design Element Density Bonus Examples Impervious lot coverage Density may be increased by 1 dwelling unit per acre for every 1 percent in impervious lot coverage below 30 percent. Site area = 10 acres 
Lot cover = 28% 
Density Bonus = 20 dwelling units (10 acres × 2 du/a) Additional buffer width Density may be increased by 3 dwelling units per acre if the required buffer width of 20 feet and plantings within the buffer are doubled abutting a property line of a R-C, R-1, R-2 or R-3. Site area = 10 acres 
Additional 20 ft. buffer provided 
Density Bonus = 30 dwelling units (10 acres × 3 du/a) Mobility - transit stop Density may be increased by 2 dwelling units per acre subject to existence or provision of a covered transit stop abutting the property approved by GLTC and the TRC, and subject to the commitment to provide transit service by GLTC or other transit service provider approved by the City. Site area = 10 acres 
Covered transit stop provided abutting site 
Density bonus = 20 dwelling units (10 acres × 2 du/a) Mobility - pedestrian enhancements Density may be increased by 2 dwelling units per acre subject to the provision of a multi-purpose trail extending through the property and connecting to existing multi-purpose trails at the property line, pedestrian facilities identified in an adopted City Plan, retail/service uses or a school within 1/2 mile of the development. Connections to sidewalks abutting the property or the provision of on-site recreational paths shall not be eligible for this density bonus. Site area = 10 acres 
Multi-purpose trail extending through the property provides connection to school or retail uses within 1/2 mile of site 
Density bonus = 20 dwelling units (10 acres × 2 du/a) Mobility - mixed use Density may be increased by 2 dwelling units per acre subject to the on-site provision of floor area for authorized retail or service uses in accordance with the R-4 district use standards established in section 35.2-44.3. Site area = 10 acres 
Ground floor retail or service use established on site 
Density bonus = 20 dwelling units (10 acres × 2 du/a) Accessible dwellings Density may be increased by 1 dwelling unit per acre if 10 percent of units are accessible and an additional dwelling unit per acre for each additional 5 percent of accessible units Site area = 10 acres with 200 total units 
30 accessible units provided 
Density bonus = 20 dwelling units (10 acres × 2 du/a) Water quality Reserved Affordable or work force housing Reserved  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-45. - Limited Business Districts (B-1). 
Sec. 35.2-45.1. - B-1 district purpose. 
    The B-1 district is intended to provide for office, retail, restaurant and service uses that are compatible with nearby residential areas because they are in scale with adjacent neighborhood development and have pedestrian-oriented designs. While they generate a moderate level of traffic, they do not involve the constant traffic flows characteristic of community-scaled retail activities. These districts can provide a transition from retail districts and heavily traveled thoroughfares to residential areas. 
Sec. 35.2-45.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-12 may be established in accordance with the procedures in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-12: Authorized Uses in B-1 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type Single-household detached 1111S Typical single-household dwelling P Modular home 1114S A prefabricated home without axles or frames (see definitions) P Two-household (duplex) 1121S A building located on one (1) zoning lot containing not more than two (2) dwelling units C Single-household attached (townhouse) 1140S Each unit on a separate lot; fire wall may protrude from roof or roofs may be staggered C Three or More Households 1200S Includes triplexes, four-plexes, and other multi-household dwellings C Mixed-use residential structures (see district regulations for limitations) 1201S Typically commercial uses on lower floors and residential uses on upper floors P Housing Services 1200 Housing and custodial services for those who cannot care for themselves. Includes nursing and retirement homes, congregate living, assisted and continuing care living, but excludes rehab uses in LBCS #6520) P Bed & Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home P boarding house 1321 Non-transient lodging that may include meals and is owner occupied P rooming house 1322 Transient or non-transient lodging that may include meals P dormitory, sorority or fraternity house 1323 Allowed only as accessory uses to and owned by a college or university C Bicycles 2113b New or used bicycle sales, rental and repair P camera and photographic supplies; clothing, jewelry, luggage, shoes, clocks, sewing; sporting goods, toy and hobby, and musical instruments; mixed media, school and office supplies 2132-2135 Primarily retail cameras and photographic supplies or retail with repair and film developing; clothing (including shoe repair and tailoring, sporting goods, toys, musical instruments, kitchen goods, books, magazines, music, videos, stationary, greeting cards, seasonal decorations, office and school supplies. P florist, art supplies, tobacco products 2141-2143 Florists, art supplies and art dealers, frame shops, tobacco products P art galleries 2142b Excludes art supply sales and retail framing services P antique shop 2145 Antique shops, (excludes flea markets, thrift stores and pawn shops) P grocery store, supermarket, or bakery, convenience store, specialty food stores 2151-2154 Included are grocery stores, convenience stores, meat, seafood and produce markets, coffee, confections, variety goods and general stores, and delicatessens. Excludes stores with fuel pumps (see 2116 for fuel sales). P beer, wine, and liquor store 2155 P Health and personal care 2160 Retail prescription or nonprescription drugs; retail cosmetics, perfumes, toiletries; prescription or nonprescription eyeglasses; prescription or nonprescription health and convalescent aids; medical devices, retail food supplement products such as vitamins, nutrition supplements, and body enhancing supplements. P Bank, credit union, or savings institution 2210 Central banking functions P   credit card and other financing 2221 Credit card, sales financing, unsecured consumer lending, real estate credit, mortgages, international trade financing P Investment banking, securities, and brokerages; insurance; fund, trust, or other financial establishment 2230-2250 Securities underwriting, brokering, exchange services, managing portfolios; Insurance underwriting, selling insurance; manage assets on behalf of shareholders or beneficiaries P Real estate services 2310 Sell or lease real estate such as buildings, manufactured home sites and vacant lots; includes real estate appraisers and realtor offices P professional offices 2411-2014 Title abstract, lawyers, notaries, accountants, bookkeeping, payroll services, architects, engineers, surveyors, graphic design, interior design and industrial design P consulting services (management, environmental technical) 2415 Advise and assist businesses on management, scientific, and technological issues P scientific research and development services 2416 Conduct research or analyze in the physical, engineering, cognitive, or life sciences in offices. P other professional offices 2419,
6810,
6820 Includes advertising and media services intellectual property rights, franchising, labor, political or business organizations, and uses with similar impacts P office administrative services 2421 Office administration such as billing, record keeping, personnel, organizational planning P facilities support services 2422 Provide operating staff for support services within a client's facilities, including janitorial, security, laundry services, etc. P employment agency 2423a Provide employee placement, temporary help P copy center, private mail center, other business support services 2424 Provide document preparation, telephone answering, telemarketing, court reporting, steno typing, FAX, internet access, small signs and banners P collection agency 2425 Collect payments, compile credit information, repossess tangible assets P Travel arrangement and reservation services 2430 Promote or sell travel, includes convention and visitors' bureaus P Restaurants, cafeterias, snack bars & catering 2510-
2530
&
2560 Provide food and drinks to patrons - see district specific use regulations for limitations. Includes banquet, assembly and reception halls. See district standards. P Personal care 2610 Hair, nail, and skin care and related personal care, barbers, beauty shops, dieting and weight loss, tanning, hair removal, hair weaving, ear piercing and similar services P   laundromat and dry cleaning 2621
&
2622 Includes Laundromats, dry cleaners, diaper services as well as other commercial laundry services P Photofinishing 2630 Primarily engaged in developing film or making slides, etc. P Parking lot and parking garage 2640 See district standards P licensed massage therapist 2651 P pet cemetery 2723 C national post office 4181 P retail courier and package delivery 4182 Retail courier, package drop-off and mail services P wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers P telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services P data processing and management, hosting and related services 4244 Web hosting, computer data storage, optical scanning, computer input preparation, microfilm imaging P Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   electric substations 4316 C Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations C Theater, dance or music establishment 5110
&
5160 Companies, groups, or theaters that produce theatrical presentations, dance, dinner theaters, and live musical entertainment; includes facilities for independent artists and performers P Promoter of sports, performing arts, similar events and management services 5140-
5150 Organize, promote, and manage performances and events; agents representing artists, athletes and entertainers P Museums and Other Special Purpose Recreational Institutions 5200 Public and private museums, historical sites, and similar establishments P Country Club 5340
&
6830 Operate private country clubs, with tennis courts and golf courses along with dining facilities and other recreational facilities; includes civic, social and fraternal organizations without dwellings P   fitness and recreational sports center 5371 Aerobic dance or exercise center, gymnasium, physical fitness center, health and athletic club, indoor handball, racquetball, volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities conducted inside a building P   outdoor recreation 5372,
5373
&
5374 Includes for profit golf courses, archery ranges, outdoor volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities, recreational courts, recreational day camp and horseback riding C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P Nursery or preschool 6110 P Grade school 6120 Comprises all public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level; includes adult education services not addressed elsewhere. See district use standards P College or university 6130 See district use standards P Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P Clinic 6511
&
6567 Include physician offices, dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, licensed massage therapists, and veterans affairs services P   outpatient care clinic 6512 Provide outpatient family planning services and outpatient care P   group home small 6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P   group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P Hospital 6530 C child and adult day care 6562 Provide day care for children and adults   Home 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) individuals in a residence P   Small 6562b Day care for six (6) to twelve (12) individuals in a residence P   Large 6562c Provide care for more than 12 individuals P Religious Institutions 6600 Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, convents and monasteries P   Funeral home and services 6710 Includes funeral homes combined with crematories P   free-standing cemetery 6722 P Columbarium 6724 C Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens with production limited to retail sales P Commercial orchards 9130 Includes fruit and nut trees with production limited to retail sales P   Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see district standards) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes temporary carnivals and circuses sponsored by non-profit organizations (see section 35.2-72.23) P cluster commercial development 9955 See section 35.2-85 C  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-45.3. - B-1 District use standards. 
    The following standards supplement the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  No lot, building or structure shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected that is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any industrial or manufacturing purposes. 
(b)  Drive-through and drive-in uses are not allowed in this district except under the following conditions: 
1.  Drive through and drive-in uses shall not be associated with businesses providing food or beverage services; 
2.  Drive-through services shall be located in the rear of the building and shall take access from an urban collector or local street; and 
3.  Drive-through services shall be designed so that not more than one two-way access or two one-way access points serving such uses shall be located on a single block. 
(c)  Outdoor operations, storage, or display are prohibited except as authorized for temporary outdoor display or outdoor dining. 
(d)  The scale of businesses shall be compatible with adjacent neighborhoods and shall not exceed the floor areas established in Exhibit IV-13. 
Exhibit IV-13: Maximum Floor Areas for the B-1 District 
Development Maximum Gross Floor Area
(sq. ft.) Multi-tenant commercial developments 50,000 Single office development 20,000 Single retail or service business 5,000 Restaurant 4,000  
(e)  Except authorized single household dwellings and other residential uses permitted by conditional use permit, ground floor residential uses shall be prohibited except when part of a mixed-use building where the residential access is taken from an urban collector or local street. 
(f)  Schools for general education with maximum enrollments of 25 or fewer students shall only be allowed subject to the setbacks for other uses allowed in the district. Schools with maximum enrollments in excess of 25 students shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit and setback requirements for schools established in section 35.2-72.21 (Schools, Colleges and Vocational Schools). 
(g)  Not more than three unrelated individuals may occupy a dwelling unit in the B-1 district unless otherwise approved by a conditional use permit. 
(h)  Accessory uses and structures shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-71. 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-45.4. - B-1 District development standards. 
    Dimensional standards for the B-1 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-14. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(a)  Setbacks. Setbacks are subject to compliance with in section 35.2-66.4 (Visibility at Intersections) and applicable landscaping requirements. 
(b)  Lot Area Regulations. In addition to the minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet, a total minimum area of 1,000 square feet is required for each dwelling unit, or unit in a boardinghouse, lodging house, nursing home, tourist home or hotel unit. 
(c)  Parking. Required on-site parking shall be provided behind the front building line in accordance with section 35.2-62 except where an existing building with parking in front of the building line is being reused and locating required parking in rear or side yards is not practical due to extreme topography or access limitations. 
(d)  Dumpsters. Dumpsters on lots abutting residential zoning districts shall be screened pursuant to section 35.2-63.9 (Utility Screening) and set back at least 25 feet from any residential property line. 
(e)  Landscaping. Where a building is located within five feet of the right-of-way, required street trees and foundation plantings may be planted in City right-of-way with permission of the City. 
(f)  Development Patterns. The B-1 district development standards may be modified through the approval of a cluster commercial development. 
Exhibit IV-14: Summary of B-1 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Section Cross-Reference Maximum height 40' 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback from right-of-way (dimension A) 0' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) 0' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior (dimension C) 0' 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) 25' 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width at front property line (dimension E) and front setback line (dimension F) 50' 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot depth (dimension F) 100' 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot area (square feet) 6,000 with 1,000 sq. ft. of lot area per dwelling unit or boarding unit 35.2-61.4  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-46. - Community Business Districts (B-3). 
Sec. 35.2-46.1. - B-3 District purpose. 
    The B-3 district is intended to provide for office, retail and service uses meeting the needs of the community as a whole. Residential uses are limited to upper floors of mixed-use buildings or in transitional buildings between commercial and residential uses in mixed use developments. They will include a wide range of business uses and other uses compatible with a moderate-sized business area, at densities lower than those permitted in the central business area. New districts of this type will be strongly encouraged to develop as fully planned entities. 
Sec. 35.2-46.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-15 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-15: Authorized Uses in B-3 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type Single-household detached 1111S Typical single-household dwelling P Modular home 1114S A prefabricated home without axles or frames (see definitions) P Two-household (duplex) 1121S A building located on one (1) zoning lot containing not more than two (2) dwelling units C Single-household attached (townhouse) 1140S Each unit on a separate lot; fire wall may protrude from roof or roofs may be staggered C Three or More Households 1200S Includes triplexes, four-plexes, and other multi-household dwellings C Mixed-use residential structures (see district regulations for limitations) 1201S Typically commercial uses on lower floors and residential uses on upper floors P Housing Services 1200 Housing and custodial services for those who cannot care for themselves. Includes nursing and retirement homes, congregate living, assisted and continuing care living, but excludes rehab uses in LBCS #6520) P Bed & Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home P   boarding house 1321 Non-transient lodging that may include meals and is owner occupied P   rooming house 1322 Transient or non-transient lodging that may include meals P   dormitory, sorority or fraternity house 1323 Allowed only as accessory uses to and owned by a college or university C Hotel, motel, or tourist court 1330 Hotels that do not have gambling services; includes extended-stay hotels P bicycles 2113b New or used bicycle sales, rental and repair P parts, accessories, or tires 2115 Automotive parts and supply stores, automotive stereo stores. P gasoline service 2116 Gas stations with or without convenience stores or food marts, excludes truck stops, light auto repair and heavy auto repair P   light auto repair 2117a Oil change, light auto repair and car wash. May included gasoline and other retail sales. C   heavy auto repair 2117b Auto repair, paint and body shops. May include gasoline and other retail sales. C furniture or home furnishings, hardware, home center, lawn and garden supplies, department store, warehouse club or superstore, electronics and appliances 2121-
2125 Furniture, flooring, bedding stores; home building and repair supplies, painting supplies, farm goods, lighting supply, window treatment; nursery and garden products predominantly grown elsewhere, power equipment sales or services; large variety stores; household-type appliances, television, stereos, including repair shops and cell phone stores. P computer and software 2131 Computers and prepackaged software including repair, support, and training P camera and photographic supplies; clothing, jewelry, luggage, shoes, clocks, sewing; sporting goods, toy and hobby, and musical instruments; mixed media, school and office supplies 2132-
2135 Primarily retail cameras and photographic supplies or retail with repair and film developing; clothing (including shoe repair and tailoring, sporting goods, toys, musical instruments, kitchen goods, books, magazines, music, videos, stationary, greeting cards, seasonal decorations, office and school supplies. P florist, art supplies, tobacco products 2141-
2143 Florists, art supplies and art dealers, frame shops, tobacco products P art galleries 2142b Excludes art supply sales and retail framing services P antique shop 2145 Antique shops, (excludes flea markets, thrift stores and pawn shops) P flea markets and thrift stores 2145b Flea markets and thrift stores P grocery store, supermarket, or bakery, convenience store, specialty food stores 2151-
2154 Included are grocery stores, convenience stores, meat, seafood and produce markets, coffee, confections, variety goods and general stores, and delicatessens. Excludes stores with fuel pumps (see 2116 for fuel sales). P beer, wine, and liquor store 2155 P Health and personal care 2160 Retail prescription or nonprescription drugs; retail cosmetics, perfumes, toiletries; prescription or nonprescription eyeglasses; prescription or nonprescription health and convalescent aids; medical devices, retail food supplement products such as vitamins, nutrition supplements, and body enhancing supplements. P Markets for farm produce or crafts 2199 Markets and truck gardens. C Bank, credit union, or savings institution 2210 Central banking functions P   credit card and other financing 2221 Credit card, sales financing, unsecured consumer lending, real estate credit, mortgages, international trade financing P pawn shops 2222 P   short-term loans 2223 Pay-day lenders and other businesses providing loans with terms of 45 days or less P   precious metal buyers 2224 Businesses providing cash for gold and other precious metals or gems (excludes retail jewelers) P Investment banking, securities, and brokerages; insurance; fund, trust, or other financial establishment 2230-
2250 Securities underwriting, brokering, exchange services, managing portfolios; Insurance underwriting, selling insurance; manage assets on behalf of shareholders or beneficiaries P Real estate services 2310 Sell or lease real estate such as buildings, manufactured home sites and vacant lots; includes real estate appraisers and realtor offices P Property management services 2320 Manage real property for others P vehicles 2331
&
2332 Lease passenger cars, trucks, trailers, RVs, buses and aircraft; drivers not provided C Professional offices 2411-
2014 Title abstract, lawyers, notaries, accountants, bookkeeping, payroll services, architects, engineers, surveyors, graphic design, interior design and industrial design P consulting services (management, environmental technical) 2415 Advise and assist businesses on management, scientific, and technological issues P scientific research and development services 2416 Conduct research or analyze in the physical, engineering, cognitive, or life sciences in laboratories or offices. P advertising, media and photography services 2417 Includes advertising, marketing and public relations agencies, photographic studios and photographic services. P veterinary services 2418 Veterinary medicine, testing services for veterinary practitioners C other professional offices 2419,
6810,
6820 Includes advertising and media services intellectual property rights, franchising, labor, political or business organizations, and uses with similar impacts P office administrative services 2421 Office administration such as billing, record keeping, personnel, organizational planning P facilities support services 2422 Provide operating staff for support services within a client's facilities, including janitorial, security, laundry services, etc. P employment agency 2423a Provide employee placement, temporary help P copy center, private mail center, other business support services 2424 Provide document preparation, telephone answering, telemarketing, court reporting, steno typing, FAX, internet access, small signs and banners P collection agency 2425 Collect payments, compile credit information, repossess tangible assets P Travel arrangement and reservation services 2430 Promote or sell travel, includes convention and visitors' bureaus P Investigation and security services 2440 Provide detective, guard and patrol services, picking up and delivery of money, selling of security systems, remote monitoring of security systems, locksmiths P Restaurants, cafeterias, snack bars & catering 2510-
2530
&
2560 Provide food and drinks to patrons - see district specific use regulations for limitations. Includes banquet, assembly and reception halls. See district standards. P Mobile food services 2550 Prepare and serve meals and snacks for immediate consumption from motorized vehicles P Personal care 2610 Hair, nail, and skin care and related personal care, barbers, beauty shops, dieting and weight loss, tanning, hair removal, hair weaving, ear piercing and similar services P   laundromat and dry cleaning 2621
&
2622 Includes Laundromats, dry cleaners, diaper services as well as other commercial laundry services P Photofinishing 2630 Primarily engaged in developing film or making slides, etc. P Parking lot and parking garage 2640 See district standards P licensed massage therapist 2651 P Tattoo parlor 2652 Tattoos by a licensed professional P adult retail establishment 2653 Stores primarily selling adult oriented products, including books, videos, magazines, toys, lingerie and other sexually-oriented goods P Pet or pet supply store 2710 Retail pets, pet foods, pet supplies P   animal services 2721 grooming and training P animal boarding 2722 sitting and boarding C pet cemetery 2723 P national post office 4181 P retail courier and package delivery 4182 Retail courier, package drop-off and mail services P radio and television broadcasting 4231,
4232
&
4241 Operate broadcasting studios and facilities for over the air, cable or satellite delivery of radio and television programs P wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers P telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services P data processing and management, hosting and related services 4244 Web hosting, computer data storage, optical scanning, computer input preparation, microfilm imaging P Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   electric substations 4316 C Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-
4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations C Theater, dance or music establishment 5110 & 5160 Companies, groups, or theaters that produce theatrical presentations, dance, dinner theaters, and live musical entertainment; includes facilities for independent artists and performers P Motion picture viewing and exhibition services 5111 Operate movie theaters (excluding drive-ins), film festival exhibitions P Promoter of sports, performing arts, similar events and management services 5140-
5150 Organize, promote, and manage performances and events; agents representing artists, athletes and entertainers P Indoor auditorium or arena 5170 Indoor auditoriums, arenas, conference centers, or multipurpose facilities P Museums and Other Special Purpose Recreational Institutions 5200 Public and private museums, historical sites, and similar establishments P   Amusement or theme park establishment 5310 Operate a variety of attractions such as mechanical rides, water rides, games C   Commercial Amusements 5320,
5380,
5390 Operate arcades and other commercial amusements as defined herein P Country Club 5340
&
6830 Operate private country clubs, with tennis courts and golf courses along with dining facilities and other recreational facilities; includes civic, social and fraternal organizations without dwellings P   fitness and recreational sports center 5371 Aerobic dance or exercise center, gymnasium, physical fitness center, health and athletic club, indoor handball, racquetball, volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities conducted inside a building P   outdoor recreation 5372,
5373
&
5374 Includes golf courses, archery ranges, outdoor volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities, recreational courts, recreational day camp and horseback riding (excludes automobile, dog and horse racing) C   shooting ranges, indoor 5375 C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P Nursery or preschool 6110 P Grade school 6120 Comprises all public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level; includes adult education services not addressed elsewhere. See district use standards. P College or university 6130 See district use standards. P   general technical schools 6141-
6143,
6145,
6147 Offer courses in office procedures, administrative skills, and basic office skills; dance, art, drama, and music; athletic activities. See district use standards. P   driving education 6144 P Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P   clinic 6511
&
6567 Include physician offices, dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, licensed massage therapists, and veterans affairs services P   outpatient care clinic 6512 Provide outpatient family planning services and outpatient care P   medical or diagnostic laboratory; blood/organ bank 6513-
6514 Provide analytic or diagnostic services including medical imaging P   group home small 6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P   group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P Hospital 6530 C child and adult day care 6562 Provide day care for children and adults   home 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) individuals in a residence P   small 6562b Day care for six (6) to twelve (12) individuals in a residence P   large 6562c Provide care for more than 12 individuals P Religious Institutions 6600 Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, convents and monasteries P Death Care Services 6700 Funeral homes, crematories, cemeteries   Funeral home and services 6710 Includes funeral homes combined with crematories P   free-standing cemetery 6722 P   columbarium 6724 C Construction-Related Businesses 7000 Contractors who can build or demolish buildings, leveling, earthmoving, excavating, land drainage; should reflect the location of the establishment and not where it is performing its services. This category also includes the manufacture of industrial buildings, manufactured homes, modular homes, storage buildings and similar structures. Note that district standards may limit or preclude manufacturing, outdoor operations, outdoor storage of commercial vehicles and materials. P Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens with production limited to retail sales P Commercial orchards 9130 Includes fruit and nut trees with production limited to retail sales P   Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Commercial greenhouse production P   Greenhouse - sales of products grown on premises 9142 P   Greenhouse - sales of products and related accessory products 9143 P   Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see standards in section 35.2-71.7) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes temporary carnivals and circuses sponsored by non-profit organizations (see section 35.2-72.23) P temporary outdoor promotional attractions 9922 Includes car shows, boat shows and similar short-term events intended to promote commercial sales or services (see section 35.2-72.23) P traditional neighborhood development 9952 See section 35.2-82 C large scale retail establishments 9954 See section 35.2-84 P cluster commercial development 9955 See section 35.2-85 C  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17; Ord. No. O-17-091 , 10-10-17) 
Sec. 35.2-46.3. - B-3 District use standards. 
    The following standards supplement the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  Schools and colleges of all types (including vocational schools) shall not exceed a maximum enrollment of 100 students except as authorized by conditional use permit. 
(b)  Radio and television studios and stations shall not have towers, shall produce no exterior electromagnetic effect and shall be soundproofed from adjoining properties. 
(c)  Large-scale retail establishments shall comply with section 35.2-84 (Retail Establishments, Large Scale) unless otherwise approved through the conditional use permit process. 
(d)  Dance floors may be allowed as accessory uses to restaurants. 
(e)  Arenas and auditoriums approved through the conditional use permit process shall be limited to a maximum capacity of 2,500 persons. 
(f)  Veterinarian hospitals authorized through the conditional use permit process shall not have outdoor kennels. 
(g)  Except authorized single household dwellings and other residential uses permitted by conditional use permit, ground floor residential uses shall be prohibited except when part of a mixed-use building where the residential access is taken from an urban collector or local street. 
(h)  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
(i)  Accessory uses and structures shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-71. 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-46.4. - B-3 district development standards. 
    Dimensional standards for the B-3 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-16. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(a)  Setbacks. Setbacks are subject to compliance with in section 35.2-66.4 (Visibility at Intersections) and applicable landscaping requirements. 
(b)  Lots Abutting R-1, R-2 or R-3 Districts. See section 35.2-61.2 for additional height requirements and section 35.2-61.3 for additional setback requirements for lots abutting R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts. 
(c)  Area Regulations. A minimum of 1,000 square feet of lot area is required for each dwelling unit or unit in a boardinghouse, lodging house, convalescent and nursing home, tourist home or hotel. 
(d)  Parking. Parking areas shall be set back at least 20 feet from front or exterior side property lines or set behind the front building line on all street frontages. 
(e)  Development Patterns. The B-3 district development standards may be modified through the approval of a cluster commercial development or traditional neighborhood development. 
Exhibit IV-16: Summary of B-3 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Cross-Reference Maximum height 40' 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback (dimension A) 0' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) 0' 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior (dimension C) 0' 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) 0' 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width (dimension E) 0', subject to compliance with access separation standards 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot depth (dimension F) 0' 35.2-61.4 Minimum district size none 35.2-61.4 Minimum average lot area per establishment (square feet) 6,000 35.2-61.4  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-47. - Urban Commercial District (B-4). 
Sec. 35.2-47.1. - B-4 District purpose. 
    The B-4 district is intended to: 
(a)  Provide for a wide range of residential, commercial and other sales and service operations, serving the entire metropolitan area in downtown Lynchburg and other mixed use centers throughout the City; 
(b)  Encourage a compatible mix of multi-household residences, business and related activities of relatively high densities and with adequate services where appropriate; 
(c)  Assure public access to the James River for recreational purposes and to protect the aesthetic qualities of the riverfront. 
Sec. 35.2-47.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-17 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-17: Authorized Uses in B-4 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type Single-household attached (townhouse) 1140S Each unit on a separate lot; fire wall may protrude from roof or roofs may be staggered P Multi-household structures 1200S Includes triplexes, four-plexes, and other multi-household dwellings P Mixed-use residential structures (see district regulations for limitations) 1201S Typically commercial uses on lower floors and residential uses on upper floors P Housing Services 1200 Housing and custodial services for those who cannot care for themselves. Includes nursing and retirement homes, congregate living, assisted and continuing care living, but excludes rehab uses in LBCS #6520) P Hotels, Motels, or Other Accommodation Services 1300 Lodging and short-term accommodation for travelers Bed & Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home P   boarding house 1321 Non-transient lodging that may include meals and is owner occupied P   rooming house 1322 Transient or non-transient lodging that may include meals P   dormitory, sorority or fraternity house 1323 Allowed only as accessory uses to and owned by a college or university C Hotel, motel, or tourist court 1330 Hotels that do not have gambling services; includes extended-stay hotels P bicycles 2113b New or used bicycle sales, rental and repair P boat or marine craft dealer 2114 New or used boats sales, rental and related repair services P parts, accessories, or tires 2115 Automotive parts and supply stores, automotive stereo stores. P gasoline service 2116 Gas stations with or without convenience stores or food marts, excludes truck stops, light auto repair and heavy auto repair C   light auto repair 2117a Oil change, light auto repair and car wash. May include gasoline and other related sales. C   heavy auto repair 2117b Auto repair, paint and body shops. May include gasoline and other retail sales. C furniture or home furnishings, hardware, home center, lawn and garden supplies, department store, warehouse club or superstore, electronics and appliances 2121-
2125 Furniture, flooring, bedding stores; home building and repair supplies, painting supplies, farm goods, lighting supply, window treatment; nursery and garden products predominantly grown elsewhere, power equipment sales or services; large variety stores; household-type appliances, television, stereos, including repair shops and cell phone stores. P computer and software 2131 Computers and prepackaged software including repair, support, and training P camera and photographic supplies; clothing, jewelry, luggage, shoes, clocks, sewing; sporting goods, toy and hobby, and musical instruments; mixed media, school and office supplies 2132-
2135 Primarily retail cameras and photographic supplies or retail with repair and film developing; clothing (including shoe repair and tailoring, sporting goods, toys, musical instruments, kitchen goods, books, magazines, music, videos, stationary, greeting cards, seasonal decorations, office and school supplies. P florist, art supplies, tobacco products 2141-
2143 Florists, art supplies and art dealers, frame shops, tobacco products P art galleries 2142b Excludes art supply sales and retail framing services P mail order or direct selling establishment 2144 Retailing other than through locations where shoppers physically visit P antique shop 2145 Antique shops, (excludes flea markets, thrift stores and pawn shops) P flea markets and thrift stores 2145b Flea markets and thrift stores P grocery store, supermarket, or bakery, convenience store, specialty food stores 2151-
2154 Included are grocery stores, convenience stores, meat, seafood and produce markets, coffee, confections, variety goods and general stores, and delicatessens. Excludes stores with fuel pumps (see 2116 for fuel sales). P beer, wine, and liquor store 2155 P Health and personal care 2160 Retail prescription or nonprescription drugs; retail cosmetics, perfumes, toiletries; prescription or nonprescription eyeglasses; prescription or nonprescription health and convalescent aids; medical devices, retail food supplement products such as vitamins, nutrition supplements, and body enhancing supplements. P Markets for farm produce or crafts 2199 Markets and truck gardens. C Bank, credit union, or savings institution 2210 Central banking functions P   credit card and other financing 2221 Credit card, sales financing, unsecured consumer lending, real estate credit, mortgages, international trade financing P   pawn shops 2222 P   short-term loans 2223 Pay-day lenders and other businesses providing loans with terms of 45 days or less P   precious metal buyers 2224 Businesses providing cash for gold and other precious metals or gems (excludes retail jewelers) P Investment banking, securities, and brokerages; insurance; fund, trust, or other financial establishment 2230-
2250 Securities underwriting, brokering, exchange services, managing portfolios; Insurance underwriting, selling insurance; manage assets on behalf of shareholders or beneficiaries P Real estate services 2310 Sell or lease real estate such as buildings, manufactured home sites and vacant lots; includes real estate appraisers and realtor offices P Property management services 2320 Manage real property for others P vehicles 2331
&
2332 Lease passenger cars, trucks, trailers, RVs, buses and aircraft; drivers not provided recreational goods rental 2333 Rent skis, canoes, bicycles, sailboats, motorcycles P Professional offices 2411-
2014 Title abstract, lawyers, notaries, accountants, bookkeeping, payroll services, architects, engineers, surveyors, graphic design, interior design and industrial design P consulting services (management, environmental technical) 2415 Advise and assist businesses on management, scientific, and technological issues P scientific research and development services 2416 Conduct research or analyze in the physical, engineering, cognitive, or life sciences in laboratories or offices. P advertising, media and photography services 2417 Includes advertising, marketing and public relations agencies, photographic studios and photographic services. P veterinary services 2418 Veterinary medicine, testing services for veterinary practitioners P other professional offices 2419,
6810,
6820 Includes advertising and media services intellectual property rights, franchising, labor, political or business organizations, and uses with similar impacts P office administrative services 2421 Office administration such as billing, record keeping, personnel, organizational planning P facilities support services 2422 Provide operating staff for support services within a client's facilities, including janitorial, security, laundry services, etc. P employment agency 2423a Provide employee placement, temporary help P copy center, private mail center, other business support services 2424 Provide document preparation, telephone answering, telemarketing, court reporting, steno typing, FAX, internet access, small signs and banners P collection agency 2425 Collect payments, compile credit information, repossess tangible assets P Travel arrangement and reservation services 2430 Promote or sell travel, includes convention and visitors' bureaus P Investigation and security services 2440 Provide detective, guard and patrol services, picking up and delivery of money, selling of security systems, remote monitoring of security systems, locksmiths P Restaurants, cafeterias, snack bars & catering 2510-
2530
&
2560 Provide food and drinks to patrons - see district specific use regulations for limitations. Includes banquet, assembly and reception halls. See district standards. P Mobile food services 2550 Prepare and serve meals and snacks for immediate consumption from motorized vehicles P Food service contractor and vending machine operator s 2570
&
2580 Provide food services at institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations based on contracts. Retail merchandise through vending machines that they service P Personal care 2610 Hair, nail, and skin care and related personal care, barbers, beauty shops, dieting and weight loss, tanning, hair removal, hair weaving, ear piercing and similar services P   laundromat and dry cleaning 2621
&
2622 Includes Laundromats, dry cleaners, diaper services as well as other commercial laundry services P Photofinishing 2630 Primarily engaged in developing film or making slides, etc. P Parking lot and parking garage 2640 See district standards P   licensed massage therapist 2651 P   tattoo parlor 2652 Tattoos by a licensed professional P   adult retail establishment 2653 Stores primarily selling adult oriented products, including books, videos, magazines, toys, lingerie and other sexually-oriented goods P Pet or pet supply store 2710 Retail pets, pet foods, pet supplies P   animal services 2721 grooming and training P Food and beverages 3110 Includes bakery and candy establishments that produce for later consumption; ice manufacturing; dairies; bottling plants; and peanut and coffee roasting P Furniture and related products 3230 Includes manufacture and repair of furniture, upholstery, mattresses, window blinds, window shades, awnings cabinets, fixtures P Office and warehousing 3610 Storage of goods related to on-site office or retail use P rail passenger transportation 4121 Passenger stations only P local transit systems-bus, special needs, sightseeing, taxi and limousine services 4133-
4134
&
4136-
4137 Single-mode local and non-local transit systems other than rail; excludes transit stops, which are allowed in all districts. Includes sightseeing, taxi and limousine services P marine and sightseeing transportation 4151 Provide water transportation, including scenic and sightseeing, for passengers P national post office 4181 P retail courier and package delivery 4182 Retail courier, package drop-off and mail services P Motion pictures and sound recording 4220 Produce and distribute motion pictures and sound recordings P radio and television broadcasting 4231,
4232
&
4241 Operate broadcasting studios and facilities for over the air, cable or satellite delivery of radio and television programs P wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers P telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services P news syndicate 4243 Supply information such as news reports, articles, pictures and features to the news media P data processing and management, hosting and related services 4244 Web hosting, computer data storage, optical scanning, computer input preparation, microfilm imaging P Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   electric substations 4316 C Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-
4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations C Theater, dance or music establishment 5110
&
5160 Companies, groups, or theaters that produce theatrical presentations, dance, dinner theaters, and live musical entertainment; includes facilities for independent artists and performers P Motion picture viewing and exhibition services 5111 Operate movie theaters (excluding drive-ins), film festival exhibitions P Promoter of sports, performing arts, similar events and management services 5140-
5150 Organize, promote, and manage performances and events; agents representing artists, athletes and entertainers P Indoor auditorium or arena 5170 Indoor auditoriums, arenas, conference centers, or multipurpose facilities C Outdoor auditorium/arenas 5180 Outdoor arenas, theaters and stadiums C Museums and Other Special Purpose Recreational Institutions 5200 Public and private museums, historical sites, and similar establishments P Amusement or theme park establishment 5310 Operate a variety of attractions such as mechanical rides, water rides, games C Commercial Amusements 5320,
5380,
5390 Operate arcades and other commercial amusements as defined herein C Country Club 5340
&
6830 Operate private country clubs, with tennis courts and golf courses along with dining facilities and other recreational facilities; includes civic, social and fraternal organizations without dwellings P   fitness and recreational sports center 5371 Aerobic dance or exercise center, gymnasium, physical fitness center, health and athletic club, indoor handball, racquetball, volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities conducted inside a building P   outdoor recreation 5372,
5373
&
5374 Includes for profit golf courses, archery ranges, outdoor volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities, recreational courts, recreational day camp and horseback riding C shooting ranges, indoor 5375 C shooting ranges, outdoor 5376 Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P Nursery or preschool 6110 P Grade school 6120 Comprises all public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level; includes adult education services not addressed elsewhere. See district use standards. P College or university 6130 See district use standards. P   general technical schools 6141-
6143,
6145,
6147 Offer courses in office procedures, administrative skills, and basic office skills; dance, art, drama, and music; athletic activities. See district use standards. C Other Government Functions 6300 Other government owned establishments not classified elsewhere such as defense and national guard establishments C Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P   clinic 6511
&
6567 Include physician offices, dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, licensed massage therapists, and veterans' affairs services P   outpatient care clinic 6512 Provide outpatient family planning services and outpatient care P   medical or diagnostic laboratory; blood/organ bank 6513-
6514 Provide analytic or diagnostic services including medical imaging P   group home small 6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P   group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P Hospital 6530 C   child and adult day care 6562 Provide day care for children and adults   home 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) individuals in a residence P   small 6562b Day care for six (6) to twelve (12) individuals in a residence P   large 6562c Provide care for more than 12 individuals P Religious Institutions 6600 Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, convents and monasteries P Death Care Services 6700 Funeral homes, crematories, cemeteries   Funeral home and services 6710 Includes funeral homes combined with crematories P   columbarium 6724 P Construction-Related Businesses 7000 Contractors who can build or demolish buildings, leveling, earthmoving, excavating, land drainage; should reflect the location of the establishment and not where it is performing its services. This category also includes the manufacture of industrial buildings, manufactured homes, modular homes, storage buildings and similar structures. Note that district standards may limit or preclude manufacturing, outdoor operations, outdoor storage of commercial vehicles and materials. P Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens with production limited to retail sales P   Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Includes fruit and nut trees with production limited to retail sales P   Greenhouse - sales of products grown on premises 9142 P   Greenhouse - sales of products and related accessory products 9143 P   Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see standards in section 35.2-71.7) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes temporary carnivals and circuses sponsored by non-profit organizations (see section 35.2-72.23) P temporary outdoor promotional attractions 9922 Includes car shows, boat shows and similar short-term events intended to promote commercial sales or services (see section 35.2-72.23) P traditional neighborhood development 9952 See section 35.2-82 C large scale retail establishments 9954 See section 35.2-84 P cluster commercial development 9955 See section 35.2-85 C  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-47.3. - B-4 District use standards. 
    The following standards supplement the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  Drive-in and drive-through businesses where persons are served food or beverages in automobiles, such as refreshment stands, restaurants, food stores and the like are prohibited. 
(b)  Hiring halls and other places of assembly for the registration for or the assignment of employment are prohibited. 
(c)  Schools and colleges of all types that exceed a maximum enrollment of 100 students are prohibited unless otherwise approved through issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(d)  Arenas, auditoriums, or stadiums, shall not exceed a maximum capacity of 1,000 persons unless otherwise approved through issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(e)  Outdoor storage shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Temporary exhibitions and festivals are subject to approval of a temporary use permit by the Zoning Administrator and shall not exceed 15 days duration. 
Sec. 35.2-47.4. - B-4 District development standards. 
    Dimensional standards for the B-4 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-18. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(a)  Setbacks. None required, except that any side or rear setback abutting a R-1, R-2 or R-3 district shall be a minimum of twice the width required in that district and shall be subject to the screening requirements of section 35.2-63.9 (Utility screening). 
(b)  Height regulations. In any B-4 district, a building may be erected to any height, provided that the height of that portion of the building in excess of two times the width of the right-of-way on which it abuts shall be governed by the following regulations: 
1.  For each foot such building or portion thereof is set back from any street, lot or minimum setback line, such building or portion thereof may be erected ten feet in height, provided that no street shall for this purpose be considered to be less than 40 feet or more than 60 feet in width. 
2.  If a building abuts on two or more streets, that street that permits the greater height shall be used as the basis of measurement. 
(c)  Development Patterns. The B-4 district development standards may be modified through the approval of a cluster commercial development or traditional neighborhood development. 
(d)  Commercial Design Guidelines. For new development and redevelopment within a local, state or national historic district, restorations or modifications to existing structures: 
1.  Building and site development should comply with the "Lynchburg Historic Districts Commercial Design Review Guidelines"; 
2.  Landscaping requirements shall be waived if: 
a.  Walls are constructed out of glass, stone, brick or masonry, excluding cinder block and unfinished concrete, except that roof and rear additions complying with the guidelines may be constructed of wood, brick or masonry unless the City Planner finds that alternative materials are comparable appearance and durability; 
b.  Entries are oriented to the street on which the building fronts, except that entries for buildings on corner lots may face the corner; 
c.  Window size, the proportion of openings and the alignment of windows, floors and cornices are consistent with adjacent buildings; and 
d.  Large buildings include architectural features to create the appearance of matching existing storefront widths. 
3.  In administering the paragraphs (d)(1) and (d)(2), the City Planner may grant minor exceptions to allow development that emulates historic design patterns when a project is located adjacent to one or more buildings that is inconsistent with historic design patterns. 
Exhibit IV-18: Summary of B-4 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Cross-Reference Maximum height none 
(see paragraph (b) above) 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback from right-of-way (dimension A) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior (dimension C) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width (dimension E) none 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot depth (dimension F) none 35.2-61.4  
Sec. 35.2-48. - General Business District (B-5). 
Sec. 35.2-48.1 - B-5 District purpose. 
    The B-5 district is intended to provide for a variety of commercial and similar uses that require large sites and which often produce substantial nuisance effects. The location of these districts should provide for a high level of access, relatively large amounts of level land, and opportunities to shield adjacent residential districts from nuisance effects. 
Sec. 35.2-48.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-19 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-19: Authorized Uses in B-5 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type Single-household detached 1111S Typical single-household dwelling C Modular home 1114S A prefabricated home without axles or frames (see definitions) C Manufactured home 1115S A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built after 1978 on a permanent chassis, and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities (see definitions) C Two-household (duplex) 1121S A building located on one (1) zoning lot containing not more than two (2) dwelling units C Single-household semi-detached 1122S One of two dwellings separated by a party wall, on abutting lots C Single-household attached (townhouse) 1140S Each unit on a separate lot; fire wall may protrude from roof or roofs may be staggered C Three or More Households 1200S Includes triplexes, four-plexes, and other multi-household dwellings C Mixed-use residential structures (see district regulations for limitations) 1201S Typically commercial uses on lower floors and residential uses on upper floors P Housing Services 1200 Housing and custodial services for those who cannot care for themselves. Includes nursing and retirement homes, congregate living, assisted and continuing care living, but excludes rehab uses in LBCS #6520) P Bed & Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home P   boarding house 1321 Non-transient lodging that may include meals and is owner occupied P   rooming house 1322 Transient or non-transient lodging that may include meals P   dormitory, sorority or fraternity house 1323 Allowed only as accessory uses to and owned by a college or university C Hotel, motel, or tourist court 1330 Hotels that do not have gambling services; includes extended-stay hotels P car, motorcycle, manufactured homes or RV dealer 2111-
2113 New or used automobiles, light trucks, motorcycles, RV's, manufactured homes, and buses P bicycles 2113b New or used bicycle sales, rental and repair P boat or marine craft dealer 2114 New or used boats sales, rental and related repair services P parts, accessories, or tires 2115 Automotive parts and supply stores, automotive stereo stores. P gasoline service 2116 Gas stations with or without convenience stores or food marts, excludes truck stops, light auto repair and heavy auto repair P   light auto repair 2117a Oil change, light auto repair and car wash. May include gasoline and other related sales. P   heavy auto repair 2117b Auto repair, paint and body shops. May include gasoline and other retail sales. P furniture or home furnishings, hardware, home center, lawn and garden supplies, department store, warehouse club or superstore, electronics and appliances 2121-
2125 Furniture, flooring, bedding stores; home building and repair supplies, painting supplies, farm goods, lighting supply, window treatment; nursery and garden products predominantly grown elsewhere, power equipment sales or services; large variety stores; household-type appliances, television, stereos, including repair shops and cell phone stores. P lumber yard and building materials; heating and plumbing equipment; heavy equipment 2126-
2128 Lumber yards and heavy building materials; heating and plumbing equipment retailers; for heating and plumbing contractors who install or service, use the appropriate construction category; construction equipment and vehicles; includes authorized storage (3650) P computer and software 2131 Computers and prepackaged software including repair, support, and training P camera and photographic supplies; clothing, jewelry, luggage, shoes, clocks, sewing; sporting goods, toy and hobby, and musical instruments; mixed media, school and office supplies 2132-
2135 Primarily retail cameras and photographic supplies or retail with repair and film developing; clothing (including shoe repair and tailoring, sporting goods, toys, musical instruments, kitchen goods, books, magazines, music, videos, stationary, greeting cards, seasonal decorations, office and school supplies. P florist, art supplies, tobacco products 2141-
2143 Florists, art supplies and art dealers, frame shops, tobacco products P art galleries 2142b Excludes art supply sales and retail framing services P mail order or direct selling establishment 2144 Retailing other than through locations where shoppers physically visit P antique shop 2145 Antique shops, (excludes flea markets, thrift stores and pawn shops) P flea markets and thrift stores 2145b Flea markets and thrift stores P grocery store, supermarket, or bakery, convenience store, specialty food stores 2151-
2154 Included are grocery stores, convenience stores, meat, seafood and produce markets, coffee, confections, variety goods and general stores, and delicatessens. Excludes stores with fuel pumps (see 2116 for fuel sales). P beer, wine, and liquor store 2155 P Health and personal care 2160 Retail prescription or nonprescription drugs; retail cosmetics, perfumes, toiletries; prescription or nonprescription eyeglasses; prescription or nonprescription health and convalescent aids; medical devices, retail food supplement products such as vitamins, nutrition supplements, and body enhancing supplements. P Markets for farm produce or crafts 2199 Markets and truck gardens. P Bank, credit union, or savings institution 2210 Central banking functions P   credit card and other financing 2221 Credit card, sales financing, unsecured consumer lending, real estate credit, mortgages, international trade financing P   pawn shops 2222 P   short-term loans 2223 Pay-day lenders and other businesses providing loans with terms of 45 days or less P   precious metal buyers 2224 Businesses providing cash for gold and other precious metals or gems (excludes retail jewelers) P Investment banking, securities, and brokerages; insurance; fund, trust, or other financial establishment 2230-
2250 Securities underwriting, brokering, exchange services, managing portfolios; Insurance underwriting, selling insurance; manage assets on behalf of shareholders or beneficiaries P Real estate services 2310 Sell or lease real estate such as buildings, manufactured home sites and vacant lots; includes real estate appraisers and realtor offices P Property management services 2320 Manage real property for others P vehicles 2331 &
2332 Lease passenger cars, trucks, trailers, RVs, buses and aircraft; drivers not provided P recreational goods rental 2333 Rent skis, canoes, bicycles, sailboats, motorcycles P commercial, industrial or consumer machinery and equipment rental 2334-
2335 Rent or lease: 
 a) office machinery and equipment; heavy equipment without operators used for construction, well-drilling; other machinery and equipment for uses such as manufacturing or telecommunications; operators not included (note: see 2337 for heavy equipment leasing) 
b) personal and household-type goods and a range of equipment geared toward consumers P Professional offices 2411-
2014 Title abstract, lawyers, notaries, accountants, bookkeeping, payroll services, architects, engineers, surveyors, graphic design, interior design and industrial design P consulting services (management, environmental technical) 2415 Advise and assist businesses on management, scientific, and technological issues P scientific research and development services 2416 Conduct research or analyze in the physical, engineering, cognitive, or life sciences in laboratories or offices. P advertising, media and photography services 2417 Includes advertising, marketing and public relations agencies, photographic studios and photographic services. P veterinary services 2418 Veterinary medicine, testing services for veterinary practitioners P other professional offices 2419,
6810,
6820 Includes advertising and media services intellectual property rights, franchising, labor, political or business organizations, and uses with similar impacts P office administrative services 2421 Office administration such as billing, record keeping, personnel, organizational planning P facilities support services 2422 Provide operating staff for support services within a client's facilities, including janitorial, security, laundry services, etc. P employment agency 2423a Provide employee placement, temporary help P hiring hall 2423b Place of assembly for the registration or assignment of employment P copy center, private mail center, other business support services 2424 Provide document preparation, telephone answering, telemarketing, court reporting, steno typing, FAX, internet access, small signs and banners P collection agency 2425 Collect payments, compile credit information, repossess tangible assets P Travel arrangement and reservation services 2430 Promote or sell travel, includes convention and visitors' bureaus P Investigation and security services 2440 Provide detective, guard and patrol services, picking up and delivery of money, selling of security systems, remote monitoring of security systems, locksmiths P Services to buildings and dwellings 2450 Provide pest control, janitorial services, landscaping, carpet cleaning, etc. (2451-2454) P   packing, crating 2455 P Restaurants, cafeterias, snack bars & catering 2510-
2530
&
2560 Provide food and drinks to patrons - see district specific use regulations for limitations. Includes banquet, assembly and reception halls. See district standards. P Mobile food services 2550 Prepare and serve meals and snacks for immediate consumption from motorized vehicles P Food service contractor and vending machine operators 2570
&
2580 Provide food services at institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations based on contracts. Retail merchandise through vending machines that they service P Personal care 2610 Hair, nail, and skin care and related personal care, barbers, beauty shops, dieting and weight loss, tanning, hair removal, hair weaving, ear piercing and similar services P   laundromat and dry cleaning 2621
&
2622 Includes Laundromats, dry cleaners, diaper services as well as other commercial laundry services P   linen and uniform supply 2623 P Photofinishing 2630 Primarily engaged in developing film or making slides, etc. P Parking lot and parking garage 2640 See district standards P licensed massage therapist 2651 P tattoo parlor 2652 Tattoos by a licensed professional P adult retail establishment 2653 Stores primarily selling adult oriented products, including books, videos, magazines, toys, lingerie and other sexually-oriented goods P Pet or pet supply store 2710 Retail pets, pet foods, pet supplies P   animal services 2721 grooming and training P   animal boarding 2722 sitting and boarding P   pet cemetery 2723 P Food and beverages 3110 Includes bakery and candy establishments that produce for later consumption; ice manufacturing; dairies; bottling plants; and peanut and coffee roasting P Textiles, leather and leather substitute products 3130
&
3140 Textile mills, apparel manufacturers and canvas making; dying plants and dry cleaning plants; leather and leather substitutes such as rubber footwear (excluding leather tanning) P Furniture and related products 3230 Includes manufacture and repair of furniture, upholstery, mattresses, window blinds, window shades, awnings cabinets, fixtures P Signs 3440 Manufacturing of signs to be erected or installed (excludes banner printing) P Blacksmith Creation of objects from wrought iron steel, such as gates, railings, furniture, and other functional and decorative items P Wholesale Trade Establishment 3500 Normally operate from a warehouse or office, selling or arranging the purchase of goods to other businesses P Office and warehousing 3610 Storage of goods related to on-site office or retail use P Warehousing 3620 Storage of goods as the principal use; includes mini-warehouses, self-storage facilities and moving companies P rail passenger transportation 4121 Passenger stations only P local transit systems-bus, special needs, sightseeing, taxi and limousine services 4133-
4134
&
4136-
4137 Single-mode local and non-local transit systems other than rail; excludes transit stops, which are allowed in all districts. Includes sightseeing, taxi and limousine services P towing and other road and ground services 4138 Tow vehicles P Truck and freight transportation services 4140 Provide over-the-road transportation of cargo using motor vehicles and temporary storage C national post office 4181 P retail courier and package delivery 4182 Retail courier, package drop-off and mail services P Courier and messenger services 4190 Provide air, surface, or combined courier delivery services of Parcels and messages (excludes retail package drop-off and local courier services) P Publishing 4210
&
4221 Issue copies of works for which they usually possess copyright, including printing plants, motion picture and audio publishing. Includes newspaper publishing, greeting card printing and lithography P Motion pictures and sound recording 4220 Produce and distribute motion pictures and sound recordings P   radio and television broadcasting 4231,
4232
&
4241 Operate broadcasting studios and facilities for over the air, cable or satellite delivery of radio and television programs P   wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers P   telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P   Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C   library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services P   news syndicate 4243 Supply information such as news reports, articles, pictures and features to the news media P   data processing and management, hosting and related services 4244 Web hosting, computer data storage, optical scanning, computer input preparation, microfilm imaging P Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   electric substations 4316 C Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-
4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations C   recycling collection centers 4349 Drop-off facilities for the collection of recycled goods P Theater, dance or music establishment 5110
&
5160 Companies, groups, or theaters that produce theatrical presentations, dance, dinner theaters, and live musical entertainment; includes facilities for independent artists and performers P Motion picture viewing and exhibition services 5111 Operate movie theaters (excludes drive-ins), film festival exhibitions P Promoter of sports, performing arts, similar events and management services 5140-
5150 Organize, promote, and manage performances and events; agents representing artists, athletes and entertainers P Indoor auditorium or arena 5170 Indoor auditoriums, arenas, conference centers, or multipurpose facilities C Outdoor auditorium/arenas 5180 Outdoor arenas, stadiums and theaters C Museums and Other Special Purpose Recreational Institutions 5200 Public and private museums, historical sites, and similar establishments P   Amusement or theme park establishment 5310 Operate a variety of attractions such as mechanical rides, water rides, games C   Commercial Amusements 5320,
5380,
5390 Operate arcades and other commercial amusements as defined herein P Country Club 5340
&
6830 Operate private country clubs, with tennis courts and golf courses along with dining facilities and other recreational facilities; includes civic, social and fraternal organizations without dwellings P   fitness and recreational sports center 5371 Aerobic dance or exercise center, gymnasium, physical fitness center, health and athletic club, indoor handball, racquetball, volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities conducted inside a building P   outdoor recreation 5372,
5373
&
5374 Includes for profit golf courses, archery ranges, outdoor volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities, recreational courts, recreational day camp and horseback riding P   shooting ranges, indoor 5375 C Camps, Camping, and Related Establishments 5400 Operate sites to accommodate campers and their equipment, provide overnight recreational camps, may provide cabins, food services, washrooms, spaces for overnight parking or recreational vehicles C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P Nursery or preschool 6110 P Grade school 6120 Comprises all public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level; includes adult education services not addressed elsewhere. See district use standards. P College or university 6130 See district use standards. P   general technical schools 6141-
6143,
6145,
6147 Offer courses in office procedures, administrative skills, and basic office skills; dance, art, drama, and music; athletic activities P   driving education 6144 P Other Government Functions 6300 Other government owned establishments not classified elsewhere such as defense and national guard establishments P Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P   clinic 6511
&
6567 Include physician offices, dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, licensed massage therapists, and veterans' affairs services P   outpatient care clinic 6512 Provide outpatient family planning services and outpatient care P   medical or diagnostic laboratory; blood/organ bank 6513-
6514 Provide analytic or diagnostic services including medical imaging P   group home small 6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P   group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P Hospital 6530 P   child and adult day care 6562 Provide day care for children and adults   home 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) individuals in a residence P   small 6562b Day care for six (6) to twelve (12) individuals in a residence P   large 6562c Provide care for more than 12 individuals P Religious Institutions 6600 Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, convents and monasteries P Death Care Services 6700 Funeral homes, crematories, cemeteries   Funeral home and services 6710 Includes funeral homes combined with crematories P   free-standing cemetery 6722 P   columbarium 6724 P Construction-Related Businesses 7000 Contractors who can build or demolish buildings, leveling, earthmoving, excavating, land drainage; should reflect the location of the establishment and not where it is performing its services. This category also includes the manufacture of industrial buildings, manufactured homes, modular homes, storage buildings and similar structures. Note that district standards may limit or preclude manufacturing, outdoor operations, outdoor storage of commercial vehicles and materials. P Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens with production limited to retail sales P Commercial orchards 9130 Includes fruit and nut trees with production limited to retail sales P   Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Commercial greenhouse production P   Greenhouse - sales of products grown on premises 9142 P   Greenhouse - sales of products and related accessory products 9143 P   Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see standards in section 35.2-71.7) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes temporary carnivals and circuses sponsored by non-profit organizations (see section 35.2-72.23) P temporary outdoor promotional attractions 9922 Includes car shows, boat shows and similar short-term events intended to promote commercial sales or services (see section 35.2-72.23) P traditional neighborhood development 9952 See section 35.2-82 C large scale retail establishments 9954 See section 35.2-84 P cluster commercial development 9955 See section 35.2-85 C flex space development 9956 See section 35.2-86 C corporate campus 9957 See section 35.2-87 C Billboards - only existing billboards allowed per section 35.2-64.16 9990 Billboards and other signs advertising goods and services not available on the site where the sign is located P  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-48.3. - District use standards. 
    The following standards supplement the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  No operations shall create conditions of smoke, fumes, noise, odor, light or dust detrimental to health, safety or the general welfare of the community. 
(b)  Billboards shall be subject to the regulations of section 35.2-64.16 (Billboards). 
(c)  Second-hand stores may include auction sales provided such activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
(d)  Storage warehouses and yards shall not include the storage of combustibles prohibited by the fire code, sand yards, gravel yards, coal yards, railroad yards and automobile wrecking yards. 
(e)  Schools and colleges of all types that exceed a maximum enrollment of 100 students are prohibited unless otherwise approved through issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(f)  Except residential uses specifically permitted by conditional use permit, ground floor residential uses shall be prohibited except when part of a mixed-use building where the residential access is taken from an urban collector or local street. 
(g)  Large-scale retail establishments shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-84 (Retail Establishments, Large Scale) unless otherwise approved through issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(h)  Outdoor storage, which is permitted as an accessory to a principal use, shall be screened in accordance with section 35.2-63.9 (Utility screening). 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-48.4. - B-5 District development standards. 
    Dimensional standards for the B-5 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-20. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(a)  Height regulations. Subject to the provisions of sections 35.2-61.2 (Height) and 35.2-61.3 (Setbacks), buildings may be erected to any height, provided that the height of that portion of the building in excess of two times the width of the street on which it abuts shall be governed by the following regulations: 
1.  For each foot such building or portion thereof is set back from any street, lot or minimum setback line, such building or portion thereof may be erected ten feet in height, provided that no street shall for this purpose be considered to be less than 40 feet nor more than 60 feet in width. 
2.  If a building abuts on two or more streets, that street which permits the greater height shall be used as the basis of measurement. 
(b)  Lots Abutting R-1, R-2 or R-3 Districts. See section 35.2-61.2 (Height) for additional height requirements and section 35.2-61.3 (Setbacks) for additional setback requirements for lots abutting R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts. 
(c)  Area regulations. Each dwelling, boardinghouse, lodging house, convalescent and nursing home, tourist home and hotel, together with their accessory buildings, shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than 1,000 square feet for each household unit, except that the minimum area for any such lot shall be 6,000 square feet, and the minimum width 50 feet. 
(d)  Development Patterns. The B-5 district development standards may be modified through the approval of a cluster commercial development or traditional neighborhood development. 
Exhibit IV-20: Summary of B-5 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Cross-Reference Maximum height none (See paragraph (a) above) 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback from right-of-way (dimension A) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior (dimension C) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width (dimension E) none 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot depth (dimension F) none 35.2-61.4 Minimum average lot area per establishment none (See paragraph (b) above) 35.2-61.4  
Sec. 35.2-49. - Institutional District 1 (IN-1). 
Sec. 35.2-49.1. - IN-1 District purpose. 
(a)  The IN-1 district is intended to provide for institutional uses such as schools, colleges, universities, senior living facilities, medical facilities and churches with multiple buildings contained in a campus setting. This district provides flexibility for institutions while identifying areas intended for future development. IN-1 districts are for institutional campuses located primarily within or adjacent to residential areas. Institutions are encouraged to maintain a dialogue with City staff that will provide a greater understanding of the relationship of the institutions' and the City's future development plans and the availability of adequate water, sanitary sewer and transportation infrastructure. 
(b)  The amount of off-site impact related to an institution depends as much on the location as the size and scale of the campus. This district will provide flexibility for institutions while creating development procedures and standards to minimize off site impacts such as noise, lighting, traffic, and availability/capacity of water and sanitary sewer infrastructure associated with their development. Off-site impacts related to erosion and sediment control/stormwater management will be mitigated by existing City ordinances. 
Sec. 35.2-49.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-21 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(e)  Bookstores (see LBCS Codes 2132-2135) may be authorized as accessory uses to a college in an IN-1 district. 
Exhibit IV-21: Authorized Uses in IN-1 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type Housing Services 1200 Housing and custodial services for those who cannot care for themselves. Includes nursing and retirement homes, congregate living, assisted and continuing care living, but excludes rehab uses in LBCS #6520) P Bed & Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home P   boarding house 1321 Non-transient lodging that may include meals and is owner occupied P   rooming house 1322 Transient or non-transient lodging that may include meals P   dormitory, sorority or fraternity house 1323 Allowed only as accessory uses to and owned by a college or university P Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C data processing and management, hosting and related services 4244 Web hosting, computer data storage, optical scanning, computer input preparation, microfilm imaging P Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   electric substations 4316 C Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-
4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P Nursery or preschool 6110 P Grade school 6120 Comprises all public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level; includes adult education services not addressed elsewhere P College or university 6130 P   general technical schools 6141-
6143,
6145,
6147 Offer courses in office procedures, administrative skills, and basic office skills; dance, art, drama, and music; athletic activities P Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P   clinic 6511
&
6567 Include physician offices, dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, licensed massage therapists, and veterans affairs services P   outpatient care clinic 6512 Provide outpatient family planning services and outpatient care P   medical or diagnostic laboratory; blood/organ bank 6513-
6514 Provide analytic or diagnostic services including medical imaging P   group home small 6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P   group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities C   child and youth services 6561 Offer services such as adoption, foster care, drug prevention services P   child and adult day care 6562 Provide day care for children and adults    home 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) individuals in a residence P    small 6562b Day care for six (6) to twelve (12) individuals in a residence P    large 6562c Provide care for more than 12 individuals P   care services community food services 6563-
6566 Includes community food services, emergency and relief services, services for the elderly and disabled other family services; does not on-site provision of housing P Religious Institutions 6600 Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, convents and monasteries P Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens with production limited to retail sales P Commercial orchards 9130 Includes fruit and nut trees with production limited to retail sales P Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see standards in section 35.2-71.7) P  
Sec. 35.2-49.3. - Establishment of an IN-1 District. 
    The process for establishing an IN-1 Institutional District for a campus shall be the same as provided for a change to the Official Zoning Map as outlined in section 35.2-11 (Applications requiring public hearings before City Council) except that at the time the IN-1 is established, the institution shall provide to the City: 
(a)  A concept plan with a two-year projection of future development at the campus. The concept plan is intended to be illustrative in nature and should provide an overview of planned campus development; mitigation plans for off-site impacts such as noise, lighting and traffic; and proposed uses that would require an extension or upgrade to water/sanitary sewer infrastructure. The concept plan is not intended to serve as a master plan. Permitted and accessory uses do not need to be indicated on the concept plan provided the development standards of the Institutional District are met and adequate transportation and water/sanitary sewer infrastructure is available to serve the development. 
(b)  A traffic study prepared by a firm qualified to conduct traffic engineering studies. The methodology for the required traffic study shall be as specified in the most recently adopted City's Manual of Specifications and Standard Details. Technical guidelines for traffic studies may be obtained from the City's Transportation Engineer. The traffic study shall, at a minimum, include the following information: 
1.  The existing Level of Service (LOS) for City streets and intersections serving the campus. 
2.  The projected amount of growth of the campus that would result in a street or intersection Level of Service (LOS) lower than "D" for City streets or intersections serving the institution, or 
3.  In the case of City streets or intersections with a Level of Service (LOS) already lower than "D" the projected amount of growth of the campus that would result in further lowering the Level of Service (LOS). 
Sec. 35.2-49.4. - Modification of concept plans. 
(a)  A new concept plan for a campus shall be required when the TRC determines in approving a site plan for the institutional campus that: 
1.  The cumulative total of the institution's existing and proposed development at the campus would result in a Level of Service (LOS) lower than "D" for City streets and intersections serving such campus or in the case of City streets or intersections serving such campus that had a Level of Service (LOS) lower than "D" at the time the district was established a further lowering of the Level of Service to "E" or "F"; or 
2.  Adequate water/sanitary sewer capacity or infrastructure, as determined by current engineering standards, is not readily available to serve the institution's existing and proposed development at such campus; or 
3.  A period of five years has passed since the review of a concept plan by the Planning Commission for such campus. 
(b)  The new concept plan shall be prepared as stated in section 35.2-49.3(a) and when the requirement for a new concept plan is based upon LOS standards, a traffic study shall be required as specified in section 35.2-49.3(b). 
1.  Improvements required to maintain a LOS "D" for City intersections or to prevent a further lowering of the Level of Service when the institutional development itself gives rise to the need for the improvement shall be required to be made by the institution. Only those improvements having a clearly demonstrated nexus between the proposed development of the campus and the need for the improvement shall be required to be made by the institution. 
2.  The new concept plan with a two-year projection shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and comment. TRC may approve the revised concept plan after review and comment by the Planning Commission as long as infrastructure is adequate to accommodate the proposed changes. Institutions are encouraged to maintain a dialogue with City staff that will provide a greater understanding of the relationship of the institutions and the City's future development plans and the availability of adequate water, sanitary sewer and transportation infrastructure. 
Sec. 35.2-49.5. - IN-1 District development standards. 
    Dimensional standards for the IN-1 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-22. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. 
(a)  Setbacks for Existing Structures and Uses. Structures and uses with setbacks less than required by the IN-1 district development standards and existing at the time the district is established shall not be considered non-conforming and may be enlarged or expanded within the existing setback. 
(b)  Height. The maximum height of a structure shall not exceed the horizontal distance from the nearest residential district boundary. 
(c)  Lighting. In addition to the standards established in section 35.2-65 (Outdoor Lighting), the following standards shall apply within the IN-1 district: 
1.  Light sources shall be shielded so that the light source shall not be visible beyond the property line; 
2.  Lights shall be shielded so they do not radiate above five degrees below horizontal as shown to the right; and 
3.  No building or street light shall be more than 35 feet in height except for athletic field lighting. 

  
Exhibit IV-22: Summary of IN-1 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Section
Cross-Reference Minimum Land Area for District 5 acres 35.2-61.2 Maximum Height See paragraph (b) above 35.2-61.3 Minimum front setback from right-of-way (dimension A) 40' 35.2-61.3 Minimum Setback from a Residential District (dimension B) 50' 35.2-61.3 Minimum Side Setback, Interior (dimension C) 50' 35.2-61.3 Minimum Side Setback, Street Side (dimension D) 50' 35.2-61.4 Minimum Rear Setback (dimension E) 50' 35.2-61.4 Minimum Open Space 20% of campus  
Sec. 35.2-50. - Institutional District 2 (IN-2). 
Sec. 35.2-50.1. - Purpose. 
(a)  The IN-2 district is intended to provide for institutional uses such as schools, colleges, universities, senior living facilities, medical facilities and churches with multiple buildings contained in a campus setting. This district provides flexibility for institutions while identifying areas intended for future development. IN-2 districts are for larger institutional campuses located primarily adjacent to districts other than residential districts. 
(b)  The amount of off-site impact related to an institution depends as much on the location as the size and scale of the campus. This district will provide flexibility for institutions while creating development procedures and standards to minimize off site impacts such as noise, lighting, traffic, and availability/capacity of water and sanitary sewer infrastructure associated with their development. Off-site impacts related to erosion and sediment control/stormwater management will be mitigated by existing City ordinances. 
Sec. 35.2-50.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-23 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-23: Authorized Uses in IN-2 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type single-household detached 1111 Typical single-household dwelling P single-household semi-detached 1112 One of two dwellings separated by a party wall P single-household attached (townhouse) 1113 Each unit on a separate lot; fire wall may protrude from roof or roofs may be staggered P modular home 1114 P manufactured home 1115 C manufactured home community 1116 Includes manufactured home subdivision and manufactured home parks with 5 or more lots or sites C Two-household (duplex) 1120 P Three or More Households 1130 Includes triplexes, four-plexes, and other multi-household dwellings P Housing Services 1200 Housing and custodial services for those who cannot care for themselves. Includes nursing and retirement homes, congregate living, assisted and continuing care living, but excludes rehab uses in LBCS #6520) P Bed & Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home P   boarding house 1321 Non-transient lodging that may include meals and is owner occupied P   rooming house 1322 Transient or non-transient lodging that may include meals P   dormitory, sorority or fraternity house 1323 Allowed only as accessory uses to and owned by a college or university P Hotel, motel, or tourist court 1330 Hotels that do not have gambling services; includes extended-stay hotels P Other traveler accommodations 1350 Youth hostels and similar short-term lodging car, motorcycle, manufactured homes or RV dealer 2111-
2113 New or used automobiles, light trucks, motorcycles, RV's, manufactured homes, and buses P bicycles 2113b New or used bicycle sales, rental and repair P boat or marine craft dealer 2114 New or used boats sales, rental and related repair services P parts, accessories, or tires 2115 Automotive parts and supply stores, automotive stereo stores. P gasoline service 2116 Gas stations with or without convenience stores or food marts, excludes truck stops, light auto repair and heavy auto repair P   light auto repair 2117a Oil change, light auto repair and car wash. May include gasoline and other retail sales P   heavy auto repair 2117b Auto repair, paint and body shops. May include gasoline and other retail sales. P furniture or home furnishings, hardware, home center, lawn and garden supplies, department store, warehouse club or superstore, electronics and appliances 2121-
2125 Furniture, flooring, bedding stores; home building and repair supplies, painting supplies, farm goods, lighting supply, window treatment; nursery and garden products predominantly grown elsewhere, power equipment sales or services; large variety stores; household-type appliances, television, stereos, including repair shops and cell phone stores. P lumber yard and building materials; heating and plumbing equipment; heavy equipment 2126-
2128 Lumber yards and heavy building materials; heating and plumbing equipment retailers; for heating and plumbing contractors who install or service, use the appropriate construction category; construction equipment and vehicles; includes authorized storage (3650) P computer and software 2131 Computers and prepackaged software including repair, support, and training P camera and photographic supplies; clothing, jewelry, luggage, shoes, clocks, sewing; sporting goods, toy and hobby, and musical instruments; mixed media, school and office supplies 2132-
2135 Primarily retail cameras and photographic supplies or retail with repair and film developing; clothing (including shoe repair and tailoring, sporting goods, toys, musical instruments, kitchen goods, books, magazines, music, videos, stationary, greeting cards, seasonal decorations, office and school supplies. P florist, art supplies, tobacco products 2141-
2143 Florists, art supplies and art dealers, frame shops, tobacco products P art galleries 2142b Excludes art supply sales and retail framing services P mail order or direct selling establishment 2144 Retailing other than through locations where shoppers physically visit P antique shop 2145 Antique shops, (excludes flea markets, thrift stores and pawn shops) P flea markets and thrift stores 2145b Flea markets, consignment shops and thrift stores P grocery store, supermarket, or bakery, convenience store, specialty food stores 2151-
2154 Included are grocery stores, convenience stores, meat, seafood and produce markets, coffee, confections, variety goods and general stores, and delicatessens. Excludes stores with fuel pumps (see 2116 for fuel sales). P beer, wine, and liquor store 2155 P Health and personal care 2160 Retail prescription or nonprescription drugs; retail cosmetics, perfumes, toiletries; prescription or nonprescription eyeglasses; prescription or nonprescription health and convalescent aids; medical devices, retail food supplement products such as vitamins, nutrition supplements, and body enhancing supplements. P Markets for farm produce or crafts 2199 Markets and truck gardens. P Bank, credit union, or savings institution 2210 Central banking functions P   credit card and other financing 2221 Credit card, sales financing, unsecured consumer lending, real estate credit, mortgages, international trade financing P   pawn shops 2222 P   short-term loans 2223 Pay-day lenders and other businesses providing loans with terms of 45 days or less P   precious metal buyers 2224 Businesses providing cash for gold and other precious metals or gems (excludes retail jewelers) P Investment banking, securities, and brokerages; insurance; fund, trust, or other financial establishment 2230-
2250 Securities underwriting, brokering, exchange services, managing portfolios; Insurance underwriting, selling insurance; manage assets on behalf of shareholders or beneficiaries P Real estate services 2310 Sell or lease real estate such as buildings, manufactured home sites and vacant lots; includes real estate appraisers and realtor offices P Property management services 2320 Manage real property for others P vehicles 2331
&
2332 Lease passenger cars, trucks, trailers, RVs, buses and aircraft; drivers not provided P recreational goods rental 2333 Rent skis, canoes, bicycles, sailboats, motorcycles P commercial, industrial or consumer machinery and equipment rental 2334-
2335 Rent or lease: 
a) office machinery and equipment; heavy equipment without operators used for construction, well-drilling; other machinery and equipment for uses such as manufacturing or telecommunications; operators not included (note: see 2337 for heavy equipment leasing) 
b) personal and household-type goods and a range of equipment geared toward consumers P Professional offices 2411-
2014 Title abstract, lawyers, notaries, accountants, bookkeeping, payroll services, architects, engineers, surveyors, graphic design, interior design and industrial design P consulting services (management, environmental technical) 2415 Advise and assist businesses on management, scientific, and technological issues P scientific research and development services 2416 Conduct research or analyze in the physical, engineering, cognitive, or life sciences in laboratories or offices. P advertising, media and photography services 2417 Includes advertising, marketing and public relations agencies, photographic studios and photographic services. P veterinary services 2418 Veterinary medicine, testing services for veterinary practitioners P other professional offices 2419,
6810,
6820 Includes advertising and media services intellectual property rights, franchising, labor, political or business organizations, and uses with similar impacts P office administrative services 2421 Office administration such as billing, record keeping, personnel, organizational planning P facilities support services 2422 Provide operating staff for support services within a client's facilities, including janitorial, security, laundry services, etc. P employment agency 2423a Provide employee placement, temporary help P hiring hall 2423b Place of assembly for the registration or assignment of employment P copy center, private mail center, other business support services 2424 Provide document preparation, telephone answering, telemarketing, court reporting, steno typing, FAX, internet access, small signs and banners. P collection agency 2425 Collect payments, compile credit information, repossess tangible assets P Travel arrangement and reservation services 2430 Promote or sell travel, includes convention and visitors' bureaus P Investigation and security services 2440 Provide detective, guard and patrol services, picking up and delivery of money, selling of security systems, remote monitoring of security systems, locksmiths P Services to buildings and dwellings 2450 Provide pest control, janitorial services, landscaping, carpet cleaning, etc. (2451-2454) P   packing, crating 2455 P Restaurants, cafeterias, snack bars & catering 2510-
2530
&
2560 Provide food and drinks to patrons - see district specific use regulations for limitations. Includes banquet, assembly and reception halls. See district standards. P Mobile food services 2550 Prepare and serve meals and snacks for immediate consumption from motorized vehicles P Food service contractor and vending machine operators 2570
&
2580 Provide food services at institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations based on contracts. Retail merchandise through vending machines that they service P Personal care 2610 Hair, nail, and skin care and related personal care, barbers, beauty shops, dieting and weight loss, tanning, hair removal, hair weaving, ear piercing and similar services P   laundromat and dry cleaning 2621
&
2622 Includes Laundromats, dry cleaners, diaper services as well as other commercial laundry services P   linen and uniform supply 2623 P Photofinishing 2630 Primarily engaged in developing film or making slides, etc. P Parking lot and parking garage 2640 See district standards P licensed massage therapist 2651 P tattoo parlor 2652 Tattoos by a licensed professional P adult establishment, retail sales 2653 Stores primarily selling adult oriented products, including books, videos, magazines, toys, lingerie and other sexually-oriented goods P Pet or pet supply store 2710 Retail pets, pet foods, pet supplies P   animal services 2721 grooming and training P   animal boarding 2722 sitting and boarding P   pet cemetery 2723 P Food and beverages 3110 Includes bakery and candy establishments that produce for later consumption; ice manufacturing; dairies; bottling plants; and peanut and coffee roasting P Textiles, leather and leather substitute products 3130
&
3140 Textile mills, apparel manufacturers and canvas making; dying plants and dry cleaning plants; leather and leather substitutes such as rubber footwear (excluding leather tanning) P Furniture and related products 3230 Includes manufacture and repair of furniture, upholstery, mattresses, window blinds, window shades, awnings cabinets, fixtures P Signs 3440 Manufacturing of signs to be erected or installed (excludes banner printing) P Blacksmith Creation of objects from wrought iron steel, such as gates, railings, furniture, and other functional and decorative items P Wholesale Trade Establishment 3500 Normally operate from a warehouse or office, selling or arranging the purchase of goods to other businesses P Warehousing and Storage Services 3600 Operate warehouse and storage facilities for general merchandise, refrigerated goods   Office and warehousing 3610 Storage of goods related to on-site office or retail use P   Warehousing 3620 Storage of goods as the principal use; includes mini-warehouses, self-storage facilities and moving companies P rail passenger transportation 4121 Passenger stations only P local transit systems-bus, special needs, sightseeing, taxi and limousine services 4133-
4134
&
4136-
4137 Single-mode local and non-local transit systems other than rail; excludes transit stops, which are allowed in all districts. Includes sightseeing, taxi and limousine services P school and employee bus transportation 4135 Maintain and dispatch buses and other motor vehicles to transport pupils or employees P towing and other road and ground services 4138 Tow vehicles P Truck and freight transportation services 4140 Provide over-the-road transportation of cargo using motor vehicles and temporary storage C national post office 4181 P retail courier and package delivery 4182 Retail courier, package drop-off and mail services P Courier and messenger services 4190 Provide air, surface, or combined courier delivery services of parcels and messages (excludes retail package drop-off and local courier services) P Publishing 4210
&
4221 Issue copies of works for which they usually possess copyright, including printing plants, motion picture and audio publishing. Includes newspaper publishing, greeting card printing and lithography P Motion pictures and sound recording 4220 Produce and distribute motion pictures and sound recordings P radio and television broadcasting 4231,
4232
&
4241 Operate broadcasting studios and facilities for over the air, cable or satellite delivery of radio and television programs P wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers P telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services P news syndicate 4243 Supply information such as news reports, articles, pictures and features to the news media P data processing and management, hosting and related services 4244 Web hosting, computer data storage, optical scanning, computer input preparation, microfilm imaging P Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   power generation 4315 C   electric substations 4316 P Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-
4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations P Wastewater treatment plants 4348   recycling collection centers 4349 Drop-off facilities for the collection of recycled goods P Theater, dance or music establishment 5110
&
5160 Companies, groups, or theaters that produce theatrical presentations, dance, dinner theaters, and live musical entertainment; includes facilities for independent artists and performers P Motion picture viewing and exhibition services 5111 Operate movie theaters, drive-ins, film festival exhibitions (Note: drive-in theaters limited to B-5 district) P Promoter of sports, performing arts, similar events and management services 5140-
5150 Organize, promote, and manage performances and events; agents representing artists, athletes and entertainers P Indoor auditorium or arena 5170 Indoor auditoriums, arenas, conference centers, or multipurpose facilities C Outdoor auditorium/arenas 5180 Outdoor arenas, stadiums and theaters C Museums and Other Special Purpose Recreational Institutions 5200 Public and private museums, historical sites, and similar establishments P Amusement or theme park establishment 5310 Operate a variety of attractions such as mechanical rides, water rides, games C Commercial Amusements 5320,
5380,
5390 Operate arcades and other commercial amusements as defined herein P Country Club 5340
&
6830 Operate private country clubs, with tennis courts and golf courses along with dining facilities and other recreational facilities; includes civic, social and fraternal organizations without dwellings P   fitness and recreational sports center 5371 Aerobic dance or exercise center, gymnasium, physical fitness center, health and athletic club, indoor handball, racquetball, volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities conducted inside a building P   outdoor recreation 5372,
5373
&
5374 Includes for profit golf courses, archery ranges, outdoor volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities, recreational courts, recreational day camp and horseback riding P   shooting ranges, indoor 5375 C   shooting ranges, outdoor 5376 Camps, Camping, and Related Establishments 5400 Operate sites to accommodate campers and their equipment, provide overnight recreational camps, may provide cabins, food services, washrooms, spaces for overnight parking or recreational vehicles C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P Nursery or preschool 6110 P Grade school 6120 Comprises all public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level; includes adult education services not addressed elsewhere P College or university 6130 P   general technical schools 6141-
6143,
6145,
6147 Offer courses in office procedures, administrative skills, and basic office skills; dance, art, drama, and music; athletic activities P   driving education 6144 P   flight training 6146 Offer aviation and flight training P Other Government Functions 6300 Other government owned establishments not classified elsewhere such as defense and national guard establishments P Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P   clinic 6511
&
6567 Include physician offices, dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, licensed massage therapists, and veterans affairs services P   outpatient care clinic 6512 Provide outpatient family planning services and outpatient care P   medical or diagnostic laboratory; blood/organ bank 6513-
6514 Provide analytic or diagnostic services including medical imaging P   group home small 6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P   group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P Hospital 6530 P  child and youth services 6561 Offer services such as adoption, foster care, drug prevention services P   child and adult day care 6562 Provide day care for children and adults   home 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) individuals in a residence P   small 6562b Day care for six (6) to twelve (12) individuals in a residence P   large 6562c Provide care for more than 12 individuals P   care services community food services 6563-
6566 Includes community food services, emergency and relief services, services for the elderly and disabled other family services; does not on-site provision of housing P Religious Institutions 6600 Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, convents and monasteries P Funeral home and services 6710 Includes funeral homes combined with crematories P   free-standing cemetery 6722 P   columbarium 6724 P Construction-Related Businesses 7000 Contractors who can build or demolish buildings, leveling, earthmoving, excavating, land drainage; should reflect the location of the establishment and not where it is performing its services. This category also includes the manufacture of industrial buildings, manufactured homes, modular homes, storage buildings and similar structures. Note that district standards may limit or preclude manufacturing, outdoor operations, outdoor storage of commercial vehicles and materials. P Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens P Commercial orchards 9130 Includes fruit and nut trees for commercial production P   Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Commercial greenhouse production P   Greenhouse - sales of products grown on premises 9142 P   Greenhouse - sales of products and related accessory products 9143 P   Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see standards in section 35.2-71.7) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes temporary carnivals and circuses sponsored by non-profit organizations (see section 35.2-72.23) P temporary outdoor promotional attractions 9922 Includes car shows, boat shows and similar short-term events intended to promote commercial sales or services (see section 35.2-72.23) P traditional neighborhood development 9952 See section 35.2-82 C large scale retail establishments 9954 See section 35.2-84 P cluster commercial development 9955 See section 35.2-85 C flex space development 9956 See section 35.2-86 C corporate campus 9957 See section 35.2-87 Billboards 9990 Billboards and other signs advertising goods and services not available on the site where the sign is located P  
Sec. 35.2-50.3. - Establishment of IN-2 District. 
(a)  The process for establishing an IN-2, Institutional District shall be the same as the process provided for amending the Official Zoning Map which is set forth in section 35.2-11 (Applications Requiring Public Hearings Before City Council), except that an applicant shall not be required to submit a legal description, a metes and bounds description or a concept plan of the property that is the subject of the application. The site plan review procedures set forth in section 35.2-14.2 shall not be applicable to applications to establish IN-2, Institutional Districts. 
(b)  At the time an application to establish an IN-2, Institutional District is submitted the applicant shall provide to the City: 
1.  A map indicating the boundaries of the proposed IN-2, Institutional District, including: 
a.  The boundaries of all parcels to be contained in the IN-2, Institutional District; 
b.  The tax map identification numbers of all parcels to be contained within the IN-2, Institutional District; and 
c.  Where available, the established street addresses of all parcels to be contained within the IN-2, Institutional District. 
Sec. 35.2-50.4. - Facility planning. 
(a)  Institutions are encouraged to maintain a dialogue with City staff that will provide a greater understanding of the relationship of the institutions' and the City's future development plans and the availability of adequate water, sanitary sewer and transportation infrastructure. 
(b)  An institution may, but is not required to, submit with its application to establish an IN-2, Institutional District, a concept plan for the proposed IN-2, district. If submitted, such plan shall show the institution's anticipated future development of the district for a period of not less than two years, nor more than five years. 
(c)  At the time an arena, stadium, auditorium or new entrance to a City street is proposed for construction by the institution, a traffic impact study shall be required. The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a firm qualified to conduct such studies and shall be conducted in compliance with the City's Manual of Specifications and Standard Details in effect as of the March 12, 2013. The study shall indicate the following: 
1.  The existing level of service for the City streets and intersections serving the IN-2 district. 
2.  The impact the anticipated arena, stadium, auditorium or new entrance will have on the level of service (LOS) on City streets and intersections. 
3.  Improvements that will be necessary to prevent such anticipated arena, stadium, auditorium or new entrance to a City street from reducing the Level of Service (LOS) of the streets or intersections serving the IN-2 district lower than "D"; and 
4.  In the case of City streets or intersections with an existing level of service (LOS) of "D", improvements necessary to prevent the arena, stadium, auditorium or new entrance to a City street from further reducing the Level of Service. 
Sec. 35.2-50.5. - IN-2 District use standards. 
    The following standards apply in addition to the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  Upon establishment of an IN-2, Institutional District by Council, the institution and its accessory uses shall be permitted by right. Notwithstanding the provision of Article IX, all conforming uses and lawful non-conforming uses existing within an IN-2, Institutional District at the time of its creation, including replacements, renovations, and expansion of such uses, shall be permitted by right; provided however, no non-conforming sign or non-conforming billboard shall be expanded except as may be allowed by the sign ordinances set forth in section 35.2-64 et seq. of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Residential uses that are not owned and operated by the applicable institution shall only be authorized subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(c)  Large-scale retail establishments shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-84 unless otherwise approved pursuant to a conditional use permit. 
(d)  Second hand stores may include auction sales provided that such activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
(e)  Soundproofed radio and television studios without towers may be established provided that they produce no electromagnetic effect on adjoining properties. 
(f)  Storage warehouses and yards may be established, but shall not include sand yards, gravel yards, coal yards, railroad yards, automobile wrecking yards, junkyards or the storage of combustibles prohibited by the Fire Code. 
(g)  Outdoor storage, which is permitted as an accessory to a university, shall be screened in accordance with section 35.2-63.9 (Utility screening). 
Sec. 35.2-50.6. - Exemptions. 
    The IN-2, Institutional District shall be exempt from the requirements of the following sections of this Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  Section 35.2-61 (Building Envelope, Height, Lot Area and Density Standards); 
(b)  Section 35.2-71 (Accessory Buildings and Uses); 
(c)  Section 35.2-62 (Parking and Loading), provided; however, any institution in the IN-2, Institutional District shall provide adequate parking and unloading areas to accommodate permitted uses within the district. The district shall be deemed to not have adequate parking and unloading areas, when the lack of parking and/or unloading areas in the district causes vehicles to be regularly parked in, or to partially or completely block any public rights- of-way; and 
(d)  Section 35.2-72.2 (Arenas, Auditoriums and Stadiums). 
Sec. 35.2-51. - Restricted Industrial Districts (I-1). 
Sec. 35.2-51.1. - I-1 District purpose. 
    The I-1 district is intended to provide for industrial plants developed at moderate to low densities and with high standards of building and site design. These districts can be mapped in close proximity to residential areas and are particularly appropriate along regional highways, where they can serve to improve the attractiveness and amenity of these highways to the benefit of the traveler, the community and the individual plant owner. 
Sec. 35.2-51.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-24 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-24: Authorized Uses in I-1 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description I-1 Hotel, motel, or tourist court 1330 Hotels that do not have gambling services; includes extended-stay hotels C consulting services (management, environmental technical) 2415 Advise and assist businesses on management, scientific, and technological issues P scientific research and development services 2416 Conduct research or analyze in the physical, engineering, cognitive, or life sciences in laboratories or offices. P advertising, media and photography services 2417 Includes advertising, marketing and public relations agencies, photographic studios and photographic services. P office administrative services 2421 Office administration such as billing, record keeping, personnel, organizational planning P facilities support services 2422 Provide operating staff for support services within a client's facilities, including janitorial, security, laundry services, etc. P copy center, private mail center, other business support services 2424 Provide document preparation, telephone answering, telemarketing, court reporting, steno typing, FAX, internet access, small signs and banners P Restaurants, cafeterias, snack bars & catering 2510-
2530
&
2560 Provide food and drinks to patrons - see district specific use regulations for limitations. Includes banquet, assembly and reception halls. See district standards. C Mobile food services 2550 Prepare and serve meals and snacks for immediate consumption from motorized vehicles P Parking lot and parking garage 2640 See district standards P Food and beverages 3110 Includes bakery and candy establishments that produce for later consumption; ice manufacturing; dairies; bottling plants; and peanut and coffee roasting Textiles, leather and leather substitute products 3130
&
3140 Textile mills, apparel manufacturers and canvas making; dying plants and dry cleaning plants; leather and leather substitutes such as rubber footwear (excluding leather tanning) P Machinery, electrical equipment, appliance, and components manufacturing 3350
&
3360 Make machinery for particular applications, such as construction, ventilation, heating and cooling; manufacture computers, communication equipment, lighting equipment, batteries, motors, appliances, household goods and medical equipment P Jewelry and silverware, sporting goods, toys, games and office supplies 3410-
3430 Jewelry, silverware, sporting goods, toys, musical instruments, office supplies, including inks. Excludes paper mills and businesses primarily engaged in on-premises retail sales P Signs 3440 Manufacturing of signs to be erected or installed (excludes banner printing) P Office and warehousing 3610 Storage of goods related to on-site office or retail use P Air transportation 4110 Provide transportation for passengers or cargo using aircraft (see section 35.2-72.10 for rules related to heliports and helipads) C   rail passenger transportation 4121 Passenger stations only P Publishing 4210
&
4221 Issue copies of works for which they usually possess copyright, including printing plants, motion picture and audio publishing. Includes newspaper publishing, greeting card printing and lithography P Motion pictures and sound recording 4220 Produce and distribute motion pictures and sound recordings P   radio and television broadcasting 4231,
4232 &
4241 Operate broadcasting studios and facilities for over the air, cable or satellite delivery of radio and television programs P   wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers P   telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P   Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C   library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services P   news syndicate 4243 Supply information such as news reports, articles, pictures and features to the news media P   data processing and management, hosting and related services 4244 Web hosting, computer data storage, optical scanning, computer input preparation, microfilm imaging P Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   power generation 4315   electric substations 4316 P Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-
4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations P   recycling collection centers 4349 Drop-off facilities for the collection of recycled goods P Promoter of sports, performing arts, similar events and management services 5140-
5150 Organize, promote, and manage performances and events; agents representing artists, athletes and entertainers P Indoor auditorium or arena 5170 Indoor auditoriums, arenas, conference centers, or multipurpose facilities C Outdoor auditorium/arenas 5180 Outdoor arenas, stadiums and theaters C   fitness and recreational sports center 5371 Aerobic dance or exercise center, gymnasium, physical fitness center, health and athletic club, indoor handball, racquetball, volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities conducted inside a building C   shooting ranges, indoor 5375 C Camps, Camping, and Related Establishments 5400 Operate sites to accommodate campers and their equipment, provide overnight recreational camps, may provide cabins, food services, washrooms, spaces for overnight parking or recreational vehicles Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions C Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see standards in section 35.2-71.7) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes temporary carnivals and circuses sponsored by non-profit organizations P flex space development 9956 See section 35.2-86 P corporate campus 9957 See section 35.2-87 P  
Sec. 35.2-51.3. - I-1 District use standards. 
    The following standards apply in addition to the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  No lot, building or structure shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected that is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any use which is in conflict with any ordinance of the City of Lynchburg now existing or hereafter enacted. 
(b)  No use shall be allowed unless specifically permitted by right, as a permitted accessory use or as a use permitted by conditional use permit, provided, however, that any use existing prior to December 13, 1988, may be enlarged or expanded, but not relocated, so long as it meets all other applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. Any such use shall not be subject to any of the limitations or other regulations prescribed for non-conforming uses elsewhere provided in this Zoning Ordinance. Dwellings and agricultural uses existing on December 13, 1988 shall be considered uses allowed by right. 
(c)  No use shall be permitted which produces noise, unshielded light, smell, dust or any other airborne nuisance that is perceptible beyond the property line of each zoning lot. 
(d)  All manufacturing, processing, testing, storage and similar operations shall be contained completely within buildings or structures. 
(e)  Foundation planting requirements may be reduced by 50 percent for building or structure sides that face a public street that have façades with at least 70 percent nonmetallic materials. 
(f)  Office buildings shall have a minimum of 12,000 square feet of gross floor area; however, offices may be established as accessory uses within a building used for any authorized use. 
(g)  Food service facilities shall be limited to those that are expressly designed for the use of an establishment or group of establishments located in the district, unless otherwise approved by conditional use permit with limited take-out service. 
(h)  Recreational facilities shall be limited to those for employees of establishments in the district. 
(i)  Care centers shall be limited to those for employer-sponsored adult or child care when located on the same property as the primary industrial use. 
(j)  Retail stores, not including warehouse sales, shall be limited to those planned and built as part of manufacturing or processing operation, dealing in the products produced in such operations, intended primarily for the exhibition and promotion of those products as well as their sale. 
(k)  Heliports and helistops shall meet all applicable federal, state and local regulations and are located at least one-half mile from any residential district. 
Sec. 35.2-51.4. - I-1 District development standards. 
    Dimensional standards for the I-1 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-25. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(a)  Height regulations. Subject to the provisions of sections 35.2-61.2 (Height) and 35.2-61.3 (Setbacks), a building may be erected to any height, provided that the height of that portion of the building in excess of two times the width of the street on which it abuts shall be governed by the following regulations: For each foot such building or portion thereof is set back from any street, lot or minimum setback line, such building or portion thereof may be erected ten feet in height, provided that no street shall for this purpose be considered to be less than 40 feet nor more than 60 feet in width. If a building abuts on two or more streets, that street which permits the greater height shall be used as the basis of measurement. See section 35.2-61.2 (Height) for additional height requirements for lots abutting R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 districts. 
(b)  Setbacks. 
1.  In all instances where a lot in an industrial district (I-1, I-2 or I-3) is adjacent to a residential district (R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4): 
a.  A buffer shall be established between the districts in compliance with section 35.2-63.10. 
b.  There shall be required a 100-foot setback. 
2.  Where a lot in an industrial district is on the same block as a residential district, the front and exterior side setback requirements of the residential district shall apply to the applicable industrial district. 
(c)  Development Patterns. The I-1 district development standards may be modified through the approval of a flex space or corporate campus development. 
Exhibit IV-25: Summary of I-1 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Cross-Reference Maximum height none (See paragraph (a) above) 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback from right-of-way (dimension A) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior (dimension C) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width (dimension E) none 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot depth (dimension F) none 35.2-61.4 Minimum district size 2 acres Minimum average lot area per establishment none  
Sec. 35.2-52. - Light Industrial Districts (I-2). 
Sec. 35.2-52.1. - I-2 District purpose. 
    The I-2 district is intended to provide for industrial uses of a variety of types that produce relatively low levels of smoke, smell, noise, light, dust and other nuisances. These areas would contain many of the same types of activities as the I-1 districts, but less stringent development standards shall apply. In general, operations are appropriate in this district that: 
(a)  Do not involve nuisances discernible at the lot line; and 
(b)  Do not deal with large volumes of customers on a continuous basis throughout the day. 
Sec. 35.2-52.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-26 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-26: Authorized Uses in I-2 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type light auto repair 2117a Oil change, light auto repair and car wash. May include gasoline and other retail sales. P heavy auto repair 2117b Auto repair, paint and body shops. May include gasoline and other retail sales. P lumber yard and building materials; heating and plumbing equipment; heavy equipment 2126-
2128 Lumber yards and heavy building materials; heating and plumbing equipment retailers; for heating and plumbing contractors who install or service, use the appropriate construction category; construction equipment and vehicles; includes authorized storage (3650) P mail order or direct selling establishment 2144 Retailing other than through locations where shoppers physically visit P commercial, industrial or consumer machinery and equipment rental 2334-
2335 Rent or lease: 
a) office machinery and equipment; heavy equipment without operators used for construction, well-drilling; other machinery and equipment for uses such as manufacturing or telecommunications; operators not included (note: see 2337 for heavy equipment leasing) 
b) personal and household-type goods and a range of equipment geared toward consumers P heavy equipment rental 2337 Includes construction vehicles with gross weights exceeding 26,000 pounds and agricultural vehicles P Services to buildings and dwellings 2450 Provide pest control, janitorial services, landscaping, carpet cleaning, etc. (2451-2454) P   packing, crating 2455 P Mobile food services 2550 Prepare and serve meals and snacks for immediate consumption from motorized vehicles P Food service contractor and vending machine operators 2570
&
2580 Provide food services at institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations based on contracts. Retail merchandise through vending machines that they service P   linen and uniform supply 2623 P Parking lot and parking garage 2640 See district standards P Food and beverages 3110 Includes bakery and candy establishments that produce for later consumption; ice manufacturing; dairies; bottling plants; and peanut and coffee roasting P Tobacco manufacturing 3120 P Textiles, leather and leather substitute products 3130
&
3140 Textile mills, apparel manufacturers and canvas making; dying plants and dry cleaning plants; leather and leather substitutes such as rubber footwear (excluding leather tanning) P Wood products 3210 Except furniture P Paper and printing materials 3220 Manufactures paper and offer printing-related products P Furniture and related products 3230 Includes manufacture and repair of furniture, upholstery, mattresses, window blinds, window shades, awnings cabinets, fixtures P Chemicals, plastic and rubber products; non-metallic mineral products, primary metal manufacturing; transportation equipment manufacture 3320-
3340
&
3370 Manufacture inorganic chemicals, plastic or rubber products, adhesives, pharmaceuticals, wax products, insulation, bricks, ceramics, glass, cement, concrete, statuary, stone products, basic metal products, such as bars, rods, wires, and castings or finished products; produce equipment for transporting people and goods P Machinery , electrical equipment, appliance, and components manufacturing 3350
&
3360 Make machinery for particular applications, such as construction, ventilation, heating and cooling; manufacture computers, communication equipment, lighting equipment, batteries, motors, appliances, household goods and medical equipment P Transportation equipment and automobiles 3370 Produce equipment for transporting people and goods. Although transportation equipment is a type of machinery, assembly tends to be distinct from the production processes common in the machinery manufacturing subsector, so these establishments are classified separately. P Jewelry and silverware, sporting goods, toys, games and office supplies 3410-
3430 Jewelry, silverware, sporting goods, toys, musical instruments, office supplies, including inks. Excludes paper mills and businesses primarily engaged in on-premises retail sales P Signs 3440 Manufacturing of signs to be erected or installed (excludes banner printing) P Blacksmith Creation of objects from wrought iron steel, such as gates, railings, furniture, and other functional and decorative items P Wholesale Trade Establishment 3500 Normally operate from a warehouse or office, selling or arranging the purchase of goods to other businesses P Office and warehousing 3610 Storage of goods related to on-site office or retail use P Warehousing 3620 Storage of goods as the principal use; includes mini-warehouses, self-storage facilities and moving companies P Air transportation 4110 Provide transportation for passengers or cargo using aircraft, excludes air courier (see 4160) P   rail passenger transportation 4121 Passenger stations only P   local transit systems-bus, special needs, sightseeing, taxi and limousine services 4133-
4134
&
4136-
4137 Single-mode local and non-local transit systems other than rail; excludes transit stops, which are allowed in all districts. Includes sightseeing, taxi and limousine services P   school and employee bus transportation 4135 Maintain and dispatch buses and other motor vehicles to transport pupils or employees P   towing and other road and ground services 4138 Tow vehicles P Truck and freight transportation services 4140 Provide over-the-road transportation of cargo using motor vehicles and temporary storage P   retail courier and package delivery 4182 Retail courier, package drop-off and mail services P Courier and messenger services 4190 Provide air, surface, or combined courier delivery services of Parcels and messages (excludes retail package drop-off and local courier services P Publishing 4210
&
4221 Issue copies of works for which they usually possess copyright, including printing plants, motion picture and audio publishing. Includes newspaper publishing, greeting card printing and lithography P Motion pictures and sound recording 4220 Produce and distribute motion pictures and sound recordings P   radio and television broadcasting 4231,
4232
&
4241 Operate broadcasting studios and facilities for over the air, cable or satellite delivery of radio and television programs P   wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers P   telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P   Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees P   library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services P   news syndicate 4243 Supply information such as news reports, articles, pictures and features to the news media P   data processing and management, hosting and related services 4244 Web hosting, computer data storage, optical scanning, computer input preparation, microfilm imaging P Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. P Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   power generation 4315 C   electric substations 4316 P Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-
4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations P   recycling collection centers 4349 Drop-off facilities for the collection of recycled goods P Promoter of sports, performing arts, similar events and management services 5140-
5150 Organize, promote, and manage performances and events; agents representing artists, athletes and entertainers P Indoor auditorium or arena 5170 Indoor auditoriums, arenas, conference centers, or multipurpose facilities C Outdoor auditorium/arenas 5180 Outdoor arenas, stadiums and theaters C Fitness, recreational sports, gym, athletic club 5370 Operate fitness and recreational sports facilities or provide services for fitness or recreational sports teams, clubs, or individual activities C   fitness and recreational sports center 5371 Aerobic dance or exercise center, gymnasium, physical fitness center, health and athletic club, indoor handball, racquetball, volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities conducted inside a building C   shooting ranges, indoor 5375 C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions C Other Government Functions 6300 Other government owned establishments not classified elsewhere such as defense and national guard establishments C Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P Construction-Related Businesses 7000 Contractors who can build or demolish buildings, leveling, earthmoving, excavating, land drainage; should reflect the location of the establishment and not where it is performing its services. This category also includes the manufacture of industrial buildings, manufactured homes, modular homes, storage buildings and similar structures. Note that district standards may limit or preclude manufacturing, outdoor operations, outdoor storage of commercial vehicles and materials. P Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Commercial greenhouse production P Greenhouse - sales of products grown on premises 9142 P Greenhouse - sales of products and related accessory products 9143 P Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see standards in section 35.2-71.7) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes carnivals and circuses C flex space development 9956 See section 35.2-86 P corporate campus 9957 See section 35.2-87 P Billboards 9990 Billboards and other signs advertising goods and services not available on the site where the sign is located P  
Sec. 35.2-52.3. - I-2 District use standards. 
    The following standards apply in addition to the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  No use shall be allowed in this district unless listed above as a use permitted by right, as a permitted accessory use or as a use permitted by conditional use permit, provided, however, that use existing prior to December 13, 1988, may be enlarged or expanded, but not relocated, so long as it meets all other applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. Any such use shall not be subject to any of the limitations or other regulations prescribed for non-conforming uses elsewhere provided in this Zoning Ordinance. Dwellings and agricultural uses existing on December 13, 1988 shall be considered uses allowed by right. 
(b)  Office buildings shall be limited to those directly related to an industrial activity taking place on the site. 
(c)  Retail/wholesale display rooms for sales at industrial establishments of products manufactured on site and other products of the corporation shall not exceed 15 percent of the total floor area. 
(d)  Authorized warehousing and storage excludes the storage of combustibles prohibited by the fire code, sand yards, gravel yards, coal yards, railroad yards, automobile wrecking yards, or junkyards. 
(e)  For wholesale establishments with a building area of 5,000 square feet or more, a portion of the establishment may be used for retail display area, provided the retail sales: 
1.  Do not exceed 15 percent of the total building area, and 
2.  Are not used for second hand (consignment) merchandise or auction centers and do not require outdoor storage such as lumber yards, wholesale warehouses for the sale of motor vehicles, farm, or heavy construction equipment. 
(f)  Heliports and helistops shall meet all applicable federal, state and local regulations and be located at least one-half mile from any residential district. 
(g)  Outdoor storage shall be screened in accordance with section 35.2-63.9. 
Sec. 35.2-52.4. - I-2 District development standards. 
(a)  Dimensional Standards. Dimensional standards for the I-2 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-27. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(b)  Height regulations. Subject to the provisions of sections 35.2-61.2 (Height) and 35.2-61.3 (Setbacks), a building may be erected to any height, provided that the height of that portion of the building in excess of two times the width of the street on which it abuts shall be governed by the following regulations: For each foot such building or portion thereof is set back from any street, lot or minimum setback line, such building or portion thereof may be erected ten feet in height, provided that no street shall for this purpose be considered to be less than 40 feet nor more than 60 feet in width. If a building abuts on two or more streets, that street which permits the greater height shall be used as the basis of measurement. See section 35.2-61.2 (Height) for additional height requirements for lots abutting R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 districts. 
(c)  Setbacks. 
1.  In all instances where a lot in an industrial district (I-1, I-2 or I-3) is adjacent to a residential district (R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4): 
a.  A buffer shall be established between the districts in compliance with section 35.2-63.10. 
b.  There shall be required a one-hundred (100) foot setback. 
2.  Where a lot in an industrial district is on the same block as a residential district, the front and exterior side setback requirements of the residential district shall apply to the applicable industrial district. 
(d)  Development Patterns. The I-2 district development standards may be modified through the approval of a flex space or corporate campus development. 
Exhibit IV-27: Summary of I-2 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Cross-Reference Maximum height none (See paragraph (b) above) 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback from right-of-way (dimension A) none (See paragraph (c) above) 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) none (See paragraph (c) above) 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior (dimension C) none (See paragraph (c) above) 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width (dimension E) none 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot depth (dimension F) none 35.2-61.4 Minimum district size 2 acres Minimum average lot area per establishment none  
Sec. 35.2-53. - Heavy Industrial Districts (I-3). 
Sec. 35.2-53.1. - I-3 District purpose. 
    The I-3 district is intended to provide for industrial and other activities which produce the highest levels of objectionable characteristics permitted under federal and state air and water pollution regulations. Generally, the objective of this ordinance is to limit objectionable characteristics and any other objectionable characteristics to those which are not discernible beyond the boundary of the district. 
Sec. 35.2-53.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  The uses authorized by Exhibit IV-28 may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the district standards in this article, the site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  Uses may also be limited by overlay standards established in Article V of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  See Article III for the rules of interpreting authorized uses and Appendix A for a complete listing of land uses allowed in every zoning district. 
(d)  Uses designated "P" are permitted by right and uses designated "C" require issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Exhibit IV-28: Authorized Uses in I-3 District 
Land Use LBCS # Description Approval 
Type gasoline service serving fleet vehicles - no retail authorized 2116 Gas stations with or without convenience stores or food marts, excludes truck stops, light auto repair and heavy auto repair C   light auto repair 2117a Oil change, light auto repair and car wash. May include gasoline and other retail sales P   heavy auto repair 2117b Auto repair, paint and body shops. May include gasoline and other retail sales. P lumber yard and building materials; heating and plumbing equipment; heavy equipment 2126-
2128 Lumber yards and heavy building materials; heating and plumbing equipment retailers; for heating and plumbing contractors who install or service, use the appropriate construction category; construction equipment and vehicles; includes authorized storage (3650) P mail order or direct selling establishment 2144 Retailing other than through locations where shoppers physically visit P commercial, industrial or consumer machinery and equipment rental 2334-
2335 Rent or lease: 
a) office machinery and equipment; heavy equipment without operators used for construction, well-drilling; other machinery and equipment for uses such as manufacturing or telecommunications; operators not included (note: see 2337 for heavy equipment leasing) 
b) personal and household-type goods and a range of equipment geared toward consumers P heavy equipment rental 2337 Includes construction vehicles with gross weights exceeding 26,000 pounds and agricultural vehicles P Services to buildings and dwellings 2450 Provide pest control, janitorial services, landscaping, carpet cleaning, etc. (2451-2454) P   packing, crating 2455 P Mobile food services 2550 Prepare and serve meals and snacks for immediate consumption from motorized vehicles P Food service contractor and vending machine operators 2570
&
2580 Provide food services at institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations based on contracts. Retail merchandise through vending machines that they service P   linen and uniform supply 2623 P Parking lot and parking garage 2640 See district standards P Food and beverages 3110 Includes bakery and candy establishments that produce for later consumption; ice manufacturing; dairies; bottling plants; and peanut and coffee roasting P Tobacco manufacturing 3120 P Textiles, leather and leather substitute products 3130
&
3140 Textile mills, apparel manufacturers and canvas making; dying plants and dry cleaning plants; leather and leather substitutes such as rubber footwear (excluding leather tanning) P Wood products 3210 Except furniture P Paper and printing materials 3220 Manufactures paper and offer printing-related products P Furniture and related products 3230 Includes manufacture and repair of furniture, upholstery, mattresses, window blinds, window shades, awnings cabinets, fixtures P liquid petroleum gas storage/sales 3311 This category addresses wholesale services and does not apply to incidental sales for home use P Chemicals, plastic and rubber products; non-metallic mineral products, primary metal manufacturing; transportation equipment manufacture 3320-
3340
&
3370 Manufacture inorganic chemicals, plastic or rubber products, adhesives, pharmaceuticals, wax products, insulation, bricks, ceramics, glass, cement, concrete, statuary, stone products, basic metal products, such as bars, rods, wires, and castings or finished products; produce equipment for transporting people and goods P Machinery, electrical equipment, appliance, and components manufacturing 3350
&
3360 Make machinery for particular applications, such as construction, ventilation, heating and cooling; manufacture computers, communication equipment, lighting equipment, batteries, motors, appliances, household goods and medical equipment P Transportation equipment and automobiles 3370 Produce equipment for transporting people and goods. Although transportation equipment is a type of machinery, assembly tends to be distinct from the production processes common in the machinery manufacturing subsector, so these establishments are classified separately. P Jewelry and silverware, sporting goods, toys, games and office supplies 3410-
3430 Jewelry, silverware, sporting goods, toys, musical instruments, office supplies, including inks. Excludes paper mills and businesses primarily engaged in on-premises retail sales P Signs 3440 Manufacturing of signs to be erected or installed (excludes banner printing) P Blacksmith Creation of objects from wrought iron steel, such as gates, railings, furniture, and other functional and decorative items P Wholesale Trade Establishment 3500 Normally operate from a warehouse or office, selling or arranging the purchase of goods to other businesses P Office and warehousing 3610 Storage of goods related to on-site office or retail use P Warehousing 3620 Storage of goods as the principal use; includes mini-warehouses, self-storage facilities and moving companies P Underground Petroleum Storage 3640 An area used for bulk storage of oil and other petrochemicals in underground tanks P Air transportation 4110 Provide transportation for passengers or cargo using aircraft, excludes air courier (see 4160) P   rail passenger transportation 4121 Passenger stations only P   local transit systems-bus, special needs, sightseeing, taxi and limousine services 4133-
4134
&
4136-
4137 Single-mode local and non-local transit systems other than rail; excludes transit stops, which are allowed in all districts. Includes sightseeing, taxi and limousine services P   school and employee bus transportation 4135 Maintain and dispatch buses and other motor vehicles to transport pupils or employees P   towing and other road and ground services 4138 Tow vehicles P Truck and freight transportation services 4140 Provide over-the-road transportation of cargo using motor vehicles and temporary storage P   retail courier and package delivery 4182 Retail courier, package drop-off and mail services P Courier and messenger services 4190 Provide air, surface, or combined courier delivery services of Parcels and messages (excludes retail package drop-off and local courier services P Publishing 4210
&
4221 Issue copies of works for which they usually possess copyright, including printing plants, motion picture and audio publishing. Includes newspaper publishing, greeting card printing and lithography P Motion pictures and sound recording 4220 Produce and distribute motion pictures and sound recordings P   radio and television broadcasting 4231,
4232
&
4241 Operate broadcasting studios and facilities for over the air, cable or satellite delivery of radio and television programs P   wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers P   telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P   Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees P   library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services P   news syndicate 4243 Supply information such as news reports, articles, pictures and features to the news media P   data processing and management, hosting and related services 4244 Web hosting, computer data storage, optical scanning, computer input preparation, microfilm imaging P Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. P Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P   power generation 4315 C   electric substations 4316 P Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-
4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations P Wastewater treatment plants 4348 C   solid waste collection, combustion, landfills or separation/sorting of recyclable materials from non-hazardous waste streams 4343-
4347 Collect or haul hazardous waste, non-hazardous waste, or recyclable materials, operate waste transfer stations; landfill, incineration or composing of non-hazardous solid waste, recycling facilities; septic tank installation and maintenance C   recycling collection centers 4349 Drop-off facilities for the collection of recycled goods P Indoor auditorium or arena 5170 Indoor auditoriums, arenas, conference centers, or multipurpose facilities C   Outdoor auditorium/arenas 5180 Outdoor arenas, stadiums and theaters C   Fitness, recreational sports, gym, athletic club 5370 Operate fitness and recreational sports facilities or provide services for fitness or recreational sports teams, clubs, or individual activities Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions C Other Government Functions 6300 Other government owned establishments not classified elsewhere such as defense and national guard establishments C Construction-Related Businesses 7000 Contractors who can build or demolish buildings, leveling, earthmoving, excavating, land drainage; should reflect the location of the establishment and not where it is performing its services. This category also includes the manufacture of industrial buildings, manufactured homes, modular homes, storage buildings and similar structures. Note that district standards may limit or preclude manufacturing, outdoor operations, outdoor storage of commercial vehicles and materials. P Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Commercial greenhouse production P Greenhouse - sales of products grown on premises 9142 P Greenhouse - sales of products and related accessory products 9143 P Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see standards in section 35.2-71.7) P tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes temporary carnivals and circuses sponsored by non-profit organizations P Billboards 9990 Billboards and other signs advertising goods and services not available on the premises of the sign P  
Sec. 35.2-53.3. - I-3 District Use Standards. 
    The following standards apply in addition to the standards for specific uses established in Article VII: 
(a)  No use shall be allowed in this district unless listed or defined above as a use permitted by right, as a permitted accessory use or as a use permitted by conditional use permit, provided, however, that any use existing prior to December 13, 1988, may be enlarged or expanded, but not relocated, so long as it meets all other applicable requirements of this Article. Any such use shall not be subject to any of the limitations or other regulations prescribed for non-conforming uses elsewhere provided in this Article. Dwellings and agricultural uses existing on December 13, 1988 shall be considered uses allowed by right. 
(b)  Uses in LBCS Code 3310 (chemicals, plastics and rubber products) exclude the manufacture of sulphurous, sulfuric, nitric, picric, hydrochloric or other corrosive acids and the manufacture of bleaching powder, ammonia or chlorine. 
(c)  Uses in LBCS Code 3320 (Chemicals, plastic and rubber products) include the production of and manufacture using low explosives, but exclude the production or manufacture using high explosives as defined in Article 11 of this zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Uses in LBCS Code 3330 exclude the manufacture of lime, gypsum, plaster or plaster of paris. 
(e)  Residential uses, including those of an institutional nature - institutional residential uses being those associated with churches or religious organizations, schools, hospitals, health or adult care facilities are limited to (1) residences of bona fide caretakers and their families, and (2) any residence constructed prior to and occupied as a residence since December 12, 1978. The limitations of Article IX, non-conforming uses, notwithstanding, such residences, in the event they are damaged or destroyed due to fire or other unforeseen circumstances (but not including neglect), may be rebuilt in their original location with substantially the same height and exterior dimensions, provided that they have frontage on an improved City street and that reconstruction is completed to the point that a new Certificate of Occupancy is issued within 24 months from the date of damage or destruction. 
(f)  No use shall be allowed that creates conditions of smoke, fumes, noise, odors or dust detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(g)  Retail/wholesale display rooms for sales at industrial establishments shall be limited to products manufactured on site and other products of the corporation provided the display area shall not exceed 15 percent of the total floor area. 
(h)  Food service facilities located within a building housing a permitted use and serving one or a group of permitted uses are authorized in the I-3 zoning district. 
Sec. 35.2-53.4. - I-3 District development standards. 
(a)  Dimensional Standards. Dimensional standards for the I-3 district are summarized in Exhibit IV-29. Section cross-references identify the location of additional dimensional standards and rules for their application. The standards in this section apply in addition to the site development standards of Article VI and site development standards applicable to specific uses established in Article VII. 
(b)  Height regulations. Subject to the provisions of sections 35.2-61.2 (Height) and 35.2-61.3 (Setbacks), a building may be erected to any height, provided that the height of that portion of the building in excess of two times the width of the street on which it abuts shall be governed by the following regulations: For each foot such building or portion thereof is set back from any street, lot or minimum setback line, such building or portion thereof may be erected ten feet in height, provided that no street shall for this purpose be considered to be less than 40 feet nor more than 60 feet in width. If a building abuts on two or more streets, that street which permits the greater height shall be used as the basis of measurement. 
(c)  Setbacks. 
1.  In all instances where a lot in an industrial district (I-1, I-2 or I-3) is adjacent to a residential district (R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4): 
a.  A buffer shall be established between the districts in compliance with section 35.2-63.10. 
b.  There shall be required a one-hundred (100) foot setback. 
2.  Where a lot in an industrial district is on the same block as a residential district, the front and exterior side setback requirements of the residential district shall apply to the applicable industrial district. 
(d)  Height. See section 35.2-61.2 (Height) for additional height requirements for lots abutting R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 districts. 
(e)  Planned Unit Developments. The I-3 district development standards may be modified through a planned unit development, which is approved through the conditional use permit approval process. 
Exhibit IV-29: Summary of I-3 Development Standards 
Design Element Standards Cross-Reference Maximum height none (See paragraph (b) above) 35.2-61.2 Minimum front setback from right-of-way (dimension A) none (See paragraph (c) above) 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, interior (dimension B) none (See paragraph (c) above) 35.2-61.3 Minimum side setback, exterior (dimension C) none (See paragraph (c) above) 35.2-61.3 Minimum rear setback (dimension D) none 35.2-61.3 Minimum lot width (dimension E) none 35.2-61.4 Minimum lot depth (dimension F) none 35.2-61.4 Minimum district size 2 acres Minimum average lot area per establishment none  
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 35.2-54. - Reserved. 
Sec. 35.2-55. - Fifth Street Revitalization Corridor Overlay District (FSC). 
Sec. 35.2-55.1. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to: 
(a)  Protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public; 
(b)  Enhance the visual appearance of the corridor; to protect and promote the vision and goals of the Fifth Street Corridor Master Plan; 
(c)  Protect and promote positive appearance, character and community values by encouraging pedestrian and mixed use oriented uses along the corridor that serve the needs of the surrounding neighborhoods; 
(d)  Promote responsible commercial development; 
(e)  Encourage neighborhood stabilization, expansion and infill; 
(f)  Reduce the number of vacant and deteriorated structures in the corridor; 
(g)  Encourage designs that produce a desirable relationship between individual sites, multiple modes of transportation and the adjacent areas; and 
(h)  Promote the corridor as a link between the Downtown and Midtown areas of the City. 
Sec. 35.2-55.2. - Establishment of district. 
    The Fifth Street Revitalization Corridor Overlay District shall be in addition to and shall overlay all other zoning districts where it is applied so that any parcel of land lying in the Fifth Street Revitalization Corridor Overlay shall also lie within one or more of the other zoning districts provided by this ordinance. The effect shall be the creation of a new zoning district consisting of the regulations and requirements of both the underlying district and the Fifth Street Corridor Overlay District. 
Sec. 35.2-55.3. - FSC District boundaries. 
    The Fifth Street Revitalization Corridor Overlay District boundaries are established from the intersection of Fifth Street to the Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial Bridge, encompassing two blocks north and south of Fifth Street, excluding the Court House Hill Historic District, the Garland Hill Historic District, the Old City Cemetery, and one-half of a block bounded by Sixth Street, Seventh Street and Church Street. 
Sec. 35.2-55.4 - Relationship between district standards. 
    Where the standards of the Fifth Street Revitalization Corridor Overlay District and the underlying district(s) differ, the Fifth Street Revitalization Corridor standards shall apply except in the instance of individually designated historic properties. 
Sec. 35.2-55.5. - Authorized uses. 
    The uses authorized for the applicable underlying zoning districts may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the zoning district standards of Article III and this article, site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations, except that: residential uses fronting Fifth Street shall require a conditional use permit (CUP) unless they are part of a mixed use development. 
Sec. 35.2-55.6. - FSC district development standards. 
    Except as specifically noted herein, the following standards shall apply in addition to any of the development standards applicable in the underlying zoning district: 
(a)  Off-street parking requirements. The minimum off-street parking requirements for the Fifth Street Revitalization Corridor shall not apply because of the impracticability of providing such parking on small lots. However, developers are strongly encouraged to provide off-street parking in areas where on-street parking is not available. 
(b)  Location of off-street parking facilities. Where provided, off-street parking facilities shall be located to the sides and rear of buildings. Means of ingress and egress to off-street parking facilities shall be from side streets only and shall not be from Fifth Street unless topography or other conditions peculiar to the site would prohibit a means of ingress and egress from the side street (see Exhibit V-1). 
Exhibit V-1: FSC Permitted/Not Permitted Parking Locations 

(c)  Internal vehicular circulation. Sites fronting Fifth Street shall be designed to achieve direct and convenient vehicular access between adjacent properties. The owner of a lot providing for internal vehicular circulation shall make adequate provision by dedication, easements, covenants, restrictions, or other legal instruments for ensuring that internal vehicular circulation is provided for and maintained consistent with the regulations and intent of this section. 
(d)  Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be controlled so that no direct illumination will occur beyond the property line. In instances where buildings have a zero foot setback, exterior lighting shall be controlled so that no direct illumination occurs beyond the public sidewalk. 
(e)  Utilities. All utilities shall be located underground. 
(f)  Architectural treatment. Buildings fronting or visible from Fifth Street are encouraged to comply with the Commercial Historic District Guidelines. Additionally: 
1.  No portion of a building constructed of unadorned cinderblock, corrugated and/or sheet metal shall be visible from any adjoining residential district, historic district or public right-of-way. 
2.  Buildings fronting on Fifth Street shall be designed to utilize building materials that are compatible with the Fifth Street Revitalization Corridor Overlay District such as stone, brick, stucco, or wood. 
3.  Vegetative buffering as described in section 35.2-63.10 (Buffering) of this ordinance placed along that portion of the building not otherwise meeting the requirements of architectural treatment will be deemed sufficient treatment for the purposes of this section. 
4.  Front porches are encouraged for all newly constructed or renovated residential units. 
(g)  Commercial districts adjacent to residential districts. In all instances where a commercial district is adjacent to a residential district, there shall be established in the commercial district a screened yard between the two districts. Screening may be provided according to the regulations of section 35.2-63.10 (Buffering) of this ordinance or by providing a screening fence, wall or any combination of landscaping, fence or wall adequate to screen the commercial use as approved by the City Planner. 
(h)  Building heights, lot area, setbacks and lot coverage. The standards for lot area, building heights, setbacks and lot coverage established in Exhibit V-2 supersede the corresponding standards of the underlying zoning district. 
Exhibit V-2: Fifth Street Revitalization Corridor Overlay
Standards for Building Height, Lot Area, Setback and Lot Coverage 
Design Element Underlying District Residential Districts Business Districts Minimum/maximum height not applicable 2-stories/4-stories Minimum lot area none none Maximum front setback from right-of-way 15' 15' Minimum side setback, interior 3' 0' Minimum side setback, street side 15' 0' Minimum rear setback 5' 10' Maximum lot coverage none none  
Sec. 35.2-56. - Scenic Corridor Overlay District (SC). 
Sec. 35.2-56.1. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to: 
(a)  Protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public; 
(b)  Enhance the visual appearance of the corridor; 
(c)  Protect and promote the character and vistas, and prevent unnecessary clutter and congestion along the corridor and the surrounding neighborhoods. 
Sec. 35.2-56.2. - Establishment of districts. 
    The Scenic Corridor Overlay District shall be in addition to and shall overlay all other zoning districts where it is applied so that any parcel of land lying in the scenic corridor overlay district shall also lie within one or more of the other zoning districts provided by this ordinance. The effect shall be the creation of new zoning districts consisting of the regulations and requirements of both the underlying district(s) and the Scenic Corridor Overlay District. 
Sec. 35.2-56.3. - SC District boundaries. 
    The Scenic Corridor Overlay District boundaries shall be as specified by City Council by ordinance as shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
Sec. 35.2-56.4. - Relationship between district standards. 
    Where the standards of the Scenic Corridor Overlay District and the underlying district(s) differ, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
Sec. 35.2-56.5. - Exemption from SC District standards. 
    Except as specifically noted, single-household, two-household residential uses, planned unit developments, cluster commercial developments, and manufactured home parks shall not be subject to the standards of the Scenic Corridor Overlay District due to the stricter standards applicable to those uses. However, at such time that a single-household, two-household residential use, planned unit development, cluster commercial development or manufactured home use is to be converted to another use, it will be subject to the standards of the Scenic Corridor Overlay District. Townhouse developments will be subject to the standards of the Scenic Corridor Overlay District. 
Sec. 35.2-56.6. - Authorized uses. 
    The uses authorized for the applicable underlying zoning districts may be established in accordance with the procedures established in Article II, the zoning district standards of Article III and this article, site development standards established in Article VI and specific use standards established in Article VII, as well as other applicable rules and regulations. 
Sec. 35.2-56.7. - SC District development standards. 
    Except as specifically noted herein, the following standards shall apply in addition to any of the development standards applicable in the underlying zoning district: 
(a)  Setbacks. The minimum building and parking setbacks are established at 40 feet for lots abutting the public street on which the scenic corridor overlay district is centered. This setback shall be measured from the right-of-way line shared by the lot and the public street on which the scenic corridor overlay district is centered. 
(b)  Utilities. All utilities shall be located underground. 
(c)  Building Bulk Softening. There shall be a building bulk softening effect created by landscaping between a structure and a limited access highway. Landscaping shall be at the outer boundaries and in the required setbacks and shall be provided except where driveways or other openings are required. Plantings shall be in an irregular (or "staggered") line. Clustering of plant and tree species shall be required. 
1.  For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall be applicable: 
a.  Large deciduous tree. A large deciduous tree shall be of a species having an average minimum mature crown spread of greater than 30 feet. A minimum caliper of at least two and one-half inches at the time of planting shall be required. 
b.  Small deciduous tree. A small deciduous tree shall be of a species having an average minimum mature crown spread of greater than 12 feet. A minimum caliper of at least one and three-fourths inches at the time of planting shall be required. 
c.  Evergreen trees. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of at least six feet at the time of planting. 
d.  Medium shrubs. Shrubs and hedge forms shall have a minimum height of at least two feet at the time of planting. 
2.  For buildings 12 feet or less in height (eave height). 
a.  At least one small deciduous tree for each 50 linear feet of building and at least one evergreen tree for each 30 linear feet shall be planted. 
b.  At least one medium shrub for each 20 linear feet shall be planted. (In lieu of the required shrubbery, a landscaped earthen berm can be used. Generally, the earthen berm shall have a varying width and height, curvilinear in form, providing a gentle tie-in with the existing grade. The minimum height shall be three feet.) 
3.  For buildings greater than 12 feet in height (eave height). 
a.  At least one large deciduous tree for each 50 linear feet and at least one evergreen tree for each 30 linear feet shall be planted. 
b.  At least one small deciduous tree for each 50 linear feet shall be planted. 
c.  At least one medium shrub for each 20 linear feet shall be planted. (In lieu of the required shrubbery, a landscaped earthen berm can be used. Generally, the earthen berm shall have a varying width and height, curvilinear in form, providing a gentle tie-in with the existing grade. The minimum height shall be three feet.) 
(d)  Architectural Treatment. 
1.  No portion of a building constructed of unadorned cinderblock or corrugated and/or sheet metal shall be visible from any adjoining single-household or two-household residential district or public right-of-way. 
2.  Buildings shall be designed to use, to the greatest extent feasible, building materials that are compatible with the Scenic Corridor Overlay District environment, such as rock, stone, brick and wood. 
3.  Vegetative buffering as provided in section 35.2-63.10, placed along that portion of a building not otherwise meeting the requirements of architectural treatment, will be deemed sufficient treatment for the purposes of this section. 
(e)  Signs. 
1.  Prohibited signs. The following types of signs shall be prohibited within the Scenic Corridor Overlay District: 
a.  Billboards; 
b.  Signs painted on building or premise; 
c.  Changeable copy signs; 
d.  Pennants, non-governmental flags, non-company/corporate logo flags, banners; 
e.  Roof signs (above line of roof); 
f.  Signs that contain an off-site commercial motif not incidental to the use of the site (soda bottles, hamburgers, figures, etc.) or other outdoor commercial displays; and 
g.  Signs that are not of a standard geometric shape or with a backing that is not of a standard geometric shape. 
2.  Permitted signs. A unified system of signage and graphics shall be encouraged for each individual development. Signage concepts should be considered during the design of buildings. Size, height, location, material, and color should strongly relate to building and site design. 
a.  Each development shall be permitted one detached free standing sign identifying the development and announcing only the name or location of the development and business names of tenants therein. One logo per sign shall be permitted. All tenant signs (individual signs for businesses in a development) shall be uniform in letter size and color. 
b.  For each independent development within an industrial park one identification sign shall be permitted on each fronting public street. 
c.  Directional signs indicating location of truck entrances, employee parking, shipping and receiving, and similar activities; provided that all such signs are located on the property of the business and no such signs exceed four (4) square feet in area. Directional signs shall contain no advertising. 
d.  The backing and support material of the face sign shall be of the same material as of that portion of the building which faces any adjoining single-household or two-household residential district or public right-of-way, or of a natural material (such as rock, stone, brick, wood). 
e.  Other signs such as real estate, political, etc., not specifically addressed in the Scenic Corridor Overlay District Standards are to conform to the regulations of the underlying districts. 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-57. - Airport Safety Overlay District (AS). 
Sec. 35.2-57.1. - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to protect the health, safety and welfare of residents and visitors to the City of Lynchburg by regulating and restricting the height of structures and objects in the vicinity of the airports and the navigable airspace in the City of Lynchburg by: 
(a)  Creating the appropriate zones and establishing boundaries thereof; 
(b)  Providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones; 
(c)  Defining certain terms used herein; 
(d)  Providing for enforcement; 
(e)  Imposing penalties; and 
(f)  Satisfying the requirements of the General Assembly of Virginia regarding airport safety zoning. 
Sec. 35.2-57.2. - Authority and findings. 
    This section is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 22 of Title 15.2, and specifically to satisfy the requirements of Section 15.2-2294 of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended and the Federal Aviation Administration. It is hereby found that an obstruction into an airport safety zone has the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of the airports and residents in the City of Lynchburg; and that an obstruction may reduce the size of areas available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the airports and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared that: 
(a)  In the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare, it is necessary to prevent the creation or establishment of obstructions that are hazards to air navigation; 
(b)  The creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential for being a public nuisance and may injure the area served by the airports; 
(c)  The prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, without compensation to the property owner. 
Sec. 35.2-57.3. - Airport safety zones. 
(a)  Safety Zones Established. In order to carry out the provisions of this section, there are hereby established certain zones which include all of the area and airspace of the City of Lynchburg lying equal to and above the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to the Lynchburg Regional Airport and Falwell Airport. These zones are established as overlay zones, superimposed over the existing base zones, being more specifically zones of airspace that do not affect the uses and activities of the base zones except as provided for in sections 35.2-57.3. and 35.2-57.4. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the most restrictive height limitation. These zones are as follows: 
1.  airport zone: a zone that is centered about the runway and primary surface, with the floor set by the horizontal surface. 
2.  approach zone: a zone that extends away from the runway ends along the extended runway centerline, with the floor set by the approach surfaces. 
3.  transitional zone: a zone that fans away perpendicular to the runway centerline and approach surfaces, with the floor set by the transitional surfaces. 
4.  conical zone: a zone that circles around the periphery of and outward from the horizontal surface, with the floor set by the conical surface. 
(b)  Source for Safety Zones. The source and the specific geometric design standards for these zones are to be found in Part 77.25, 77.28, and 77.29, subchapter E (Airspace), of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or in successor federal regulations. The boundaries of such zones are shown on maps filed and maintained in the same manner provided for in Article III of this Zoning Ordinance for other Zoning Maps. 
Sec. 35.2-57.4. - Airport safety zone height limitations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, in any zone created by this section no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained to a height so as to penetrate any portion of any referenced surface, also known as the floor, of any zone provided for in section 35.2-57.3. 
(b)  The height restrictions, or floors, for the individual zones shall be those planes delineated as surfaces in Part 77.25, 77.28, and 77.29, Subchapter E (Airspace), of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or in successor federal regulations. 
(c)  For any proposed construction or activity that may penetrate any referenced surface, certification of the elevation shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator by a Virginia registered engineer or surveyor. 
(d)  Any such proposed structure or activity within the airport safety zone shall meet the standards and requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration or the Virginia Department of Aviation. The Zoning Administrator shall refer the plans for such a proposed structure to the applicable agency for a report as to the possible interference with flight operations, if the certificate of elevation indicates that the structure will exceed the standards listed in this section. The inspections division shall obtain certification from the Virginia Department of Aviation that the proposed obstruction will or will not be considered a hazard to air navigation by that agency. 
Sec. 35.2-57.5. - Non-conforming uses. 
(a)  Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section and section 35.2-57.6(b), the regulations prescribed by this section shall not require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any structure or vegetation not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this section, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a legal non-conforming use. Nothing contained in this section shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to December 12, 1978, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provision of paragraph (a) of this section, the owner of any existing legal non-conforming structure or vegetation is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of whatever markers and lights deemed necessary by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Virginia Department of Aviation. These markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the airport owners, and not the owner of the non-conforming obstruction. 
Sec. 35.2-57.6. - Building permits. 
(a)  Except as provided in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this section, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established in any zone created by this section unless a building permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a building permit shall indicate the purpose for which desired and with sufficient geometric specificity to determine whether the resulting structure would conform to the regulations prescribed in this section. 
(b)  No building permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or allow a non-conforming use or structure to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this section or any amendments thereto other than with relief as provided for in this section. 
(c)  Whenever the Zoning Administrator determines that a non-conforming structure has been abandoned for two or more years, or greater than 50 percent of the value of the structure has been destroyed, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no building permit shall be granted that would enable such structure to be rebuilt, reconstructed, or otherwise refurbished so as to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations contained in this section, except with the relief as provided for in section 35.2-91.4 (Non-Conforming Signs). The owner of any residential or commercial building that is damaged or destroyed by a natural disaster or other act of God may repair, rebuild, or replace such building even if the building is damaged by more than 50 percent of its value. 
(d)  The Zoning Administrator may condition approval of a building permit on the agreement by the owner and/or operator of the structure and land to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be deemed necessary by the Federal Aviation Administration, the Virginia Department of Aviation, or the Zoning Administrator. 
(e)  The owner of any proposed obstruction is hereby required to post a bond, in such an amount as may be deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator, to cover the expense of removal of such obstruction as stipulated in paragraph (c) of this section. This bond shall carry with the ownership of the land or structure. 
(f)  When any structure erected after the enactment of this section exceeds the height listed in the building permit, the owner/operator shall be legally and financially responsible for removing such obstruction. 
(g)  No use shall be established that the Zoning Administrator finds to be inconsistent with the provisions of this section 35.2-57 et seq. 
Sec. 35.2-57.7. - Enforcement. 
    The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce the regulations prescribed in this section, unless otherwise stated, and shall carry out and effectuate this section, including the action of injunction, prosecution and other available means pursuant to section 35.2-102 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-57.8. - Penalties. 
    Penalties for violations of the provisions of this section 35.2-57 et seq. shall be established as provided in section 35.2-102 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-57.9. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this section and any other regulations applicable to the same subject, where the conflict is with respect to the height of obstructions, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern. 
Sec. 35.2-57.10. - Severability. 
    Should any portion or provision of this section be held by any court to be unconstitutional or invalid, that decision shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole, or any part of the section other than the part held to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Sec. 35.2-58. - Historic Districts. 
Sec. 35.2-58.1. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of the historic districts are to: 
(a)  Promote the public welfare through the creation of historic districts for the protection and preservation of historic buildings, structures, places, archaeological sites, and areas of historic interest (as a class of structural and environmental types) within the City of Lynchburg; 
(b)  Promote the development and maintenance of appropriate settings and environment for such buildings, structures, places and areas as provided by Section 15.2-2306 of the Code of Virginia, as amended; 
(c)  Stabilize and improve property values in the historic districts; 
(d)  Encourage new buildings and developments that will be architecturally compatible with existing historic landmarks, buildings and structures; 
(e)  Prevent the encroachment of additions or new buildings and structures that are architecturally incongruous with the environs of the historic districts; 
(f)  Promote local historic preservation efforts, and encourage the identification and nomination of qualified historic properties and districts to the National Register of Historic Places and the Virginia Landmarks Register; and 
(g)  Provide an educational resource and to foster a sense of pride in our heritage for succeeding generations, that they may appreciate and understand the history of our culture. 
Sec. 35.2-58.2. - Historic Overlay Districts. 
(a)  City Council of the City of Lynchburg has adopted criteria for determination of landmarks, buildings, or structures to be designated as being historically significant. Any changes to said criteria shall be made by City Council after receiving recommendations from the HPC. 
(b)  To execute the purposes and objectives of this ordinance, there may be created in the City districts to be known as "Historic Districts" in addition to any existing historic districts. A historic district may be a part or all of a neighborhood, site, structure or a combination thereof. The boundaries of such districts shall be as specified by City Council by ordinance as shown on the Official Zoning Map. The boundaries of such districts shall be shown on maps, which shall be filed and maintained in the City's GIS. 
(c)  The procedure to be followed in establishing historic districts is specified in section 35.2-11 (Applications Requiring Public Hearings Before City Council) of this Zoning Ordinance. However, due to the unique nature of a historic district designation relative to traditional zoning, consideration of designating an area as a historic district may be exempted by the City from the regulations requiring posting of notices cited in section 35.2-11 with the exception of the public hearing requirements to appear in the local newspaper as specified in section 35.2-10.14 (Notice) of this Zoning Ordinance. The City may waive posting of a sign giving notice of intent to rezone. In the case of historic district consideration, in addition to other requirements, a fee may be required from the petitioner in the amount set forth in the fee schedule adopted by City Council to cover the cost of publishing legal notices for hearings before the HPC, the Planning Commission and the City Council. 
(d)  A notice that a building may be designated as a "historic district" shall be mailed in accordance with section 35.2-10.14(d)2, which notice shall contain the following information: the location and street address; the reason why the building and/or the district in which it is proposed to be located is deemed to be of historic or architectural interest; a copy of the pertinent portions of this ordinance restricting the altering or razing of said building; the place, time and date of the public hearing of the HPC. 
(e)  The HPC, the Planning Commission, City Council, or the owner of any landmark, building, or structure in the City of Lynchburg, including those listed on the Virginia Landmarks Register or the National Register of Historic Places, may make a written request of the HPC for the consideration of recommending the designation of such landmarks, buildings, or structures as a historic district. The HPC shall recommend the requested addition if, after a public hearing, it considers said building to be of historic, architectural, or cultural merit. 
(f)  The HPC, the Planning Commission, City Council, the owner or owners of any landmark, building or structure located within a historic district may make a written request of the HPC for the consideration of recommending the removal of the historic district designation from such landmark, building, or structure. Procedure for notification of a public hearing to remove a designation as a historic district shall be the same as the procedure to establish such designation. 
Sec. 35.2-58.3. - Historic marker. 
    The HPC shall designate an appropriate marker and may permit each owner of a historic landmark, building or structure to display the marker in an appropriate manner. In addition, the HPC may at its discretion design and display similar markers denoting "historic districts." The costs of making, inscribing, installing and maintaining such markers shall be paid for by the City of Lynchburg. The costs of making, inscribing, installing and maintaining private individual markers shall be paid for by the property owner. 
Sec. 35.2-58.4. - Unauthorized display. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display, without the authorization of the HPC, a marker or any imitation thereof as provided for in section 35.2-58.3. 
Sec. 35.2-58.5. - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
    No building or structure, including signs, and including non-contributing buildings and structures and signs, shall be erected, reconstructed, restored, demolished, or altered in any way that affects the external appearance of the building or structure, including such items as roofs, chimneys, fences, and color changes, unless the same is approved as being architecturally compatible with historic landmarks, buildings, or structures therein through the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, also referred to as a COA, by the Historic Preservation Commission (HPC), the City Planner or by City Council in accordance with section 35.2-13. 
Sec. 35.2-58.6. - Conflict with statutes, local ordinances or regulations. 
    Whenever the decisions made under the authority of the Historic District regulations pursuant to section 35.2-13 et seq. require a greater width or size of setbacks, courts or other open spaces, require a lower height of building or fewer stories, require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied or impose other higher standards than are required in any other statute or local ordinance or regulation, the requirements made pursuant to the Historic District regulations shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or local ordinance or regulation require a greater width or size of setbacks, courts or other open spaces, require a lower height of building or a less number of stories, require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied or impose other higher standards than are required by the Historic District regulations, the provisions of such statute or local ordinance or regulation shall govern. 
Sec. 35.2-58.7. - Assistance of city administration. 
    The departments, bureaus, divisions, boards, commissions, agencies, and other offices of the City government shall furnish to the HPC such available information and render it appropriate service as may be required for the exercise of the powers and performance of the duties and functions of the HPC. All City departments and agencies responsible for historic public buildings, monuments, districts, and places shall submit a COA application to demolish, move, or alter said structures or places to the HPC for review and recommendation. No certificate of appropriateness is required when the demolition of a structure is ordered by the Building Official pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
Sec. 35.2-58.8. - Acquisition of historic real property. 
    The HPC may recommend to City Council that the City acquire in any legal manner any historic area, landmark, building or structure, land pertaining thereto, or any estate or interest therein which, in the opinion of the HPC, should be acquired, preserved and maintained for the use, observation, education, pleasure and welfare of the people. 
Sec. 35.2-58.9. - Injunctions. 
    Wherever any person has engaged in or is about to engage in any act or practice that constitutes or will constitute a violation of this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator may make application to the circuit court for an order enjoining such act or practice, or requiring such person to refrain from such prospective violation, or to remedy such violations by restoring the affected property to its previous condition. Upon proof by the Zoning Administrator that such person has engaged in or is about to engage in any such act or practice, a temporary or permanent injunction, restraining order or other appropriate order shall be granted to the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 35.2-58.10. - Penalties. 
    For violations and penalties, see section 35.2-102 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-58.11. - Severability. 
    If any provision of these Historic District Regulations or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this ordinance and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
Sec. 35.2-59. - Flood Hazard Districts. 
Sec. 35.2-59.1. - Purpose. 
    The flood hazard districts (floodway districts (FW), floodway fringe districts (FF), and approximated flood plain districts (AFP)) are to provide primarily for the preservation and protection of lives and property in the flood plain areas of the City as well as to satisfy the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) requirements for full compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) to: 
(a)  Protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Prevent the loss of life and excess damage to property in flood hazard areas. 
(c)  Promote health and safe use of flood plains and avoid disruption of commerce and industry, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and the impairment of the tax base. 
(d)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood. 
(e)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve such uses, shall be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
Sec. 35.2-59.2. - Boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the flood zoning districts will be shown on the Official Zoning Map, as they become available, and shall be determined by the water surface profiles, and, in the event of conflict between the boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map and the water surface profiles, the water surface profiles shall control. Applicants for a building permit must ensure to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator or the Board of Zoning Appeals, as applicable that the building site is not in a floodplain. 
(b)  The building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other development in Zone A comply with applicable sections of this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-59.3. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
Sec. 35.2-59.4. - Establishment of flood hazard zoning districts. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of this ordinance are hereby divided into four sections: floodway districts (FW), floodway fringe districts (FF), approximated flood plain districts (AFP), and special floodplain districts (SFD). 
(b)  The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the flood insurance study (FIS) for the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Federal Insurance Administration, as amended. Any changes in the delineation are subject to the prior approval of the federal insurance administrator. 
1.  The floodway district is delineated for purposes of this ordinance using the criteria that a certain area within the flood plain must be capable of carrying the waters of the 100-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation. The areas included in this district are specifically defined in Table 2 of the above-referenced flood insurance study and shown on the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM). 
2.  The flood-fringe district shall be that area of the 100-year flood plain not included in the floodway district. The basis for the outermost boundary of this district shall be the 100-year flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the above-referenced flood insurance study and as shown on the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and subsequent revisions. 
3.  The approximated flood plain district shall be that flood plain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a 100-year flood plain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown on the flood boundary and floodway map and/or flood insurance rate map. Where the specific 100-year flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data such as the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, Flood Plain Information Reports, U. S. Geological Survey Flood Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the City. 
4.  The special floodplain district shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study for which 100-year flood elevations have been provided but for which no floodway has been delineated. 
Sec. 35.2-59.5. - Alteration or relocation of a watercourse. 
(a)  Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or floodways of any watercourse, stream, etc., within the City of Lynchburg, the following procedures shall apply: 
1.  Notification shall be given by the developer to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for work in any stream, watercourse, etc., identified in the flood insurance study (FIS) for the City of Lynchburg. 
2.  Approval shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator for work in any stream, watercourse, etc. in Lynchburg. The developer may be required to provide hydrologic and hydraulic analyses for approval. 
3.  Notification shall be given by the developer to the Virginia Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management, (Department of Conservation and Recreation), for any proposed work in any stream, watercourse, etc. in the City of Lynchburg and any required permits obtained before work will be permitted. A permit from the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, and certification from the Virginia State Water Control Board, may be necessary. (A joint permit is available from any of these agencies.) It shall be the responsibility of the developer to obtain all necessary permits. Further notification shall be given by the developer to all adjacent affected jurisdictions, as determined by the City of Lynchburg. Copies of this notification shall be forwarded to the Lynchburg department of community development and any affected counties. 
4.  Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any water course, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system. 
(b)  All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a Building Permit and/or land disturbance permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of the City's Zoning Ordinance, the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, the City of Lynchburg subdivision regulations and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, as amended. All proposed development within flood hazard areas will be reviewed to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 V.S.C. 1334. 
Sec. 35.2-59.6. - Prohibited uses: Floodway District (FW). 
    The following structures and uses are hereby prohibited in the floodway district: 
(a)  The storage or processing of materials that are pollutants, buoyant, flammable, poisonous, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life in time of flooding or that have high flood damage potential. 
(b)  Garbage and waste disposal facilities including any further encroachment upon the floodway at existing sites. 
(c)  Recreational uses with fencing to surround the playing area-such as tennis courts or fenced ball fields. 
Sec. 35.2-59.7. - Uses permitted by right: Floodway District (FW). 
    The following uses shall be permitted within the floodway district; provided that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance, and, provided further, that encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the floodway district shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(a)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasturing, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting. 
(b)  Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips. 
(c)  Recreational uses such as temporary festivals operated by nonprofit organizations, golf courses, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic areas, boat launching ramps, parks, swimming areas, fish hatcheries, wildlife preserves, game farms, target ranges, hiking and horseback trails and hunting and fishing areas. 
(d)  Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas. 
(e)  Transportation and service uses such as streets, bridges, pipes and pipelines, utilities and railroads, provided: 
1.  New and replacement water supply systems are to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems. 
2.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems are to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and onsite waste disposal systems are to be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
3.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
Sec. 35.2-59.8. - Uses permitted by conditional use permit: Floodway District (FW). 
    Certain conditional uses may be allowed within the floodway district provided they comply with the regulations of section 35.2-11 (Applications Requiring Public Hearings Before City Council) of this ordinance. However, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the floodway districts, shall be proved not to result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Conditional uses include the following: 
(a)  Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves. 
Sec. 35.2-59.9. - Uses permitted by right: Floodway Fringe District (FF). 
    Any use permitted by right in the floodway district (FW) may be permitted within the floodway fringe district (FF) provided it is not in conflict with any existing ordinances. 
Sec. 35.2-59.10. - Uses permitted by conditional use permit: Floodway Fringe District (FF). 
    The following conditional uses will be permitted within the floodway fringe district provided they comply with the regulations of section 35.2-11 (Applications Requiring Public Hearings Before City Council) of this ordinance. 
(a)  Structures accessory to open space. 
(b)  Circuses, carnivals and similar transient amusement facilities. 
(c)  New and used car lots, roadside stands. 
(d)  Extraction of sand, gravel and other natural materials. 
(e)  Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials. 
(f)  Residential structures meeting the following standards: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the 100-year flood level. Accessory land uses such as yards, parking areas and railroad tracks may be placed at lower elevations. 
2.  Residential structures will have a means of ingress and egress to land outside the flood hazard district that is above the 100-year flood level. The means of pedestrian ingress and egress shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide, or five feet wide if equipped with handrails or other safety features. Such structures will also have a means of ingress and egress to land outside the flood hazard district for emergency vehicles. 
3.  Existing structures in the floodway area shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic or hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed expansion would not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
4.  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain area to an extent or amount of 50 percent or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with this ordinance and shall require the entire structure to conform to the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
5.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within the flood hazard district shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the applicable provisions of the City. 
6.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has not permanently attached additions); or, 
c.  meet all the requirements for manufactured housing, including anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(g)  Nonresidential structures, provided that all new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the 100-year flood level or "flood-proofed" in accordance with the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(h)  Fill, provided that: 
1.  Any fill or materials proposed to be deposited in the flood hazard district must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and the amount thereof shall not be greater than on a plan submitted by the owner showing the uses to which the filled land will be put and the final dimensions of the proposed fill or other materials. 
2.  Such fill or other materials shall be protected against erosion by riprap, bulkheading or vegetative cover. 
3.  The applicant must show that construction of the fill will not cause damage to upstream properties by raising the flood surface profile. 
(i)  Mechanical and utility equipment provided that electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(j)  Use of openings in enclosures below a structure's lowest floor. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding and that are used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(k)  Other uses similar in nature that are consistent with the provisions put forth in the statement of intent. 
(l)  Storage of materials or equipment, not prohibited in section 35.2-59.6 (Prohibited uses: Floodway District (FW)), may be allowed if it is not subject to damage by floods and is either firmly anchored to prevent flotation or easily removable from the designated area within the time available after an official flood warning has been issued. 
Sec. 35.2-59.11. - Uses permitted by right: Approximated Flood Plain District (AFP). 
    Any use permitted by right in the floodway district (FW) and floodway fringe district (FF) may be permitted within the approximated floodplain district (AFP) provided it complies with the regulations of section 35.2-59.4(b)3 of this ordinance and is not in conflict with any existing ordinances. 
Sec. 35.2-59.12. - Uses permitted by conditional use permit: Approximated Flood Plain District (AFP). 
    Any conditional use permitted in the floodway district (FW) and floodway fringe district (FF) may be permitted in the approximated flood plain district (AFP) provided it complies with sections 35.2-11 and 35.2-59.4(b)3 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-59.13. - Special Floodplain District. 
    Within the special floodplain district the following provisions apply: until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, designated as Zones AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood within the City of Lynchburg. 
Sec. 35.2-59.14. - Flood-proofing measures. 
    When the approval body declares that a structure must provide watertight flood-proofing before issuance of conditional use or variance, the applicant for said development approval will submit a plan or documents certified by a professional engineer and/or architect registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, that the flood-proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for that particular area. 
Sec. 35.2-59.15. - Regulation of real estate sales in flood hazard areas. 
(a)  Any owner or partial owner of estate or his agent and any real estate broker or his agent who contracts to sell or sells real estate subject to a floodplain regulation without first notifying in writing the buyer or his agent that such real estate is subject to flood plain regulation shall be in violation of this Zoning Ordinance and subject to penalties as established in section 35.2-102. 
(b)  Flood plain regulation referred to in paragraph (a) above includes Zoning Ordinances, subdivision regulations and building codes which impose restrictions specifically related to flooding on the whole or a portion of the lands. 
Sec. 35.2-59.16. - Variances to flood hazard district regulations. 
(a)  In passing upon applications for variances, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in section 35.2-12 (Variances and Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals) of this Zoning Ordinance and consider the following additional factors: 
1.  The showing of good and sufficient cause. 
2.  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any floodway district that will cause any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
3.  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
4.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions. 
5.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
6.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
7.  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
8.  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
9.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
10.  The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
11.  The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in the time of flood. 
12.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site. 
13.  The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
14.  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this ordinance. 
(b)  The Board of Zoning Appeals may refer to any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters. 
(c)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance, in writing, that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the 100-year flood elevation (a) increases the risks to life and property and (b) will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
Sec. 35.2-59.17. - Building permits in flood hazard district. 
    All Building Permit applications issued for the flood hazard district shall incorporate the following information: 
(a)  For residential structures, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement); 
(b)  For nonresidential structures only, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or the flood-proofing elevation; 
(c)  The elevation of the 100-year flood. 
ARTICLE VI. - SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 35.2-60. - General. 
Sec. 35.2-60.1. - Applicability. 
    The standards in this section apply to any new development, redevelopment or change of use requiring a development approval, building permit or certificate of occupancy except as otherwise authorized by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-60.2. - Buildings, uses and lots. 
(a)  Building Lot Required. Every building or structure hereafter erected shall be located on a lot as herein defined. Where more than one building or structure is located on a lot, separation shall be provided as provided in the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(b)  Street Frontage Required. No development approval shall be issued for any land use or structure unless the lot on which such land use is to be established or such structure is to be built has frontage providing access on at least one dedicated, improved street extending across the entire front of the lot where right-of-way extends along the property line. 
1.  Said street shall have at least 20 feet of pavement with 50 feet of right-of-way, except that a building permit may be issued for one single-household dwelling or duplex residence on a lot of record existing on September 12, 1989, that has a perpetual unobstructed easement of access at least 30 feet wide to such a street to serve one building. 
2.  The requirement for street frontage may be waived by the City Council in the case of planned unit developments, residential clusters, cluster commercial developments, traditional neighborhood developments and townhouse lots when the Council finds that adequate public and private access is provided to such land uses or structures. 
3.  Access for lots within commercial centers may be provided via private streets or drives approved by the City through the subdivision and site plan approval processes and shall be consistent with section 35.2-66.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Reduced Street Frontage Requirements. A building permit may be issued for a land use or structure on a lot with less than the required street frontage if: 
1.  The lot fronts on a cul-de-sac, in which case the minimum street frontage shall be 30 feet; 
2.  The lot is a flag lot having at least 50 feet of frontage as required by section 24.1-28.1 of the City's subdivision regulations; or 
3.  The lot was an existing lot of record on July 11, 2011, in which case the lot shall provide access on at least one dedicated, improved street extending a minimum of 25 feet past the driveway accessing the lot. 
(d)  Reduction or Subdivision of Lots. No lot shall be subdivided or reduced in area to create a non-conforming lot or structure. 
(e)  Occupancy. Except as allowed by conditional use permit or for non-conforming duplex or multi-household dwellings, no dwelling unit or boarding unit may be occupied by more than three unrelated people. Where two or more related people reside in a dwelling unit, only one person unrelated to the related people may reside in the dwelling unit. 
(f)  County Boundary Lines. A structure which would be split by a county boundary line shall be permitted by a conditional use permit under the regulations of section 35.2-11, Applications Requiring Public Hearings Before City Council. 
Sec. 35.2-61. - Building Envelope, Lot Area and Density Standards. 
Sec. 35.2-61.1. - Rules for building envelope standards (height, setbacks and building coverage). 
(a)  The building envelope standards are listed for each zoning district in Article IV and are summarized in Appendix B. This section describes the general rules for applying height, setback and building coverage standards. 
(b)  Building envelope standards, other than those established in the applicable zoning district and this article may apply when: 
1.  Greater setbacks or lesser heights are required pursuant to the zoning district standards in Article IV or the standards in this article; 
2.  An overlay district imposes different standards pursuant to Article V; 
3.  The City Council approves alternative building envelope standards pursuant to a conditional use permit issued in accordance with section 35.2-11 (Applications Requiring Public Hearings Before City Council); or 
4.  Board of Zoning Appeals modifies building envelope standards by granting a variance pursuant to section 35.2-12 (Variances and Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals). 
Sec. 35.2-61.2. - Additional height regulations. 
(a)  Measurement of height. 
1.  Building Height. Building height is the vertical distance measured from the crown of the street opposite the middle of the front of the building to: 

2.  Exceptions to Measurement of Building Height. 
a.  Buildings with Large Setbacks. Where a building is set back from the street line 35 feet or more, building height shall be measured from the average elevation of finished ground surface along the front of the building. 
b.  Large Corner Lots. On corner lots exceeding 20,000 square feet in area, the height of the building may be measured from the crown of either street at the midpoint of the building facing the applicable street. 
c.  Through Lots. For lots extending through from street to street, the height may be measured from the crown of either street at the midpoint of the building facing the applicable street, provided that the maximum height that would be permitted based on the lower street shall extend back from the right-of-way of such street not less than 150 feet (see following illustration). 

d.  Properties Abutting R-1, R-2 or R-3 Districts. For lots in any R-4, B-3, B-5, IN-1, I-1, I-2 or I-3 district abutting property zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3, height shall be measured from natural grade at the horizontal midpoint of the building wall facing each abutting residential property and shall apply to any portion of the building located within 100 feet of the property line (see following illustration). In no case shall a building be required to be less than 20 feet in height at the front building line. 

(b)  Height Exceptions for Certain Structures. 
1.  The height limitations shall not apply to the following features projecting above the roof line: flag poles, church spires/steeples, belfries, cupolas and domes not used for human occupancy, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads or similar features, radio and television antennas for the use of residents of dwelling units in apartments, and necessary mechanical appurtenances (including, but not limited to solar energy panels and related appurtenances, plumbing vents, exhaust vents, HVAC equipment, electrical connections, lightning rods and telecommunications connections) usually carried above the roof level provided that: 
a.  Such a feature shall be erected only to a height necessary to accomplish the purpose it is intended to serve, but in no case more than 15 feet above its lowest point of contact with the roof. 
b.  The total area covered by such features shall not exceed in horizontal cross-sectional area 15 percent of the area of the plane of roof upon which they are located. 
c.  Such features as water tanks, cooling towers and bulkheads, but not solar energy panels and related appurtenances, shall be enclosed within walls constructed of the same material as the main walls of the building on which they are located. 
2.  Parapet walls may extend not more than five feet above the limiting height of the building on which they rest. 
3.  No sign, name plate, display or advertising device of any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or attached to any chimney, tower, tank or other structure which extends above the district height limitations. 
(c)  Tall Buildings in the R-4, B-1, B-3 and IN-1 Districts. In the R-4, B-1, B-3 and IN-1 districts, apartment buildings, public or semi-public buildings such as a religious institution, school, library, hospital, may be erected to not more than 125 feet in height; provided that the portion of such building more than 40 feet in height shall set back from the street, lot or required setback line, one foot for each one foot of such additional height (see following illustration). 

Sec. 35.2-61.3. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Measuring Setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured as the shortest distance between the applicable property line (front, side or rear) and the nearest portion of the building, except as specifically provided in this section. For purposes of this measurement, the property line shall be considered a vertical plane and all distances shall be measured horizontally from that plane. 
(b)  Setbacks, Buffers and Open Spaces Unique to Lot. No required setback, buffer or open space for any building or lot shall be considered to provide a required setback, buffer or open space for a building on any other lot. 
(c)  Corner Lots. On a corner lot, the required side setback abutting a street (exterior side setback) shall be at least equal to a required front setback for other lots fronting on the side street. The Zoning Administrator shall determine the front, side and rear yards based on the predominant orientation of lots on the block on which the property is located. 
(d)  Interior Lots with Double Frontage. Interior lots having frontages on two streets shall have a front setback on each street, except where all lots or existing dwellings are designed to face the same street. 
(e)  Authorized Encroachments. The following structures may encroach upon minimum setback areas as provided herein: 
1.  Terraces. A paved terrace shall not be subject to minimum setback or maximum lot coverage requirements; provided that such terrace is without roof, awnings, screens, walls, parapets or other forms of enclosure and is not more than three feet above grade. Such terrace, however, may have a guard railing, wall or fence not over four feet high with less than 50 percent opacity, and shall not be closer than five feet from any lot line. 
2.  Porches. Unenclosed porches or decks may project not more than ten feet beyond the front, exterior side and rear walls of a building into the minimum front, exterior side or rear setback for the district. Any two story or enclosed porch, or one having a roof, shall be considered a part of the building in the determination of the required setback and amount of building coverage. 
3.  Projecting Horizontal Architectural Features. Architectural features, such as windowsills, belt courses, chimneys, cornices, eaves or bay windows, may project not more than three feet into any required setback, but not closer than five feet to any lot line. The sum of any bay or bow window projections on any wall shall not exceed one-fourth of the length of said wall. 
4.  Fire Escapes. Open fire escapes may extend into any required setback not more than five feet; provided, however, that such fire escapes shall not be closer than five feet at any point to any lot line. 
5.  Fences and Walls. 
a.  The setback requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be deemed to prohibit any otherwise lawful fence or wall if: 
1.  Each fence and/or wall does not exceed four feet in height in a front yard. 
2.  Each fence and/or wall shall not exceed eight feet in height in side and rear yards in residential districts of ten feet in height in other districts. 
3.  Fences and/or walls in required exterior side setbacks shall not exceed four feet in height. 
4.  Fences and walls do not conflict the standards for visibility at intersections established in section 35.2-66.4 (Visibility at Intersections) in any district. 
5.  On a corner lot, no fence and/or wall shall exceed four feet in height in the required exterior side or rear setback abutting a street when a front yard is required for any lot on the side street in any district. 
(f)  Setback Reductions for Neighborhood Norms. The following provisions are applicable to new development, additions or redevelopment in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts: 
1.  Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 of this section, the minimum front and side setbacks shall be reduced to match the lesser of: 
a.  The average setbacks on the block face on which the proposed building fronts and the block face opposite the front of the proposed building; 
b.  The average setback of the buildings located on either side of the proposed development; 
c.  The mode of setbacks on the block face of the proposed development and the block face opposite the front of the proposed development; 

2.  The minimum rear setback shall be reduced by 25 percent when a legally created lot is less than the minimum lot area for the applicable district. 
3.  When determining the average setbacks, the City shall determine the mean of all principal structure setbacks. For any structure set back further than the minimum required setback for the applicable zoning district shall be deemed to be set back to that minimum. The mode shall be the most frequently occurring setback on the applicable lot's block face and the block face across the street. 
4.  Regardless of the neighborhood norm, side and rear setbacks shall comply with minimum fire code requirements. 
5.  When the neighborhood norm provisions are not applicable, the Zoning Administrator may authorize a minor exception, not to exceed one foot from the required dimension, for a building setback for one and two-household dwellings to preserve existing vegetation or where other purposes of this Zoning Ordinance are achieved. 
(g)  Future Street Widening. On any street where a street widening plan designating future right-of-way lines has been officially adopted by the City or Commonwealth of Virginia, the setbacks required by this Zoning Ordinance shall be measured from such lines rather than the existing street lines; and where no setback is otherwise required, a setback at the future right-of-way line is required. 
(h)  Setbacks from Limited Access Highways. On any limited access highway (including ramps), there shall be provided a setback line of 50 feet from the right-of-way line for billboards. 
(i)  B-1 District Abutting and R-1, R-2 or R-3 District. Where a B-1 lot abuts a R-1, R-2 or R-3 lot, the minimum front setbacks along block faces shall be the lesser of the neighborhood norm as provided in paragraph (f) of this section or 20 feet. 
(j)  R-4, B-3, B-5, IN-1 or IN-2 Districts Adjacent to R-1, R-2 or R-3 Districts. 
1.  In all instances where a lot in a R-4, B-3, B-5, IN-1 or IN-2 district abuts a lot in a R-1, R-2 or R-3 district: 
a.  A buffer shall be established between the districts in compliance with section 35.2-63.10. 
b.  A 50-foot setback shall be provided. 
2.  Where lot in a B-3, B-5, IN-1 or IN-2 district is on the same block as a residential district, the front and exterior side setback requirements of the residential district shall apply to the applicable business or institutional district. 
3.  The buffer and setback requirements of paragraphs (j)1. and (j)2. of this section do not apply when the property within the R-1, R-2 or R-3 district is owned or leased by an institutional use. 
(k)  Industrial Districts Adjacent to Residential Districts. 
1.  In all instances where a lot in an industrial district (I-1, I-2 or I-3) abuts a lot in a residential district (R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4): 
a.  A buffer shall be established between the districts in compliance with section 35.2-63.10. 
b.  There shall be required a 100-foot minimum building setback on the lot in the industrial district. 
2.  Where a lot in an industrial district is on the same block as a residential district, the front and exterior side setback requirements of the residential district shall apply to the applicable industrial district. 
(l)  Private recreational facilities. Private recreational facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts and basketball courts permitted as accessory uses located on residentially zoned land, shall not be located in any front yard and shall have the following setbacks: 
1.  If accessory to a single-household use or duplex, the edge of the facility shall be located not less than five feet from any lot line. 
2.  If accessory to a residential use other than a single-household residence or duplex, the edge of the facility shall be located not less than 20 feet from any lot line. 
3.  Any private recreational facility with above ground lighting shall comply with minimum setback requirements for the principal structure in the applicable location. 
4.  In the event that a lighted facility is located less than 50 feet from any lot line, it shall be screened pursuant to section 35.2-63.9 (Utility Screening). 
(m)  Dedicated Street as Portion of Required Buffer. When a dedicated street separates two districts requiring additional setbacks, one-fourth of the width of the dedicated right-of-way may be deducted from the required setback. 
Sec. 35.2-61.4. - Rules for lot dimension and density standards. 
(a)  Lot Dimension and Density Standards. The zoning districts in Article IV establish and Appendix C summarizes the lot dimension and density standards applicable in each zoning district. 
(b)  Lots under Water or within the 100-Year Floodplains. No more than ten percent of the minimum area requirements of a lot, or the area used to calculate the maximum floor area ratios or permitted number of dwelling units, may be comprised of land that is in a 100-year floodplain as determined by the Flood Insurance Rate Maps or delineated wetland. 
(c)  Parts of Lot Not Counted Toward Area Requirements. For any lot created by subdivision subsequent to adoption of this ordinance, no portion of lot that is less than one-third the minimum lot width for the applicable zoning district shall be counted as part of the required minimum lot area. 
(d)  Additional Setbacks Required for Visibility at Intersections. Where required to achieve the requirements for visibility at intersections and driveways as provided in section 35.2-66.4 (Visibility at Intersections), additional setbacks may be required as a condition of a development approval for all or a portion of a lot's street frontage. 
(e)  New buildings on Lots Less than the Required Minimum Area or Lot Dimensions. A building permit may be issued for the erection of a building for a permitted use on a non-conforming lot provided that: 
1.  That all setbacks and other requirements that are in effect at the time of building permit issuance are complied with; 
2.  That the owner of such lot did not own other lots contiguous thereto at the time of the adoption of this ordinance. If the latter is the case, such lot, or so much thereof as may be necessary, shall be combined with the first named lot to make one or more conforming lots, whereupon a permit may be issued, but only for such combined lots; 
3.  Where the required lot areas or lot dimensions are less than those required for the applicable district, but are consistent with the lot sizes and dimensions of the neighborhood, combination of contiguous lots shall not be required. For purposes of this provision, lots are consistent if at least 50 percent of the lots on the subject block face have lot areas and dimensions that are within ten percent of the dimensions of the substandard lot proposed to be developed. 
4.  Where lots in an R-C, R-1, R-2 or R-3 district do not meet minimum lot area requirements no detached accessory dwelling unit may be established. 
5.  Where the required area of dimensions of lots are changed by an amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, any legal lot existing on that date that is made non-conforming by such amendment, may be built upon within the limits of paragraphs (1) through (3) of this section. 
(f)  Calculation of Density. Density is the measure of the number of dwelling units per acre of a lot or site, excluding any portion of the lot or site within a 100-year floodplain or delineated wetland that exceeds ten percent of the total as established in paragraph (b) of this section and excluding areas that have slopes in excess of 25 percent. 
Sec. 35.2-62. - Parking and Loading. 
Sec. 35.2-62.1. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. All structures and land uses hereafter enlarged, erected, extended or modified to increase parking demand shall be provided with the amount of off-street parking and loading space required by this section. Parking requirements shall be calculated prior to final site plan approval. 
(b)  Existing Structures and Uses. Structures and land uses in existence on the date of enactment of this ordinance, or structures and uses for which Building Permits have been approved on the said date, shall not be subject to the parking and loading requirements set forth in this section. However, any parking and loading facilities now existing to serve such structures or uses may only be reduced if they continue to comply with the minimum parking and loading standards established herein. 
Sec. 35.2-62.2. - Location of off-street parking facilities. 
    Off-street parking facilities required by this article shall be provided on the same lot with the structure or land use served or on a lot connected by pedestrian facilities to the said lot provided that excess parking is available and a shared parking agreement is executed pursuant to section 35.2-62.4(d). A shared parking agreement shall not be required for lots under common ownership. On-street parking located within 1,000 feet and connected by pedestrian facilities may be used to satisfy off-street parking requirements. Except for one household and duplex residential parking facilities, no off-street parking facilities shall be located within 20 feet of any residential lot line, nor shall they be located in any required front setback. 
Sec. 35.2-62.3. - Parking specifications. 
(a)  Parking Dimensions. Each parking space and the necessary access aisles shall have at least the minimum dimensions listed in Exhibit VI-1, depending on the parking angle and the direction of the traffic flow. 
Exhibit VI-1: Minimum Parking Lot Dimensions 
Parking
Angle (A) Stall
Width (B) Stall
Depth (C) Stall
Length (D) Cross Aisle Width
(One-Way) (E) Cross Aisle Width
(Two-Way) (E) 45° 9' 19' 25' 12' 20' 60° 9' 20' 22' 16' 20' 75° 9' 20' 20' 20' 20' 90° 9' 18' 18' 24' 24' 0° 8.5' 8.5' 23' 11' 20'  
(b)  Parking Surfaces. 
1.  Parking and loading areas shall be graded and surfaced, marked and maintained in accordance with the provision of this section. The City Engineer shall approve the materials and construction of parking surfaces. 
2.  Parking areas having ten or fewer parking spaces may be gravel and shall require marking or tire stops. 
3.  Parking areas having more than ten spaces shall be paved or surfaced with pervious or impervious material approved by the City Planner, subject to the review and recommendation of the TRC. Gravel may be used if the City Planner in accordance with the TRC recommendation determines that the use of gravel is appropriate. Decisions on whether or not the use of gravel for a larger parking area is appropriate will include, but not be limited to, the following factors: 
a.  Volume of traffic; 
b.  Frequency of use; 
c.  Size and location of the parking area; 
d.  Type of land use requiring the parking; 
e.  Topography; and 
f.  Control measures needed for stormwater, erosion and dust management. 
4.  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained for gravel parking and vehicular areas to the same standards required for paved parking and vehicular areas. 
5.  The future conversion of gravel parking areas to surface-treatment or pavement shall be subject to the provisions of the City's stormwater and erosion and sediment control ordinances. 
Sec. 35.2-62.4. - Required number of parking spaces. 
(a)  Schedule of Parking Space Requirements. Exhibit VI-2 establishes the minimum requirements for all districts except B-4. LBCS (see Article III for a description of the Land Based Classification Structure) code references follow the uses in parentheses where applicable 
1.  The required number of spaces may be increased based on projected parking demands pursuant to issuance of a conditional use permit (see section 35.2-11, Applications Requiring Public Hearings Before City Council). 
2.  The required number of spaces may be reduced by the City Planner if the applicant provides credible information documenting that the use will require fewer spaces and the City Planner determines that the reduction will not reduce the viability of future use of the site. 
Exhibit VI-2: Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Required 
Use Minimum Number of Spaces Residential Uses Residential dwellings (1100-1130) one (1) per dwelling unit Uses accessory to residential uses in addition to required spaces per dwelling unit:  accessory dwelling one (1) per dwelling unit  roomers and boarders (1321-1322) one (1) per boarder  tourist homes or bed and breakfast (1310) one (1) for each guest bedroom  home occupation one (1) if client visits are part of occupation Institutional Uses Places of worship (6600) one (1) for each four (4) fixed seats included; benches shall be deemed to have capacity of one (1) person per twenty (20) linear inches of bench Arenas, auditoriums, and stadiums (5170-5180) 1. One (1) parking space per three (3) spectator seats. 
2. One (1) parking space per ten (10) square feet of additional places for spectators provided by the establishment. 
3. One (1) parking space per employee. Art galleries, libraries, museums (4242 & 5200) three (3) per one thousand (1000) square of floor space, exclusive of utility areas Clubs, lodges and other recreational facilities (6830) one (1) per each four (4) persons of the rated capacity of the building Fraternities and sororities with residential component (1323) one (1) parking space per employee, plus one (1) parking space per site resident, plus one (1) parking space per fifty (50) square feet of floor area. Schools, public and private, elementary and junior high (6120) two (2) per three (3) teachers and other employees High schools, public and private (6120) two (2) per three (3) teachers and employees plus one (1) per ten (10) students Colleges (6130) two (2) per three (3) teachers and employees plus one (1) per five (5) students up to one hundred (100) on campus and commuting students. For colleges exceeding one hundred (100) on campus and commuting students the parking need shall be estimated by the petitioner and approved as part of a conditional use permit pursuant to section 35.2-11 or approved through the site plan approval process in the IN-2 district. Group homes (6522-6523) two (2) per home plus one (1) per eight (8) residents plus one (1) per three (3) staff members Hospitals (6530) one (1) per three (3) patient beds, plus one (1) per resident doctor, plus one (1) per three (3) three other employees Nursing homes (1200) one (1) per three (3) beds, plus one (1) per resident doctor, plus one (1) per each three (3) staff members Other institutional and special uses and facilities (1200) one (1) per each four (4) persons of the rated capacity of the building Commercial uses Offices for business, banking, professional and similar uses (2210, 2230-2250, 2411-2414) two (2) per one thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area, exclusive of utility area Retail sales and services (2100) two (2) per one thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area plus one (1) for each three (3) employees on duty at any one time Commercial and trade schools (6140 & 6568) one (1) per five (5) students and one (1) per two (2) employees Hotels and motels (1330) one (1) per guest room plus one (1) for each three (3) employees on duty at any one time Mortuaries and funeral parlors (6710) one (1) for each four (4) fixed seats included; benches shall be deemed to have capacity of one (1) person per twenty (20) linear inches of bench Restaurants, night clubs, taverns, places of assembly (including theaters) (2500, 5110, 5160 & 5111) one (1) per each four (4) persons of the rated capacity of the building plus one (1) for each three (3) employees on duty at any one time Automobile service stations (2117) two (2) per three (3) employees on main shift plus two (2) for each service bay Warehouse (3600) two (2) per three (3) employees on main shift All others one (1) per each four (4) persons of the rated capacity of the building Industrial uses Manufacturing, wholesale and other industrial uses (3000-3599) two (2) per three (3) employees on main shift  
(b)  Uses Not Listed. For uses not listed in Exhibit VI-2, or where the City Planner and property owner agree the minimum required standards would create excess parking, the City Planner shall determine the appropriate minimum requirements in accordance with the TRC recommendation. 
(c)  Two or More Uses on The Same Lot. Where two or more uses occur on the same lot, the minimum parking requirement shall be the sum of the requirements for each individual use calculated separately; except that the City Planner, may reduce the minimum parking space requirements in accordance with the TRC recommendation, upon finding that the timing of parking demands for the uses results in less demand for parking spaces. 
(d)  Shared Parking. Shared parking may be approved by the technical review committee (TRC) during final site plan review. Uses sharing parking need not be located on the same lot, but shall be located within the same block or an adjacent block. In approving shared parking, the TRC shall require the following: 
1.  Shared parking shall be connected to the uses it serves by pedestrian facilities. 
2.  That the applicant shows through a study of peak parking needs for all proposed uses involved, that shared parking is feasible and that the number of spaces proposed is adequate to meet the projected parking demand at all hours; 
3.  That the design and location of parking areas is convenient for sharing by customers, patrons, and residents of all properties involved; 
4.  That a shared parking agreement that establishes ongoing access to the shared parking for all users, responsibilities for parking lot maintenance and limits on hours of operation has been executed between all property owners involved and is binding on all tenants; and 
5.  That the agreement shall be recorded and shall not be terminated without approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
(e)  Mass Transit Provision. The City Planner may reduce the minimum parking space requirements by a suitable amount in accordance with the TRC recommendation where: 
1.  Mass transit is available; 
2.  Facilities are provided in the form of shelters and/or benches; and 
3.  The facilities are adjacent to or within 1,000 feet of a development and connected to the building entrance by pedestrian facilities. 
(f)  Special Conditions in the B-4 District. In the B-4 district the minimum off-street parking requirements shall not apply because of the impracticability of providing such parking spaces on the basis of individual uses in highly congested areas. However, developers of new buildings are strongly encouraged to provide parking spaces up to the minimum cited in these regulations. 
Sec. 35.2-62.5. - Off-street loading berth requirements. 
    Except as provided in paragraphs (d) and (g) of this section, off-street loading and unloading berths, as defined herein, shall be provided in accordance with this section and located on the same lot with the use to be served. 
(a)  For Retail and Service Business Establishments, one berth for the first 4,000 square feet of floor area or portion thereof used for business purposes, and one additional berth for each 10,000 square feet or portion thereof in excess of the first 4,000 square feet. 
(b)  For Business, Professional, Financial and Other Office Buildings, one berth for each 100,000 square feet of gross floor space. 
(c)  For Manufacturing, Wholesale Business, Storage, Warehouses and Similar Activities, one berth for the first 4,000 square feet of floor area or portion thereof used for such purposes and one additional berth for each 10,000 square feet or portion thereof in excess of the first 4,000 square feet. 
(d)  For Arenas, Stadiums, Performing Arts Theaters and Auditoriums, there shall be five loading berths per main entrance and five loading berths for service vehicles. 
(e)  Joint Use of Loading Berths. In B-3 and B-4 business districts several business establishments within one block may provide off-street loading berths for joint use, provided that the design and location of such berths is satisfactory to the City Planner. The minimum requirements for such berths shall be figured on the basis of the total floor space of all the establishments served. 
(f)  Fraternities, Sororities and Fraternal Organizations. There shall be one loading berth for service vehicles plus three loading berths for the main entrance. 
(g)  Exceptions. The Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement for loading berths for existing structures or new structures developed in the middle of a block upon finding that there is no practical way to provide for a loading berth at the side or rear of a building in a manner that is consistent with the intent of the applicable zoning district. 
Sec. 35.2-62.6. - Bicycle parking. 
(a)  Quantity. 
1.  Exhibit VI-3 establishes the minimum number of required bicycle parking spaces for each use. 
2.  Under no circumstances will a building with a single use and business be required to provide more than ten spaces. 
3.  If calculation results in an odd number and a fraction of a space, then the number of required spaces shall be increased to the next whole number. If calculation results in an even number and a fraction of a space, then the number of required spaces shall be reduced to the even number whole number. All racks shall be designed and located to accommodate at least two bicycles. 
Exhibit VI-3: Minimum Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces Required 
Use** Requirement Residential Single household dwellings none Multi household dwellings 1 space for every 6 dwelling units. Minimum requirement is 2 spaces. Civic: Cultural/Recreational Non-assembly cultural (library, government buildings, museum) 1 space for each 10,000 s.f. of floor area. Minimum requirement is 2 spaces. Assembly (church, theaters, stadiums, parks) 5% of provided vehicular spaces. Minimum requirement is 2 spaces. Health care/hospitals 1 space for each 20,000 s.f. of floor area. Minimum requirement is 2 spaces. Commercial/Industrial Food sales or groceries (includes restaurants) 1 space for each 2,000 s.f. of floor area. Minimum requirement is 2 spaces. General retail 1 space for each 5,000 s.f. of floor area. Minimum requirement is 2 spaces. Office 1 space for each 20,000 s.f. of floor area. Minimum requirement is 2 spaces. Auto-related uses (sales, rental, repair, etc.) 1 space for each 20,000 s.f. of floor area. Minimum requirement is 2 spaces. Manufacturing and production 1 space for each 15,000 s.f. of floor area. Minimum requirement is 2 spaces. (can be long-term and not publicly available)  
** Schools, daycares, colleges and universities are not required to provide bicycle parking, but are encouraged to provide spaces according to their need. 
(b)  Required bicycle racks must be permanently anchored. 
(c)  Bicycle Racks shall be located in a safe, accessible area within 50 feet of the building entrance. 
(d)  Required bicycle racks shall be of inverted U construction and adequately spaced to accommodate multiple bicycles unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator provided they meet the following standards: 
1.  Provide stable support for a bicycle locked against it with at least two points of contact with a typical adult or child's bicycle frame. 
2.  Do not hold or otherwise place stress upon the bicycle's wheels. 
3.  Allow the user to lock both the bike frame and one wheel to the rack using a standard u-lock. 

4.  Bike racks are not grid/radiator, wheel block, or wave/ribbon style. 
(e)  Single racks may provide spaces for multiple bicycles. 
(f)  For multi-tenant developments: 
1.  Bike racks may be clustered on site, but no more than 200 feet from the business for which they are required. 
2.  Bike racks must be connected to the building entrance by pedestrian facilities. 
3.  Bike racks must be visible from the business entrance or the business owner shall provide a sign indicating where bicycle parking may be found. 
(g)  When buildings are set back fewer than 20 feet from the right-of-way: 
1.  The applicant for site plan approval may, subject to the City Traffic Engineer's approval, voluntarily pay for the City to install a required rack(s) within the public right-of-way. 
2.  Racks placed within City right-of-way must be no more than 200 feet from the business for which they are required. 
3.  Bike racks must be connected to the building entrance by pedestrian facilities. 
4.  When the City Traffic Engineer determines that no space exists to place a new rack, existing racks within City right-of-way and connected by pedestrian facilities may count towards the required bicycle parking. 
(h)  Shared Bicycle Parking. Shared parking may be approved by the technical review committee (TRC) during final site plan review. Uses sharing parking need not be located on the same lot, but shall be located within the same block or an adjacent block. In approving shared parking, the TRC shall require that: 
1.  Shared bicycle parking is connected to the entrances of the uses it serves by pedestrian facilities; 
2.  Bike racks are visible from entrances of all uses or signs are provided indicating the location of bicycle parking; 
3.  The number of spaces proposed is adequate to meet the total minimum required spaces for all uses sharing the parking; 
4.  The design and location of bicycle parking areas shall be convenient for sharing by customers, patrons, employees and residents of all properties involved; 
5.  A shared bicycle parking agreement that establishes ongoing access to the shared bicycle parking for all users and responsibilities for bicycle parking maintenance has been executed between all property owners involved and is binding on all tenants; and 
6.  That the agreement shall be recorded and shall not be terminated without approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 35.2-63. - Landscaping. 
Sec. 35.2-63.1. - Title. 
    This section 35.2-63 et seq. shall be referred to as the landscaping ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-63.2. - Purpose of landscaping provisions. 
    The Landscaping requirements of this section are intended to: 
(a)  Promote the public necessity, convenience, general welfare and good zoning practice by incorporating landscaping, screening and tree preservation requirements into the development review process; 
(b)  Ensure development consistent with the goals of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(c)  Reduce soil erosion; 
(d)  Maintain or enhance water quality; 
(e)  Increase infiltration in permeable land areas to improve stormwater management, mitigate air, dust, noise, and chemical pollution; 
(f)  Reduce the heat island effect; 
(g)  Protect property values and provide buffers between incompatible uses; 
(h)  Preserve existing natural vegetation as an integral part of the City; and 
(i)  Ensure that the City remains an attractive place to live, work and play. 
Sec. 35.2-63.3. - Applicability. 
(a)  This landscaping ordinance applies to the development or redevelopment of any property after June, 13, 2006, and located in an R-4, R-5, B-1, B-3, B-4, B-5, IN-1, IN-2, I-1, I-2 or I-3 district and to any use requiring conditional use permit approval. 
(b)  When an existing use is expanded, enlarged, or redeveloped, only those portions of the property subject to the expansion, enlargement, or redevelopment are subject to the landscaping ordinance. 
(c)  It is not the intent of this ordinance to regulate landscaping for one or two-household dwellings. 
Sec. 35.2-63.4. - General landscaping regulations. 
(a)  Landscaping within an area for visibility at intersections (see section 35.2-66.4 (Visibility at Intersections), shall not include any evergreen trees and shall not include shrubs exceeding three feet in height above the ground at maturity. Tree limbs within this area shall be trimmed to ensure visibility for motor vehicle safety, but in no case shall tree limbs be trimmed more than 12 feet above the ground. 
(b)  When a determination of the number of trees or shrubs results in a fraction, any fraction shall be rounded up to count as one tree or shrub. 
(c)  Existing vegetation within the development area and that measures at least three inches in caliper and that meets the requirements of the landscaping ordinance may be preserved and may be used to meet all or part of the landscaping requirements. 
(d)  Removal of healthy trees 18 inches or greater in caliper is discouraged. For each healthy tree 18 inches or greater in caliper that is retained within the development area a credit of 12 trees shall be given towards meeting the requirements of the landscaping ordinance. 
(e)  All landscaped areas shall be covered with an appropriate ground cover, mulch, or decorative landscape stone. Where mulch or decorative landscape stone is used, it shall be installed to a depth of not less than two to three inches. The use of gravel and/or riprap is prohibited. 
(f)  All slopes shall be covered with an appropriate ground cover. The use of riprap for ground cover on any slope visible from a public or private street, or residential district is prohibited. 
(g)  All retaining walls visible from any public or private street or residential district shall be constructed of segmental block, brick, treated wood, stone or stamped and colored concrete that gives the appearance of brick or stone. Retaining walls that consist of creosote materials are prohibited. Retaining walls of other materials are permitted provided that they are supplemented with landscape material as follows: 
1.  Retaining walls less than eight feet in height, one large evergreen shrub per three linear feet of wall. 
2.  Retaining walls eight feet in height or greater, one large evergreen shrub per three linear feet of wall and one ornamental tree per 20 linear feet of wall. 
(h)  All trees used to satisfy the requirements of the landscaping ordinance shall be in accordance with the City's Master Tree List. The City's Master Tree List shall be maintained by the City's Urban Forester. The City's Urban Forester may approve the substitution of a different species of tree in circumstances of disease, drought, or overhead utility lines. 
(i)  No tree, shrub and/or ground cover contained on the invasive alien plant species of Virginia list as maintained by the Department of Conservation and Recreation of Virginia (DCR) and the Virginia native plant society may be planted or used to satisfy any portion of the landscaping ordinance. 
(j)  Where the planting of trees that have a height at 20 years of maturity would interfere with overhead utility lines, the Urban Forester shall as part of the site plan approval require the substitution of a tree with lesser mature height or allow placement of trees in a manner that will not interfere with overhead utility lines, provided that the general intent and purpose of the landscaping ordinance is met. 
(k)  All disturbed areas not used for operations, including slopes shall be landscaped at the rate of 20 trees per acre. Required trees may be any combination of deciduous or evergreen and may be placed in creative groupings. 
(l)  The only landscaping regulations applicable to parking garages are those of section 35.2-63.8 (Foundation Plantings). 
Sec. 35.2-63.5. - Residential street trees. 
    When the subdivision of any land for residential purposes includes the dedication of new City streets or the extension of existing City streets, the following street tree planting requirements apply: 
(a)  Shade type trees shall be planted at the rate of two trees for every 40 feet of the new street centerline or ornamental trees may be substituted at the rate of two trees for every 30 feet of the new street centerline. (See Exhibit VI-4) 
Exhibit VI-4: Calculation of Street Trees for New Residential Subdivisions 

(b)  Required street trees shall be placed within the proposed right-of-way and no required landscaping shall be planted on any private property. 
(c)  Trees shall be placed in a manner to prevent interference with driveways, drainage areas and/or utilities. 
(d)  To prevent damage to trees, required landscaping installed prior to completion of construction of the subdivision shall be protected as provided in as specified in "STD and SPEC 3.38, Tree Preservation and Protection," in the 1992 edition of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for all landscaping proposed or required to be preserved to satisfy the requirements of the landscape ordinance (see Exhibit VI-5: Tree Protection Detail). 
Exhibit VI-5: Tree Protection Detail 

(e)  Prior to the acceptance of any new road by the City the developer shall do one of the following: 
1.  Install all required street trees; 
2.  Post a performance bond for the amount of all required street trees, related materials and installation cost; or 
3.  Upon mutual agreement of the City and the applicant, a cash payment may be made to the City for all required street trees, related material and installation cost. At such time a cash payment is made to the City, installation of the required landscaping becomes the responsibility of the City's Urban Forester and landscaping shall be installed within a reasonable time period. 
Sec. 35.2-63.6. - Street trees for multi-household, commercial institutional and industrial districts. 
(a)  For all multi-household, commercial, institutional and industrial developments, street trees are required at the rate of one shade tree for each 40 feet of street frontage or in the case where overhead utility lines prohibit the planting of shade trees one ornamental tree for each 20 feet of street frontage. 
(b)  Required street trees shall be planted along the property line that fronts the street and shall not be planted within the public right-of-way or within any utility easements unless otherwise approved by the City. 
(c)  Street trees within the site distance triangle may be trimmed to allow for visibility. 
Sec. 35.2-63.7. - Parking area landscaping. 
(a)  Requirements for All Parking Areas. All parking areas are subject to the following landscaping standards: 
1.  All parking rows and parking bays shall be capped with a landscaped island containing a required shade tree and medium height shrubs. 
2.  One shade type tree for every eight parking spaces, planted within landscape islands, reasonably dispersed within the parking area so that no more than 20 parking spaces exist between landscape islands. 
3.  One medium shrub for every one parking space shall be planted within landscape islands containing required trees. 
(b)  Large Parking Areas. Parking areas with 200 or more parking spaces shall comply with the following additional standards: 
1.  One landscape median six feet in width for every three parking bays shall be installed. The landscape median shall be required to extend the full length of the parking bay and shall include 20 percent of the required parking area landscaping. (See Exhibit VI-6) 
Exhibit VI-6: Landscape Median Required 

2.  Wheel stops, curbing, or other barriers shall be provided to prevent damage to required landscaping by vehicular traffic. Protection shall be installed to prevent soil erosion from the landscape area. 
(c)  Parking Area Screening. 
1.  In all instances where parking areas are adjacent to public or private streets, a screen with a minimum height of three feet at time of installation shall be provided along the entire length of the parking area exclusive of driveways and entrances. The minimum planting width for the screen shall be six feet and such screen shall not be located in the street right-of-way (see Exhibit VI-7). 
2.  For the purposes of this section, any of the following combination of landscaping and berms may be used to fulfill this requirement: 
a.  One large shrub per three feet of street frontage; 
b.  Earthen berm with three small shrubs per three feet of street frontage; 
c.  Earthen berm with one medium shrub and one small shrub per three feet of street frontage; or 
d.  Any combination of paragraphs a, b or c above. 
3.  Earthen berms shall vary in width and height and shall be curvilinear in form and provide a gentle tie-in with the existing grade. Average height of earthen berms used to satisfy this requirement shall be three feet in height. 
Exhibit VI-7: Parking Area Screening 

(d)  Parking area exceptions. Where the primary use of a parking area is for the sale of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, trailers, boats, tractors, or manufactured homes the required parking area landscaping and parking area screening may be arranged in a reasonable manner so as not to interfere with display and maintenance. 
Sec. 35.2-63.8. - Foundation plantings. 
(a)  All sides of multi-household, commercial, institutional or industrial buildings, which front on a public or private street or are visible from an adjacent residential district, shall be landscaped with foundation plantings that include one ornamental tree per 50 linear feet of building, and: 
1.  One large shrub per ten linear feet of building; 
2.  One medium shrub and one small shrub per ten linear feet of building; 
3.  Three small shrubs per ten linear feet of building; or 
4.  Any combination of paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) above. 
(b)  Foundation plantings may be placed in collective groupings along the perimeter of the building for which required. 
(c)  In the event that the City Planner determines that topography or other landscaping would prevent the required foundation plantings from being visible from a public or private street or an adjacent residential district, the only foundation plantings that shall be required are for the wall of the building on which the main entrance is located. 
Sec. 35.2-63.9. - Utility screening. 
(a)  Loading areas, refuse areas, storage yards, stormwater management ponds, water vaults, Reduced Pressure Zone (RPZ) devices or other objectionable items shall be screened from view of any public or private street, or any adjacent residential district. 
(b)  Stormwater Management Facilities intended for display as a water feature or naturalized planting area are exempt from screening requirements. 
(c)  Screening may be accomplished by a combination of existing evergreen vegetation, walls, fences, earthen berms and new evergreen vegetation appropriate to screen the equipment or activity. The required height of screening at installation shall be sufficient to screen the equipment or activity. 
(d)  The use of chain link fence as the sole method of screening is prohibited. Where it is deemed appropriate by the property owner or developer for security purposes, the chain link fence shall be screened from view as listed in paragraph (c) above. 
(e)  Mechanical Equipment and Dumpsters. Mechanical equipment and dumpsters shall be located and screened as follows: 
1.  Ground-fixed mechanical equipment shall not be located between the front of a building and the street. If located between the building and a street, the equipment shall be screened from view with masonry wall or evergreen shrubs. 
2.  Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from adjacent properties and from street view by a parapet or architecturally compatible rooftop screen. 

3.  Trash dumpsters shall not be located between the front building facade and the public street or internal street. 
4.  No trash dumpsters shall be located between a building and a residential district unless set back from the residential district at least a minimum of 50 feet. 
5.  Dumpsters shall be separated from adjacent parking stalls by a minimum three feet wide (interior clear dimension) planting strip. 
6.  Dumpsters shall be enclosed with a wood or vinyl fence or a masonry wall constructed of the same materials as the principal structure. The fence or wall enclosure shall screen the dumpster and be at least six feet and no more than eight feet in height. 

(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-63.10. - Buffering. 
(a)  In all instances where a commercial district, institutional district, industrial district, or any parking area is located adjacent to any residential district, or a multi-household residential district is adjacent to a one or two-household residential district, a vegetative evergreen buffer shall be established on the property for which said buffer is required. 
(b)  Where required, the planting area for buffering shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width extending along the entire length of the development area and shall generally be required along the property line unless topographic or other considerations would make it more effective located back from the property line. 
(c)  The vegetative buffer shall consist of a staggered evergreen tree line with a baseline filler of medium height evergreen shrubs. The evergreen tree material shall be a minimum of four feet in height at time of planting. The evergreen tree line shall be planted in rows ten feet apart with tree trunks staggered 15 feet on center. In lieu of the baseline filler an earthen berm may be used. The earthen berm shall vary in width and height and shall be curvilinear in form and provide a gentle tie-in with the existing grade. Average height of earthen berms used to satisfy this requirement shall be three feet in height. 
(d)  In the B-1 district, where a fence that is not less than six feet in height, the buffer width may be reduced to ten feet in width with evergreen trees staggered 15 feet on center and a baseline filler of medium height evergreen shrubs. An earthen berm meeting the requirements of paragraph (c) may be substituted for the baseline filer of evergreen shrubs. 
(e)  Where appropriate existing vegetation may be used to satisfy this requirement. Existing vegetation may be required to be supplemented with additional evergreen material to meet the buffering requirements. The need for additional evergreen material shall be determined during the site plan review process. 
Sec. 35.2-63.11. - Tree canopy requirements. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, "tree canopy" shall include all areas of coverage by existing plant material exceeding five feet in height, and the extent of planted tree canopy at maturity shall be based on the published reference text, Manual of Woody Landscape Plants, Fifth Edition, 1998, by Michael A. Dirr. 
(b)  The planting or replacement of trees on a development site shall be required to the extent that, at a 20 years, minimum tree canopies will be provided as provided in Exhibit VI-8. 
Exhibit VI-8: Minimum Tree Canopy Required 
Zoning District Minimum Tree Canopy Required B-1, B-3, B-4, B-5, IN-1, IN-2, I-1, I-2, I-3 10% of entire development site R-4 10% of entire development site R-3 15% of entire development site R-C, R-1, R-2 20% of entire development site  
(c)  Existing trees that are to be preserved may be included to meet all or part of the tree canopy requirements. 
(d)  Existing trees infested with disease or structurally damaged to the extent that they pose a hazard to person or property, or to the health of other trees on site, shall not be included to meet the tree canopy requirements. 
(e)  Tree canopy requirements do not replace, or negate full compliance with, the requirements of any other section of the landscaping ordinance. However, if planting of landscaping required by this ordinance meets or exceeds the tree canopy requirement, no further planting of trees or replacement of trees is required by this section. 
(f)  In areas zoned B-4 or where the City Planner determines that crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) principles apply, the City Planner, in consultation with the City's Urban Forester, may allow the off-site planting of up to 99 percent of the required street trees, parking area screening, buffering and foundation plantings. Off-site planting areas shall be within the City limits and in such location as approved by the City Planner. 
(g)  The following shall be exempt from the tree canopy requirements. 
1.  Dedicated K-12 school sites. 
2.  Playing fields and other non-wooded recreation areas 
3.  Designated wetlands 
4.  Other facilities and uses similar in nature as determined by the City Council. 
Sec. 35.2-63.12. - Installation. 
(a)  The planting of trees shall be done in accordance with either the standardized landscape specifications jointly adopted by the Virginia Nurserymen's Association and the Virginia Society of Landscape Designers, or the Virginia Article of the American Society of Landscape Architects. 
(b)  All landscaping used to satisfy the requirements of the landscaping ordinance shall meet the specifications and standards of the American Association of Nurserymen. 
(c)  Any tree used to satisfy the requirements of the landscaping ordinance shall be a minimum of one and one-half inches in caliper at time of planting. 
(d)  Required landscaping shall be installed in accordance with an approved site plan and shall be completed prior to occupancy or the property owner or developer may provide a guarantee in a form acceptable to the Zoning Administrator that ensures installation. 
1.  A guarantee for required landscaping shall be in an amount equal to 120 percent of the cost of all plants, related materials and installation. Amount is subject to approval of the City's Zoning Administrator and Urban Forester. 
2.  All required landscaping shall be installed, inspected, and approved within six months of acceptance of the guarantee. 
3.  During any water emergency declared by the governing body in which the use of water is restricted, the Zoning Administrator may permit the delayed installation of required trees, plants or screening materials. In this event, the property owner shall be required to obtain and or maintain a guarantee. After declaration of the water emergency ends, the property owner shall be required to install all trees, plants, screening and related materials within six months. 
Sec. 35.2-63.13. - Maintenance. 
(a)  After the Zoning Administrator determines that all landscaping required by this Article is complete and in healthy condition, the property owner shall be responsible for the ongoing protection and maintenance of all required landscaping in a manner consistent with the approved site plan. 
(b)  In the event required landscaping as shown on the approved site plan is dead or damaged, it shall be replaced by the property owner after notification by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may accept a guarantee in the amount of 120 percent of the cost of all damaged or dead plants, related materials and installation. 
(c)  All required trees and shrubs as shown on the approved site plan shall be allowed to grow until maturity and shall not be removed, unless a suitable replacement is provided that meets the standards of this ordinance and shown on an approved landscaping plan. Pruning techniques shall be done in accordance with the standards adopted by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), A300, Part 1, Standard 1 and the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA). Topping of trees is inappropriate. Any tree that dies as the result of topping shall be replaced by the property owner. 
Sec. 35.2-63.14. - Alternate layout of landscaping. 
(a)  The City Planner with the concurrence of the Planning Commission may approve an alternative layout to landscaping required by this ordinance provided that the spirit and intent of the ordinance are preserved and the goals of section 35.2-63.2 (Purpose) are assured. 
(b)  To provide greater flexibility for the layout and operations of institutions, landscaping required by this ordinance for an IN-2, Institutional District may be dispersed within the area proposed for development. In dispersing the required landscaping, no special approvals shall be required, provided that the same, quantity and size of landscaping as required by this ordinance are installed. 
Sec. 35.2-64. - Signs. 
Sec. 35.2-64.1. - Title. 
    This section 35.2-64 et.seq. shall be referred to as the Sign Ordinance of the City of Lynchburg or Sign Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-64.2. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent of the Sign Ordinance to: 
1.  Minimize the negative secondary effects that can accompany the unregulated display of signs, such as visual blight and traffic hazards, by adopting content neutral time, place and manner of display standards for signs; 
2.  Preserve the residential character of residential neighborhoods; 
3.  Avoid the appearance of clutter; 
4.  Protect property values; 
5.  Reduce traffic hazards caused by distractions and impairment of sight lines to motorists; 
6.  Facilitate safe and convenient movement of all modes of traffic; 
7.  Ensure that the City remains an attractive place to live, work and play; 
8.  Reduce administrative burdens; and to promote the public necessity, convenience, general welfare and good zoning practice. 
(b)  It is not the intent of the City to suppress any free speech activities protected under the First Amendment or to regulate the content of signs or to require the alteration of federally registered trademarks or logos, but to enact a content-neutral ordinance which will address the secondary effects of signs. 
Sec. 35.2-64.3. - Substitution of noncommercial speech for commercial speech. 
    Any sign erected pursuant to this Sign Ordinance, or otherwise lawfully existing with a commercial message, may, at the option of the owner, contain a noncommercial message unrelated to the business located on the premises where the sign is erected. The noncommercial message may occupy the entire sign face or any portion thereof. The sign face may be changed from commercial to noncommercial messages, or from one noncommercial message to another, as frequently as desired by the owner of the sign, provided that the sign is not a prohibited sign or sign type. 
Sec. 35.2-64.4. - Severability clause.. 
    If any provision of the Sign Ordinance is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of the Zoning Ordinance regulating signs and all of such provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
Sec. 35.2-64.5. - Signs exempt from this sign ordinance. 
    The following shall not be subject to the provisions of the Zoning Code regulating signs: 
(a)  Signs that are subject to the regulations of the Virginia Department of Transportation and that are placed in the public rights-of-way or on City-owned property by the City for public information purposes. Such signs include but are not limited to, signs that direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic, community identification signs that identify the location of buildings and facilities or scenic or historic attractions, and similar types of signs; 
(b)  Flags; 
(c)  Memorial signs or tablets; 
(d)  Decorative embellishments attached to light poles; 
(e)  Scoreboards; and 
(f)  Signs that are intended for wayfinding purposes or signs that are only legible from within an IN-1 or IN-2, Institutional District. 
Sec. 35.2-64.6. - Sign permits required. 
(a)  Prior to the construction, installation or modification of a sign, the applicant shall submit a complete sign permit application to the Zoning Administrator in accordance with section 35.2-14.3 and the provisions of this section. The Zoning Administrator shall approve the sign permit application if the application includes sufficient detail about the dimensions and area of the sign frame, structure, face, box, base, design, materials and location to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section 35.2-64 et seq. and all applicable permit fees have been paid to the City. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a completed sign application, the Zoning Administrator will review the submitted information for compliance with the provisions of this Sign Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator will mark on the sign application approved, approved with conditions or denied and make notification to the applicant within ten working days of receipt of the completed sign application, unless the applicant has agreed to a longer period of time. Any conditions or reason for denial shall be attached to the sign application and returned to the applicant. 
(c)  Permits issued for temporary commercial banners or inflatable items shall include the date of issue and the date of expiration. Said permit shall be securely fastened to the back side of the banner or inflatable item, except for banners attached to walls. When the banner is attached to a wall or other structure not easily accessible, said permit shall be kept with the owner or manager of the business and be presented to Zoning Administrator upon request. 
(d)  If a proposed sign or banner complies with the standards set forth in the Zoning Ordinance a sign permit shall be granted. The Zoning Administrator shall not deny a permit for a sign based upon the content of the sign and the denial of a permit on such grounds is prohibited. 
(e)  Appeals of a decision to deny a sign permit shall be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals in the same manner as provided in section 35.2-12 of this Zoning Ordinance and in the Code of Virginia. 
Sec. 35.2-64.7. - General regulations. 
(a)  Awning Signs. For the purposes of the Sign Ordinance, awning signs shall be allowed and treated as building mounted signs. The maximum permissible area for awning signs shall be subject to, and calculated with, the maximum permissible building mounted sign area for the specific district in which such signs are located. These provisions are applicable to awning signs regardless of the material. 
(b)  Window Signs. Window Signs covering more than 25 percent of the glass area shall be calculated with and included in the maximum permitted building mounted sign area in the district. 
(c)  Signs for Discontinued Uses. Within 30 days after a use or activity that is advertised by a sign ceases, the owner of such use or activity or the owner of the property on which the sign advertising the discontinued use or activity is located shall remove any changeable copy on the sign. In the event the use of any non-conforming sign is abandoned for two or more years the sign and its supporting structure shall be removed by the owner of the use or activity or by the owner of the property on which the sign is located. If the sign and its supporting structure are not removed the City shall give the property owner notice to remove the sign and a deadline for removal. If the property owner fails to remove the sign after having been given written notice by the City to do so or if the City after reasonable efforts to do so is unable to locate the property owner, the City may pursue any or all of the following remedies: 
1.  Through its employees or agents, enter the property upon which the sign is located, remove the sign and its supporting structure, and bill the property owner for the costs of such removal; 
2.  Apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order requiring the removal of such abandoned non-conforming sign by the owner by means of injunction or other appropriate remedy; and/or 
3.  Cite the owner of the property where the sign is located with a violation of the Zoning Ordinance as provided in section 35.2-102. 
(d)  Existing Signs. 
1.  Any existing sign and/or sign structure legally erected and maintained, which is non-conforming to the provisions of the June 22, 2004 amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, may continue in its non-conforming status as long as it is maintained in its then structural condition as it existed at the time of adoption of this article (see non-conforming section 35.2-91.4). 
2.  When a non-conforming sign, sign frame, and/or sign structure is intentionally reconstructed or structurally altered by the business or building owner, the surface area and height requirements for a new sign, sign frame, and/or sign structure, under this ordinance, shall apply. 
3.  The new sign, sign frame, and/or sign structure may exceed the ordinance requirements, however, to a limit which is calculated by taking a 25 percent reduction in the height and/or square foot area of the original sign, sign frame and/or sign structure, provided that the new sign, sign frame, and or sign structure is constructed within 60 days of the removal of the previous non-conforming sign and sign application approval is granted as provided in this Sign Ordinance. 
4.  New signs, sign frames and/or sign structures that exceed the area or height standards of this ordinance pursuant to paragraph (3) shall be considered non-conforming. Replacements of signs destroyed by acts of God, or other occurrences beyond the control of the owner shall comply fully with this Sign Ordinance. 
(e)  Prohibited Signs. Portable signs, pennants, streamers, off site directional signs, and flashing signs are prohibited. 
(f)  Compliance with electrical code. All illuminated signs must comply with UL standards of the statewide uniform building code. 
(g)  Violations and penalties: See section 35.2-102. 
Sec. 35.2-64.8. - Flags. 
    Any flag that advertises a business, service, product, goods, special promotion, activity or event shall be calculated with the maximum permissible sign area for the district in which the flag is located. 
Sec. 35.2-64.9. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Generally. 
1.  Temporary signs that are permitted by this section may not be placed on utility poles, traffic control signs or within the public rights-of-way. 
2.  All temporary signs must be removed within three days after the event or activity being advertised or promoted by the temporary sign has been completed. 
(b)  Banner Design Standards. Banners shall comply with the design standards of Exhibit VI-9. 
Exhibit VI-9: Banner Design Standards 
District Maximum
Area Maximum
Number
of Signs Minimum
Setback Maximum
Projection
from Wall R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, 24 sq. ft. 1 Per Street Frontage 8 Feet 3 Inches B-1, B-4 24 sq. ft. 1 Per Street Frontage 8 Feet 3 Inches B-3, B-5, IN-1, IN-2 32 sq. ft. 1 Per Street Frontage 8 Feet 3 Inches I-1, I-2, I-3 24 sq. ft. 1 Per Street Frontage 8 Feet 3 Inches  
SF = square feet 
(c)  Banner Limitations. Banners may be erected only by the occupant of the lot and the advertising matter shall apply only to the nature of the activity occupying the lot on which the Banner is erected. 
(d)  Applications for Banners and Inflatable Signs. 
1.  An application and permit for a banner or inflatable item is required as provided in section 35.2-14.3. 
2.  No such permit shall be issued for a period to exceed 60 days. 
3.  Permits for banner signs and inflatable items shall not be issued for any location during a period of 30 days after the expiration date of a permit for a banner or inflatable item previously issued for the same location, unless the business operated at the location has changed ownership. 
4.  In no case shall a banner or inflatable item be displayed for more than a total of 180 days per calendar year. 
5.  Said banners and inflatable items shall be securely fastened to the ground or other immovable object and shall be located a minimum of eight feet from the property line. 
(e)  Temporary Construction Signs. 
1.  Temporary construction signs shall comply with the design standards of Exhibit VI-10: 
Exhibit VI-10: Temporary Construction Sign Design Standards 
District Maximum Sign Area Maximum Number of Signs R-C, R-1, R-2, R-3 6 sq. ft. 1 R-4 16 sq. ft. 1 B-1, B-3, B-4, B-5, IN-1, IN-2 32 sq. ft. 1 I-1, I-2, I-3 32 sq. ft. 1  
SF = square feet 
2.  One temporary construction sign shall be allowed for each contractor, subcontractor, architect or engineer. Temporary construction signs shall only be allowed on the property on which construction will commence within the next three months, and may be erected on the wall of a construction trailer, construction shed or on the ground. Temporary construction signs shall not be lighted by any means and shall be removed prior to a certificate of occupancy (CO) being granted for said building. A sign permit is not required for the placement of a temporary construction sign. 
(f)  Temporary Real Estate Signs. 
1.  Temporary real estate signs shall comply with the design standards of Exhibit VI-11. 
Exhibit VI-11: Temporary Real Estate Sign Design Standards 
District Maximum Sign Area Maximum Number of Signs R-C, R-1. R-2, R-3 6 sq. ft. 1 per Street Frontage R-4 16 sq. ft. 1 per Street Frontage B-1, B-3, B-4, B-5, IN-1, IN-2 32 sq. ft. 1 per Street Frontage I-1, I-2, I-3 32 sq. ft. 1 per Street Frontage  
SF = square feet 
2.  Temporary real estate signs are to be placed only on the property that is for sale or lease. Temporary real estate signs shall be removed within three days of the sale or lease of the property. 
(g)  Temporary Subdivision Signs. 
1.  One temporary subdivision identification sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area may be erected during construction at an entrance to the subdivided property; provided that not more than two signs shall be erected for any one subdivision. 
2.  These signs shall be removed upon completion or sale of 75 percent of the lots in the subdivision. 
3.  No electric or other luminous sign and no sign illuminated by a floodlight or other similar device shall be permitted. 
Sec. 35.2-64.10. - Political signs. 
    A political sign is a temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a person running for a governmental office or promoting a position on an issue to be voted on at a governmental election. Within any district, political signs may be erected on a lot, provided that such sign is erected only upon approval of the property owner. Political signs may not be placed on utility poles, traffic control signs or within the public rights-of-way. Political signs must be removed within three days after the election. The removal of such signs shall be the responsibility of the property owner on whose lot the sign is displayed. 
Sec. 35.2-64.11. - Opinion signs. 
    Opinion signs are permitted in any zoning district on private property only and may be erected only upon approval of the property owner. Opinion signs may not be placed on utility poles, traffic control signs or within the public rights-of-way. 
Sec. 35.2-64.12. - Signs in R-C, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts. 
    Signs pertaining only to the uses conducted on the premises will be permitted, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Home Occupations. One sign announcing a permitted home occupation will be allowed for each street on which the lot abuts. Each such sign shall not exceed one square foot in area. Such signs shall be illuminated only by shielded white lights. 
(b)  Other Permitted Use Signs. Signs for permitted non-residential uses shall be permitted when such signs do not exceed an aggregate area of 18 square feet for each use. Such signs may be illuminated only by shielded white lights. 
(c)  Development Identification Signs. One development identification sign not exceeding 40 square feet in area may be erected at each main street entrance to a development subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Signs shall be monument signs with a maximum height of eight feet. 
2.  The maximum area of the sign may be on one sign or divided into two signs located on each side of the development's road entrance. 
3.  Light fixtures shall not be included in calculating the maximum height. 
4.  Such signs shall be illuminated only by shielded white lights. 
(d)  Changeable Copy Signs for Certain Institutional Uses. Changeable copy signs may be erected for schools, religious institutions and hospitals in residential districts subject to the following provisions: 
1.  The property shall abut and the sign shall be oriented toward an arterial street. 
2.  The digital reader board shall be limited to 18 square feet and the total sign area limited to 30 square feet. 
3.  Signs shall be monument signs with a maximum height of eight feet. 
4.  Animations, flashing, video and other display or transition modes of operation that create the appearance of motion are prohibited. 
5.  Signs shall not change the displayed message more frequently than once every six seconds and transitions shall not last longer than one second. 
6.  Display brightness shall not exceed three-tenths foot-candles over ambient light levels. Foot-candle readings shall be measured using an appropriate meter at a distance of 45 feet perpendicular to the face of the sign. 
7.  Signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities to maintain compliance with brightness requirements. 
Sec. 35.2-64.13. - Signs in the B-1 and IN-1 District. 
    Signs pertaining only to the uses conducted on the premises, but not including any roof signs or billboards, will be permitted, subject to the provisions of this section. The provisions of this section do not apply to signs that are further than 12 inches inside of the inside face of an exterior windowpane. 
(a)  Building-Mounted Signs. 
1.  Building mounted signs shall face only upon an abutting street or an abutting parking lot of the same parcel where the sign is located. 
2.  The aggregate face area of all signs on any one wall of the building shall not exceed 24 square feet except for where building frontage along the street exceeds 60 linear feet, the sign area may be increased to up to one-half square foot per linear feet, provided that the maximum size shall not exceed 50 square feet. 
3.  Newly constructed groups of buildings shall have unified and coordinated building mounted signs. 
4.  No wall sign shall project more than 15 inches beyond the face of a building. Projecting Signs mounted perpendicular to the building may project a maximum of four feet beyond the face of the building and shall allow for eight feet of clearance between the bottom of the sign structure and the ground. No sign shall project above the parapet wall of the building. 
Exhibit VI-12: Building Mounted Sign Samples 

(b)  Free-Standing Signs. 
1.  One free-standing sign structure, permanently fixed to the ground, may be erected on each street on which a lot occupied by a permitted use abuts, provided such sign structure does not extend beyond the lot line nor shall such sign be located closer to the front property line than two feet. 
2.  Such sign structure shall be limited to two sign faces, each of which shall not exceed 24 square feet in surface area. 
3.  Any architectural or decorative surrounds to support or enhance the sign face may not exceed 25 percent of the maximum allowable sign face surface area. 
4.  Sign bases, uprights, or poles located under the sign shall not count toward the architectural or decorative surrounds calculation. 
5.  The overall height of any sign structure, including its architectural or decorative surrounds, shall not exceed ten feet above the ground. 
6.  Any pole supporting a freestanding sign shall be in an 18 inch wide rectangular enclosure. The material and color of the enclosure shall coordinate with the sign and/or building. 
7.  Any freestanding sign in a historic district shall be monument style, maximum seven feet in height, comply with the historic district guidelines, and receive approval from the Secretary of the Historic Preservation Commission. Decisions of the Secretary may be appealed to the Historic Preservation Commission. 
Exhibit VI-13: Free-Standing Sign Samples 

(c)  Signs for Multi-Structure Developments. 
1.  When a group of buildings is coordinated into a business, IN-1 Institutional campus or shopping area, one free-standing sign structure, permanently fixed to the ground and designed to identify the area as a whole, may be erected on each street on which the area abuts, provided such sign structure shall not be located closer to the front property line than two feet. 
2.  Such sign shall be limited to two sign faces, each of which shall not exceed 24 square feet in area for the first business tenant, but may be increased incrementally by four square feet for each additional business tenant up to a maximum of 32 square feet. 
3.  Any architectural or decorative surrounds to support or enhance the sign face may not exceed 25 percent of the maximum allowable sign face surface area. 
4.  The overall height of any such sign, including its architectural or decorative surrounds, shall not exceed ten feet above the ground. 
(d)  Sign Illumination. 
1.  When any sign is lighted in these districts, such lights shall be enclosed in the sign, shaded or indirect so that the source of illumination is not visible and in no way interferes with the vision of motorists or with neighboring residents. 
2.  Only white illumination shall be used, and no flashing (on-and-off) sign simulating movement shall be permitted, except signs indicating time and/or temperature or similar signs erected for the convenience of the public. No other changeable copy signs are permitted in the B-1 or IN-1 districts. 
3.  No fluorescent paint or other reflective surface shall be used. 
(e)  Open Signs. One sign with the word "open" (neon or otherwise) shall be permitted per use, provided the sign does not exceed four square feet. Said sign shall not count towards the maximum allowable sign square footage if it is located behind a window or door. 
(f)  Visibility at Intersections. Signs shall not encroach on areas necessary for visibility at intersections (see section 35.2-66.4). 
Sec. 35.2-64.14. - Signs in B-3, B-5, IN-2, I-1, I-2 and I-3 Districts. 
    Signs pertaining only to the uses conducted on the premises, but not including any roof signs or billboards, will be permitted, subject to the provisions of this section. The provisions of this section do not apply to window signs on the inside of buildings that are further than 12 inches inside the inside face of an exterior window pane, nor to small signs on outdoor merchandise display racks, cases and vending devices. 
(a)  Building-Mounted Signs. 
1.  Building mounted signs shall face only an abutting street or an abutting parking lot of the same parcel where the sign is located. 
2.  The aggregate sign face surface area of all signs, including trim or embellishment, on any one building wall within 200 feet from the abutting street right-of-way for any improved street shall not exceed 25 square feet plus one square foot for each linear foot of such wall. 
3.  In no case shall the sign face surface area exceed 150 square feet. 
4.  The aggregate sign face surface area of all signs on any one building wall greater than 200 feet from the abutting street right-of-way shall not exceed 25 square feet plus two square feet for each linear foot of such wall. 
5.  The sign face surface area shall not exceed 200 square feet except that for buildings three stories or greater in height the sign size may increase 20 square feet per story above the maximum permissible sign area. 
6.  Newly constructed groups of buildings shall have unified and coordinated building mounted signs. 
7.  No sign applied flat to the wall shall project more than 15 inches beyond the face of a building. Signs mounted perpendicular to the building may project a maximum of four feet beyond the face of the building and shall provide at least eight feet of clearance between the bottom of the sign structure and the ground. No sign shall project above the parapet wall of the building. 
(b)  Free-Standing Signs. 
1.  One free-standing sign structure, permanently fixed to the ground, may be erected fronting each street that a lot occupied by a permitted use abuts, provided such sign structure is not located closer to the property line than two feet. 
2.  Such sign structure shall be limited to two sign faces, each of which shall not exceed 50 square feet in area. 
3.  Any changeable copy sign must abut or connect with the sign face and the total square footage for both sign face surface area and changeable copy sign surface area may not exceed 66 square feet (see Exhibit VI-14). 
4.  The changeable copy sign surface area itself may be no larger than 22 square feet. 
5.  Any architectural or decorative surrounds to support or enhance the sign face and/or changeable copy sign face may not exceed 25 percent of the allowable sign face surface area. 
6.  The overall height of any such sign structure, including any architectural or decorative surrounds, shall not exceed 17 feet above the ground. 
7.  Any pole supporting a freestanding sign shall be in an 18-inch wide rectangular enclosure. The material and color of the enclosure shall coordinate with the sign and/or building. Any freestanding sign in a historic district shall be monument style, comply with the historic districts design guidelines and receive administrative approval from the City Planner. Decisions of the City Planner may be appealed to the Historic Preservation Commission. 
Exhibit VI-14: Changeable Copy Signs 

(c)  Signs for Multi-Structure Developments. 
1.  When a group of buildings is coordinated into a business, institutional campus, shopping area or industrial complex, one free-standing sign structure, permanently fixed to the ground, designed to identify the area as a whole may be erected on each street on which the area abuts, provided such sign shall not be located closer to the front property line than two feet. 
2.  For a group of buildings that is between 100,000 square feet and 200,000 square feet, such sign shall be limited to two faces, each of which shall not exceed 75 square feet in area plus 16 square feet for a changeable copy sign. 
3.  The changeable copy sign must be attached to the sign. For a group of buildings that exceeds 200,000 square feet in area, such sign shall be limited to two faces, each of which shall not exceed 125 square feet in area plus 16 square feet for a changeable copy sign. 
4.  The changeable copy sign must be attached to the sign. Any architectural or decorative surrounds to support or enhance the sign and/or changeable copy sign may not exceed 25 percent of the allowable sign area. 
5.  The overall height of any such sign, including any architectural or decorative surrounds, shall not exceed 17 feet above the ground. 
6.  Development identification signs may be erected at each main street entrance to business park, industrial park or corporate campus development subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Signs shall be monument signs with a maximum height of 12 feet. 
b.  The maximum area of the sign as established in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this section may be on one sign or divided into two signs located on each side of the development road entrance. 
c.  Such signs shall be illuminated only by shielded white lights. 
(d)  Traffic Direction Signs. Traffic direction signs, each not exceeding four square feet in area, and four feet in height may be displayed as follows: 
1.  Signs identifying vehicular entrance to and exit from the lot; and 
2.  Signs of the type generally used for traffic control necessary for the safe and proper control of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the lot. 
(e)  Sign illumination. 
1.  When any sign is lighted in this district, such lights shall be enclosed in the sign, shaded or indirect so that the source of illumination is not visible and in no way interferes with the vision of motorists or with neighboring occupants. 
2.  Only white illumination shall be used, and no flashing (on-and-off) sign, nor any sign simulating movement, which includes video and animation, shall be permitted, except signs indicating time and/or temperature or similar signs erected for the convenience of the public. 
3.  No fluorescent paint or other preparation shall be used for high reflection. 
4.  Neon tubing of any color is permitted on a sign, provided the neon is installed within a channel enclosure. 
5.  Digital signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities, with display brightness not to exceed three-tenths foot-candles over ambient light levels. Foot-candle readings shall be measured using an appropriate meter at a distance of 45 feet perpendicular to the face of the digital billboard. 
6.  Digital signs shall not change the displayed message more frequently than once every six seconds. 
(f)  Open Signs. One sign with the word "open" (neon or otherwise) shall be permitted per use, provided the sign does not exceed four square feet. Such a sign shall not count towards the maximum sign square footage. 
(g)  Visibility at Intersections. Signs shall not encroach on areas necessary for visibility at intersections (see section 35.2-66.4). 
Sec. 35.2-64.15. - Signs in B-4 District. 
    Signs pertaining only to the uses conducted on the premises, but not including any roof signs or billboards, will be permitted subject the conditions of this section. The provisions of this section do not apply to signs that are further than 12 inches inside the interior face of an exterior windowpane, nor to small signs on outdoor merchandise display racks, cases and vending devices. 
(a)  Prohibited Signs. Box signs, internally illuminated plastic signs, moving signs or signs simulating movement, and flashing signs are not permitted. 
(b)  Building-Mounted Signs. 
1.  Building-mounted signs shall face only upon an abutting street or an abutting parking lot of the same parcel where the sign is located. 
2.  The aggregate face area of all signs on any one wall of a building shall not exceed one square foot per one linear foot of building. 
3.  For buildings six stories or greater, the sign size may increase 20 square feet per story. 
4.  No roof-mounted signs are permitted except where the Historic Preservation Commission finds that the sign is consistent with historically significant signage in a local, state or federal historic district or property. 
5.  No sign applied flat to the wall shall project more than 15 inches beyond the face of a building. Signs mounted perpendicular to the building may project a maximum of four feet beyond the face of the building and shall provide at least eight feet of clearance between the bottom of the sign structure and the ground. No sign shall project above the parapet wall of the building. 
(c)  Free-Standing Signs. 
1.  One free-standing sign, permanently fixed to the ground, may be erected on each street on which a lot occupied by a permitted use abuts, provided such sign does not extend beyond the lot line. 
2.  Such sign shall be limited to two faces, each of which shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Any architectural or decorative surrounds to support or enhance the sign may not exceed 25 percent of the allowable sign area. 
3.  The overall height of any such sign, including any architectural or decorative surrounds, shall not exceed seven feet above the ground and shall be monument style. 
(d)  Signs for Multi-Structure Developments. 
1.  When a group of buildings is coordinated into a business or shopping area, one free-standing sign, permanently fixed to the ground, designed to identify the area as a whole may be erected on each street on which the area abuts, provided such sign shall not extend beyond the lot line. 
2.  Such sign shall be limited to two faces, each of which shall not exceed 50 square feet in area. 
3.  The overall height of any such sign shall not exceed seven feet above the ground and shall be monument style. 
(e)  Compliance with Historic District Design Guidelines. Any sign in the B-4 district shall follow the commercial historic districts design guidelines and receive approval from the City Planner. Decisions of the City Planner may be appealed to the Historic Preservation Commission. 
(f)  Sign illumination. Internal illumination of signs is permitted for individual letters or logos. When any sign is lighted, such lights shall be indirect white spotlights only. Only white illumination shall be used. No fluorescent paint or other highly reflective surface shall be used. 
(g)  Open Signs. One sign with the word "open" (neon or otherwise) shall be permitted per use, provided the sign does not exceed four square feet. Such a sign shall not count towards the maximum sign square footage. 
(h)  Temporary Signs. Additional temporary signs may be permitted as regulated by Section 35.2-14.3 and the provisions of this section. 
Sec. 35.2-64.16. - Billboards. 
    All billboards constructed or erected after the enactment of this ordinance shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  No person shall cause to be constructed or erected in a B-5 district any billboard except a billboard that replaces a then existing billboard in a B-5 district. Any billboard existing in a B-5 district at the time of enactment of this ordinance, and any replacements and any billboard existing in an I-2 or I-3 district at the time of enactment of this ordinance shall not be considered as a non-conforming billboard provided said billboard is in compliance with this ordinance. All other billboards existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance shall be deemed non-conforming billboards. 
(b)  Any billboard located within 300 feet of the centerline of, and readily readable from, any limited access highway shall be located not nearer than 500 feet to an exit ramp. The required distance shall be measured along the center line of the highway, in the direction in which traffic is approaching the exit ramp, beginning at the nearest intersecting point of a line drawn perpendicular to the said center line through the beginning of the nearest exit ramp with said highway. No billboard shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct an existing advertising structure viewed from a point on the main traveled portion of said highway at a distance of 300 feet approaching said sign. 
(c)  Billboards shall be located no less than 500 feet apart. 
(d)  The spacing provisions cited above shall not apply to billboards separated by buildings or other obstructions in such a manner that only one sign located within the required spacing distance is visible from the road at any one time. 
(e)  Except on property located adjacent to limited access highways, no billboard shall be located within 150 feet of any property zoned for or used as a residential development, church, playground, school or public park. 
(f)  The construction of new billboards shall be prohibited within 1,320 feet of the John Lynch Memorial Bridge and the Carter Glass Bridge. 
(g)  The area of the advertising surfaces erected on any billboard shall not exceed 675 square feet, and no billboard(s) shall be double-decked, multi-decked, stacked or side-by-side structures with more than one surface area facing the same direction. 
(h)  When any billboard is lighted, such lights shall be enclosed in the sign, shaded or indirect, so that they will in no way interfere with the vision of motorists or with neighboring residents. Only white illumination shall be used, and no flashing (on-and-off) sign, nor any sign simulating movement (which includes video and animation), shall be permitted. No fluorescent paint or other highly reflective surface can be used. 
(i)  The maximum height of a billboard shall be 40 feet from the grade of the thoroughfare to which the sign is oriented or from the base of the structure, whichever is higher. 
(j)  Commercial electronic variable message signs or digital billboards are legal and conforming and permitted in I-2, Light Industrial Districts and I-3, Heavy Industrial Districts by right. Existing billboards in B-5, General Business Districts may be converted to a digital billboard by right and upon such conversion shall be legal and conforming. 
(k)  Digital billboards shall conform to the following additional standards: 
1.  Digital billboards shall not change the displayed message more frequently than once every six seconds. 
2.  Display brightness shall not exceed three-tenths foot-candles over ambient light levels. Foot-candle readings shall be measured using an appropriate meter at a distance of 250 feet perpendicular to the face of the digital billboard. 
3.  Digital billboards shall have automatic dimming capabilities. 
(l)  All billboards shall be maintained by the owner in accordance with Section 33.1-370.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(m)  No billboard shall be erected, rebuilt, altered or relocated without a Building Permit. 
(Ord. No. O-18-048 , 6-12-18) 
Sec. 35.2-64.17. - Maintenance. 
    All signs, banners, inflatable items and similar devices, and their supporting structures, that are displayed within the City shall be maintained in good order and repair, and shall be properly anchored so as to be kept in sound condition. All exposed surfaces shall be protected against decay or rust by proper application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or a similar surface treatment. 
Sec. 35.2-64.18. - Signs in historic districts. 
(a)  Except for those standards for signs which must be modified by the granting of a variance, a conditional use permit or a rezoning, modified signs are permitted in a historic district by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the Historic Preservation Commission. A request for a certificate of appropriateness for a modified sign shall be submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission in the manner provided by section 35.2-13 of this Zoning Ordinance. The Historic Preservation Commission may grant modifications upon a determination that: 
1.  The proposed sign is a re-creation or repair of a historically significant sign. 
2.  The proposed sign will not be detrimental to the character of the historic district in which it is located or other adjacent properties. 
(b)  The Historic Preservation Commission shall not deny an application for a modification of a sign in a historic district based upon the content of the sign and the denial of an application on such grounds is prohibited. Appeals of a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be taken in the manner provided in section 35.2-44.1 of the Zoning Ordinance and in the Code of Virginia. 
Sec. 35.2-65. - Outdoor Lighting. 
Sec. 35.2-65.1. - Purpose. 
    These outdoor lighting provisions establish standards for outdoor lighting to: 
(a)  Protect against direct glare and excessive lighting; 
(b)  Provide safe roadways for motorists, cyclists and pedestrians; 
(c)  Promote efficient and cost effective lighting; 
(d)  Ensure that sufficient lighting can be provided where needed to promote safety and security; and 
(e)  Allow for flexibility in the style of lighting fixtures. 
Sec. 35.2-65.2. - Applicability. 
(a)  All applications for final site plan review or conditional use permits shall include lighting plans showing location, type, height and lumen output of all proposed and existing fixtures. The applicant shall provide information to verify that lighting conforms to the provisions of this lighting code at the time of final site plan approval. 
(b)  All permanent exterior lighting installed on private property, excluding single-household and duplex dwellings, after the effective date of these provisions shall comply with the requirements established herein unless required by a public agency for public safety purposes. The standards established in this section do not apply to public street lights. 
(c)  Lighting that is established pursuant to submittal of a master lighting plan may exceed the heights established in section 35.2-65.3(a) as long as a qualified lighting professional certifies that spillover lighting at the outer property lines of the area subject to the master lighting plan does not exceed the maximum lighting thresholds established in section 35.2-65.3. 
(d)  The outdoor lighting requirements of this section do not apply to holiday lighting between November 15 and January 15 of each year. 
Sec. 35.2-65.3 - General standards. 
(a)  Shielding Required. All exterior lighting shall be full cut-off fixtures with the light source fully shielded, with the exception of unshielded luminaires installed pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section. All other lighting shall be installed so that the direct lighting from fixtures is shielded from crossing any residential property line. 
(b)  Maximum Spillover Lighting. Outdoor lighting shall not cause spillover lighting at any residential property line exceeding 0.5 footcandles measured horizontally and vertically at the property line. 
(c)  Unshielded Luminaires. When a light source or luminaire has no cutoff or a cutoff that is greater than 90 degrees, the requirements of Exhibit VI-15: Standards for Unshielded Luminaires shall be met. 
Exhibit VI-15: Standards for Unshielded Luminaires 
Standard Maximum
Permitted
Average Maintained
Illumination Measured
Vertically and
Horizontally Maximum
Permitted Height of Light Source* Uniformity (ratio of maximum to minimum illumination) Residential Districts 2.0 footcandles 16 feet 15:1 Business and Institutional Districts 5.0 footcandles 16 feet 15:1 Industrial Districts 5.0 footcandles 20 feet 15:1  
*Measured from the ground to light source. 

(d)  Other Outdoor Lighting Fixtures. All outdoor lighting fixtures other than those listed in paragraph (c) of this section shall have a total cutoff of light at an angle equal to or less than 90 degrees and shall be shielded from abutting residential properties. The maximum permitted height of the luminaire shall meet the standards in Exhibit VI-16. 
Exhibit VI-16: Standards for Luminaires with Cutoffs 
Standard Maximum Permitted Height
of Light Source* Residential District 25 feet Business, Institutional and Industrial District 35 feet  
* Measured from the ground to light source. 

Sec. 35.2-65.4. - Additional regulations. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary: 
(a)  No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted. 
(b)  Light sources or luminaires shall not be located within a required buffer except along pedestrian walkways. 
(c)  Measurement. 
1.  Metering equipment. Lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles. 
2.  Method of measurement. The meter sensor shall at ground level for horizontal footcandles and five feet above ground for vertical footcandles. Readings shall be taken by qualified personnel only after the cell has been exposed long enough to provide a constant reading. 
3.  Responsibility for Measurement at the Time of Installation. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the person installing lighting fixtures shall document compliance with the requirements of the lighting requirements in this section 35.2-65 et seq. 
Sec. 35.2-65.5. - Lighting plan required. 
    As part of the site plan approval process, the applicant shall submit a lighting plan that includes the location of outdoor lighting and a key to the proposed outdoor lighting that provides the following information: 
(a)  Type and number of luminaire equipment (fixtures), including the "cut off characteristics", indicating manufacturer and model number(s). 
(b)  Lamp source type (bulb type, i.e. high pressure sodium), lumen output, and wattage. Mounting height with distance noted to the nearest property line for each luminaire. 
(c)  Types of timing devices used to control the hours set for illumination, as well as the proposed hours when each fixture will be operated. 
(d)  Total footcandles for each fixture, and total square footage of areas to be illuminated. 
(e)  Lighting manufacturer-supplied specifications ("cut sheets") that include photographs of the fixtures, indicating the certified "cut off characteristics" of the fixture. 
(f)  Lighting design shall be submitted showing an average maintained point-by-point analysis of the area and showing the footcandles at the property lines for light trespass analysis. 
(g)  A statement from a lighting professional that the resulting lighting, including all on-site sources of lighting complies with the standards of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(h)  A statement that no substitutions, additions, or changes may be made without prior approval by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 35.2-66. - Access and Visibility at Intersections. 
Sec. 35.2-66.1. - Access to lots. 
(a)  All driveway entrances and other openings onto streets shall be designed constructed so that: 
1.  Vehicles can enter and exit from the lot in question without posing any substantial danger to themselves, pedestrians, cyclists or vehicles traveling in abutting streets; and 
2.  Interference with the free and convenient flow of traffic in abutting or surrounding streets is minimized. 
(b)  Requests for new driveway entrances or requests for modifications to existing driveway entrances, when not associated with a rezoning or conditional use permit application shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. 
(c)  Specifications for spacing and dimensions of driveway entrances are established in the following section. 
Sec. 35.2-66.2. - Access standards. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is intended to ensure safe and efficient access to commercial properties and to encourage growth and economic development. These access management standards are intended to minimize disruptive and potentially hazardous traffic conflicts, ensure safe access by emergency vehicles, maximize roadway capacity and promote public safety. The regulations set forth in this section will apply to all urban collector or higher order roads as identified in the Comprehensive Plan, except where access is managed by VDOT. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to any development or redevelopment subject to site plan approval, subdivision, resubdivision or a traffic study. These standards shall not apply within the B-4 district due to the low traffic speeds, limited setbacks, on-street-parking, wide sidewalks and other pedestrian-oriented design features throughout this zoning district. 
(c)  Public and Emergency Vehicle Access. Access shall be provided to the public street system from all lots, parcels or developments. All subdivisions shall have access from a public street capable of supporting emergency access. 
(d)  Minimum Driveway Spacing. The minimum separation between the nearest edges of pavement between driveways shall be 150 feet along urban collector streets and 330 feet along arterial streets unless a greater separation is determined to be needed for any development requiring a traffic study. The City Engineer may modify these standards to reflect unique site conditions (such as traffic speed, traffic volume, visibility at intersections, turn lanes and topography) that would improve or degrade intersection safety. 
(e)  Maximum Number of Driveways Per Lot. Lots existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance without sufficient frontage to allow the above minimum distance between driveways shall be permitted one driveway per lot and: 
1.  Where topography prohibits joint access, driveway separation shall be maximized. 
2.  Where adjacent lots existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance are under separate ownership, one or more of the lots is too narrow to allow for required driveway separations, and one of the property owners does not agree to relocate an existing driveway, the City Engineer shall determine the location of the driveway for the lot being developed or redeveloped based on traffic safety and considerations and the potential for future shared driveways. 
3.  Where two or more abutting lots are under common ownership or control, the entire frontage of the lot shall be used in determining the number of driveways. 
(f)  Access for Corner Tracts. No driveway approach may be located closer to an intersection than the minimum driveway spacing standard established in paragraph (d) of this section. This measurement shall be taken from the intersection of property lines at the corner and the nearest edge of pavement of driveway. When existing lot sizes do not allow for minimum spacing requirements to be met, the City Engineer shall determine the safest practical access, which may include locating access as far from the intersection as practical, limiting access to side streets and/or limiting turn movements. 
(g)  Shared Access. 
1.  If the applicant requests to create a lot with less frontage than the minimum driveway spacing established in paragraph (d) of this section, the use of shared driveways, cross-access drives, service drives, and similar means of shared access connecting two or more lots or uses shall be required pursuant to subdivision approval. 
2.  Where shared access is provided for multiple uses, the minimum parking requirement shall be reduced by ten percent for each of the lots providing said shared access. 
3.  Where shared access is provided for multiple lots pursuant to this section, access easements granting access to adjacent or undeveloped site(s) shall be recorded with the following specifics: 
a.  Location. New shared driveways, cross-access drives, and service drives shall be aligned with existing drives on adjacent lots. 
b.  Cross-Access Easement. Shared driveways, cross-access drives, and service drives shall be located within a dedicated access easement that permits traffic circulation between lots, which shall be recorded with the clerk of court. 
c.  Construction and Materials. Shared driveways, cross-access drives, and service drives shall be paved with concrete, asphalt, similar hard-surfacing materials or porous pavement materials approved by the TRC. The grade of such drives shall be coordinated with existing or planned drives on adjacent lots. 
d.  Maintenance. The easement area shall remain clear of obstructions, and shall not be used for parking. Each property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the shared access. A maintenance agreement shall be required by the City Planner, subject to review and approval by the City Attorney. 
e.  Remaining Frontage. The remaining street frontage on collector and arterial roadways shall have no access. 
(h)  Alignment of Access. Driveways shall be aligned with existing driveways and cross-overs unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
Sec. 35.2-66.3. - Design of driveway access for collector or higher order streets. 
    The minimum dimensions for curb radii, driveway throat length and driveway widths shall comply with the City's currently adopted Engineering Standards Manual. 
Sec. 35.2-66.4. - Visibility at intersections. 
(a)  Purpose. To provide adequate visibility for streets and driveways, sight visibility areas shall be maintained at street intersections and at the intersections of streets with driveways serving more than two dwelling units in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Visual Obstructions Prohibited. Sight visibility areas shall be maintained free of visual obstructions to between the height of three and eight feet above street grade. No building, fence, wall, hedge or other structure or planting more than three feet in height other than posts, columns or trees separated by not less than six feet from each other, shall be erected, placed or maintained in these areas. 
(c)  Visibility Area Dimensions. The dimensions of visibility areas shall comply with the standards established in Exhibit VI-17. The dimensions in the table correspond with the dimensions in the drawing and are measured from the intersections of the edges of pavement lines to the ends of the hypotenuse of the triangle. The City Engineer may modify these standards based on topographic conditions, speeds and road configurations in accordance with VDOT Access Management Regulations. 
(d)  B-4 District Applicability. In the B-4 district, buildings shall not be required to be set back further than the edge of the property lines. 
Exhibit VI-17: Visibility Areas 
Intersection Type Dimension A B Any intersection involving only local streets or driveways 20 feet 20 feet Any intersection of a local street or driveway with an urban arterial with a speed limit of 30 mph or less 20 feet along the driveway or local street 25 feet along the urban collector street or urban arterial street Any intersection of a local street or driveway with an urban collector or urban arterial with a speed limit of 35 mph 25 feet along the driveway or local street 40 feet along the urban collector street or urban arterial street Any intersection of two urban collectors or urban arterials with speed limits of 35 mph or less 30 feet 30 feet Any intersection of a street or driveway along a street with a speed limit greater than 35 mph. To be determined by the City Engineer based on compliance with minimum sight distances established by VDOT.  
Sec. 35.2-67. - Sidewalks and Pedestrian Connectivity. 
Sec. 35.2-67.1. - Applicability. 
(a)  Sidewalks and walkways that comply with Americans with Disabilities Act requirements, the City of Lynchburg Manual of Specifications and Standard Details and this section, shall be provided for any development subject to site plan review. 
1.  New development: Sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontages. 
2.  Redevelopment: Sidewalks shall be provided along the primary street frontage and for redevelopments with multiple street frontages along the secondary street frontage as provided in this section. For purposes of this section, primary street frontage shall be the street with the highest vehicle trips per day and secondary street frontage shall be the street with the second highest vehicle trips per day. 
a.  Sidewalks shall be required when site development meets the threshold of 15,000 gross square feet of developed area per 100 linear feet of primary street frontage, whether the developed area is existing or proposed at the time of site plan approval. Existing development shall be calculated from data maintained by the city assessor's office and proposed development shall include any new buildings, parking areas or areas of land disturbance. 
[site development = (frontage ft/100) x 15,000] 
b.  Redevelopments that exceed the site development threshold prior to final site plan approval, shall not be required to construct sidewalks until site development exceeds an additional 5,000 cumulative square feet. 
c.  For the purposes of this ordinance redevelopment shall be considered the expanded development of a property while retaining the existing buildings. 
Exhibit VI-18: Sidewalk Threshold Requirements for Redevelopment 

(Ord. No. O-17-098 , 11-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-67.2. - Sidewalk width requirements. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be as provided in Exhibit VI-18.1. Generally, sidewalks shall be located in the right-of-way adjacent to the property line. However, the City Engineer may approve the installation of sidewalks on private property upon finding that adequate easements have been provided by the property owner and the sidewalk alignment provides adequate connectivity to existing and future sidewalks. 
Exhibit VI-18.1: Sidewalk Width Requirements 
Local and collector streets in residential districts 5 feet Local and collector streets in B-3, B-5, IN-1, IN-2, I-1, I-2 and I-3 districts 6 feet Local and collector streets in B-1 districts 6 feet where buildings are set back more than 10 feet 
8 feet where buildings are set back 10 feet or less Arterial streets 6 feet B-4 districts 8 feet  
(b)  For multiple household residential, mixed use or multi-occupant commercial centers and institutional uses, the applicant for site plan approval shall provide for a safe, clearly marked and continuous walkway from the sidewalk to the building entrances. Where warranted by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), the driveways shall have either marked crosswalks that are ADA compliant or continuous ADA compliant sidewalks with aprons for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. O-17-098 , 11-14-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-17-098 , adopted Nov. 14, 2017, amended § 35.2-67.2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 35.2-67.2 pertained to sidewalk requirements. 
Sec. 35.2-67.3. - Sidewalk exemptions. 
(a)  The zoning administrator may lessen or eliminate the requirements for sidewalks when existing cross-slopes in excess of 25 percent measured perpendicular across the width of the right-of-way, stormwater conveyances or other physical constraints render required sidewalk improvements unfeasible. 
(b)  The zoning administrator may eliminate the requirement for sidewalk on streets with fewer than 100 vehicle trips per day and if the area served by the street will not generate an excess of 100 vehicle trips per day based upon the existing zoning patterns and the Comprehensive Plan's Future Land Use Map. 
(c)  In areas where sidewalks are not required, and grading occurs in city right-of-way, grading shall be done in a manner so as not to preclude the future installation of sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. O-17-098 , 11-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-68. - Utilities. 
Sec. 35.2-68.1. - Applicability. 
    All new development or redevelopment requiring a building permit shall comply with the City's minimum requirements for provision of public utilities as provided in this section and the other applicable sections of the City Code. 
Sec. 35.2-68.2. - Additional requirements. 
    Utility design installation and connection shall comply with adopted policies and regulations, including but not limited to the requirements that: 
(a)  Utilities shall be extended through the property designed and installed to comply with City standards. 
(b)  Adequate easements shall be provided to facilitate access for maintenance. 
(c)  On-site utility distribution and service lines shall be installed underground unless the City Engineer determines that undergrounding utilities for remodeling or partial redevelopment of a site are not practical due to the configuration of existing utilities. This requirement does not apply to: 
1.  New, redeveloped or modified single family or duplex residences on a lot of record established prior to the adoption of this provision. 
2.  Additions to structures existing at the time of the adoption of this provision. 
(d)  Utility distribution and service lines within new subdivisions shall be installed underground except that distribution and service lines interior to lots or along private streets within IN-2 and I-3 districts may be located above ground. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIFIC LAND USE STANDARDS 

Sec. 35.2-70. - Generally. 
Sec. 35.2-70.1. - Legislative Intent. 
    Many of the regulations and procedures included in this Ordinance require special attention to individual land uses for which the general standards of height, bulk, density, access, and other limitations cannot provide adequate control. This Article provides explicit standards for uses in structures to be permitted through site plan review and conditional use procedures. 
Sec. 35.2-70.2. - General standards. 
    All uses and structures for which a conditional use permit or site plan approval shall conform to review criteria established in Article II, the applicable zoning district standards in Articles IV and V, the site development standards in Article VI and the provisions of this Article, as applicable. 
Sec. 35.2-71. - Accessory structures and uses. 
    Accessory structures and uses shall comply with the applicable zoning district standards established in Articles IV, V and VI as well as the standards established in this section. 
Sec. 35.2-71.1. - Locations of accessory structures. 
(a)  Subject to Section 35.2-71.2, accessory buildings shall be located in rear or side yards only and may occupy not more than 30 percent of the required rear yard. 
(b)  On through lots (lots having with front and rear property lines abutting street rights-of-way), accessory buildings shall be prohibited in all required setbacks. 
(c)  Accessory structures shall be located behind the front building line and at least five feet from any property line. 
Sec. 35.2-71.2. - Accessory buildings in side yards. 
    Accessory structures within a side yard shall be constructed of materials substantially similar to those of the principal structure. 
Sec. 35.2-71.3. - Dwellings units accessory to single-household residences. 
    Dwellings units, which include guest houses, caretakers' cottages and other residential accommodations, may be established accessory to a single-household residence either in the principal dwelling or as a detached accessory structure subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Accessory dwelling units shall be located within the principal structure using a common entrance so that the principal structure retains the appearance of a single-household residence, or be located in an accessory structure located in the rear yard and outside required setback lines for principal structures. 
(b)  The occupancy shall not exceed the limits established in the applicable zoning district. 
(c)  Detached accessory dwelling units shall be limited to 900 square feet and shall not have more than one bedroom. 
(d)  Accessory dwellings shall comply with all applicable parking, building coverage and rear yard building coverage requirements. 
Sec. 35.2-71.4. - Home occupations. 
    Home occupations may be established subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Subject to the performance standards listed in paragraph 2 of this section, home occupations may include: 
1.  Professional offices for certified, ordained, licensed or registered professions, including, but not limited to offices for an architect, draftsman, attorney-at-law, conveyancer, dentist, surveyor, professional engineer (civil, electrical, mechanical or other), public accountant, minister or teacher residing in the dwelling or dwelling unit in which the office is located; 
2.  Personal or medical services offered by individuals licensed by the state, such as licensed massage therapists, physicians, osteopaths, healers, dentists, midwives, barbers and hairstylists; and 
3.  Artists, craftsmen and teachers. 
(b)  Home occupations shall: 
1.  Be limited to visiting clients on an appointment basis and shall not offer services to the general public on a drop-by basis; 
2.  Be conducted by a member of the household residing on the premises except that, in connection with the practice of a profession listed under paragraph 1.a., one person not residing in such dwelling unit may be employed; 
3.  Not provide services to more than one client at a time for professions listed in paragraph (a) of this section; 
4.  Be allowed one sign not exceeding one square foot in area and fixed flat to the wall of the building shall be permitted for each street on which the lot abuts to identify the home occupation. No artificial lighting shall be used to illuminate the sign or exterior of the building, nor shall any display of products be made which will indicate from the exterior that the building is being used for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; 
5.  Be limited to mechanical equipment that is customary for purely domestic or household purposes; 
6.  Not have any outside storage of goods or equipment other than one business vehicle and one trailer per lot, providing said trailer is located behind the building line of the main structure on the property and it is not over 22 feet in length or eight feet, nine inches in height; 
7.  Not use more than 20 percent of the principal dwelling's gross floor area for the home occupation, regardless of whether the home occupation is conducted in the principal dwelling or an accessory building; and 
8.  Be limited to incidental retail sales of goods to customers of the primary service provided. 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-71.5. - Small family day home. 
    Family day home, providing day care only to fewer than six children or adults exclusive of any people who reside in the home during a 24-hour period and meeting all applicable licensure requirements imposed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Sec. 35.2-71.6. - Large family day home. 
    As authorized by Virginia Code § 15.2-2292(B), the Zoning Administrator may issue a permit for a Family Day Home, as defined in Virginia Code § 63.2-100 and this ordinance, serving five through 12 children, exclusive of the provider's own children and any children who reside in the home. As authorized by Virginia Code § 63.2-1733, and subject to the provisions of this section and applicable provisions of Virginia Code, day care may be provided for not more than 12 adults, exclusive of people who reside in the home. 
(a)  Application for Permit. The provider shall submit an application to the Zoning Administrator which shall identify: 
1.  The property on which the proposed large family day home will be located. 
2.  A list identifying the property owner and all occupants of the property. 
3.  The maximum number of children or adults proposed to be served. 
4.  A description of the staff, if any, that will be on-site, other than the provider. 
5.  What facilities will be available for the participants and the staff. 
6.  What parking will be available for the participants and the staff. 
7.  The proposed hours of operation. 
8.  What insurance coverage will be maintained. 
9.  The Zoning Administrator may request additional information as reasonably related to the proposed large family day home use. 
(b)  Notice. The Zoning Administrator shall send notice of the application for the proposed large family day home use by registered or certified mail to last known address of each adjacent property owner and all property owners within 200 feet of the facility. 
(c)  Standards. The Zoning Administrator shall consider the potential effect of the proposed large family day home use on neighboring and area property owners. The Zoning Administrator shall also consider whether the proposed facilities are safe and sufficient for the proposed large family day home. 
(d)  Objections. The Zoning Administrator shall consider any written objections from any neighboring property owners or area property owners received by the Zoning Administrator. 
(e)  Issuance of Permit. Based on the information provided by the applicant, and the standards set forth above, the Zoning Administrator may issue a permit authorizing the proposed large family day home use. The Zoning Administrator may impose reasonable conditions on the applicant to mitigate the potential effects of the proposed large family day home use on neighboring and area properties. 
(f)  Appeals . Any person aggrieved by the administrative approval of a large family day home may appeal the Zoning Administrator's administrative approval to the Board of Zoning Appeals. An appeal must be taken within thirty days after the Zoning Administrator's issuance of the permit for the large family day home. 
(g)  Procedure Upon Denial. An applicant for a large family day home use that is denied a permit by the Zoning Administrator through the administrative process under this section may request in writing that its application be considered by the Council. 
1.  Upon receipt of such written request, the Zoning Administrator shall cause public notice of a hearing to be given as provided in Virginia Code § 15.2-2204 and Section 35.2-11 of this ordinance. 
2.  Upon such hearing, the Council may, in its discretion, approve the permit subject to such conditions as agreed upon by the applicant and the locality, or deny the permit. 
(h)  Approval as a Conditional Use. If the applicant is denied an administrative approval or approval is revoked, the Council may approve the large family day home as a conditional use after notice and hearing as provided for in Section 35.2-11. 
(i)  Revocation. If the petitioner fails to comply with the requirements of this ordinance or the provisions of the Code of Virginia concerning the operation of the large family day home or if the large family day home is determined to constitute a nuisance, the Zoning Administrator may revoke the permit after notice and an opportunity for the applicant to be heard by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 35.2-71.7. - Farm animals. 
(a)  The raising of farm animals in the R-C district shall comply with the R-C district provisions; the raising of farm animals in any other district shall comply with the provisions of Exhibit VII-1: 
Exhibit VII-1: Standards for Farm Animals 
Farm Animals Zoning
Provisions Standards All farm animals Commercial Production Any production of eggs, milk, meat or other farm animal products for sale is prohibited on lots smaller than 10 acres Poultry Definition Any free-ranging, domesticated fowl, with an adult weight no greater than 30 lbs. Minimum distance of enclosure from nearest residence and/or property lines and location  20 feet from property line for 4 or fewer hens 
 100 feet from nearest residence if more than 4 hens are kept 
 Located behind front building line Maximum number of fowl  4 fowl on lots of 15,000 sq. ft. or smaller plus 
 1 fowl for every additional 5,000 sq. ft. of lot area 
 Maximum of 40 fowl Small farm animals Definition Any domesticated farm animal used for the production of food and food products, with an adult weight no greater than 150 lbs. Maximum number of small farm animals & distance from property line.  2 small animals on lots less than 10 ac. 
 Minimum lot size of 15,000 sq. ft. 
 1 additional small farm animal per additional acre of lot area 
 Located behind front building line 
 20 feet from property line. Maximum number of goats by area   On lots of 15,000 sq. ft. or larger in area, 2 goats may be kept 
 One additional goat may be kept for each acre of land area in excess of 15,000 square feet Keeping of swine Prohibited Large farm animals Definition Any animal with an adult weight of 151 lbs. or greater Maximum number of animals  2 acres minimum for keeping of up to 2 large animals. Keeping of 3 or more large farm animals shall require 10 acres of land. Accommodations  Enclosures, not including fences, are required to be located at least 200 feet from any property line 
 Located behind front building line  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-71.8. - Reserved. 
Sec. 35.2-71.9. - Commercial structures in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts. 
    No lot, building or structure shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected that is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any industrial manufacturing, trade or commercial purposes except as authorized in section 35.2-71 for a home occupation. 
Sec. 35.2-71.10. - No accessory building prior to a principal structure. 
    No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has actually commenced and no accessory building shall be used unless the main building on a lot is completed and used. 
Sec. 35.2-71.11. - Recreational vehicles. 
    Any owner of a travel trailer, boat and/or boat trailer, truck camper, inhabitable bus or recreational vehicle may park or store, but not inhabit, such equipment providing such equipment is located behind the building line of the main structure on the property and it is not over 22 feet in length or eight feet nine inches in height. This section shall apply to the parking or storing a vehicle for seven or more days within any 30-day period. 
Sec. 35.2-71.12. - Accessory food service in the I-1, I-2 and I-3 Districts. 
    Food service facilities that are located within a building housing a permitted use and serve one or a group of permitted uses are authorized as an accessory use in the I-1, I-2 and I-3 zoning districts. 
Sec. 35.2-71.13. - Commercial vehicles in the R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 Districts. 
    No commercial vehicle requiring a Class A or Class B license to operate, or that carries hazardous materials may be parked or stored in a R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 district. 

Sec. 35.2-71.14. - Temporary family health care structures. 
    Temporary family health care structures as defined in section 15.2-2292.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be permitted on lots zoned for and developed with single-family detached dwellings, subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator by issuance of a permit and compliance with the following provisions: 
(a)  Any temporary family healthcare structure installed pursuant [to] occupancy of a temporary family healthcare structure shall be limited to one mentally or physically impaired person or, in the case of a married couple, two occupants, one of whom is a mentally or physically impaired person, and the other requires assistance with one or more activities of daily living as defined in Virginia Code § 63.2-2200, as certified in writing by a physician licensed in the Commonwealth. 
(b)  The property on which the temporary family health care structure will be located shall be owned or occupied by an adult caregiver who provides care for a mentally or physically impaired person and the property shall be used as the caregiver's primary residence. The adult caregiver shall be related by blood, marriage, or adoption to or the legally appointed guardian of the physically or mentally impaired person(s) occupying the temporary family health care structure. 
(c)  Only one temporary family health care structure shall be permitted on a lot or parcel of land. 
(d)  Temporary family health care structures shall be limited to a maximum of 300 square feet of gross floor area and shall meet the minimum setback requirements for single family detached dwellings of the zoning district in which they located. Temporary health care structures shall be located behind the front building line. 
(e)  Temporary family health care structures shall not be installed on a permanent foundation. 
(f)  Temporary family health care structures shall be subject to the Industrialized Building Safety Law (Virginia Code 36-70 et seq.) and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (Virginia Code 36-97 et seq.). 
(g)  Temporary family health care structures shall be required to connect to any water, sewer, and electric utilities that are serving the principal residence on the property, and shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Virginia Department of Health. 
(h)  No signs promoting or advertising the existence of the structure shall be permitted on the structure or on the lot. 
(i)  The applicant shall provide evidence of compliance with all requirements of Virginia Code §15.2-2292.1 and this section on an annual basis as long as the temporary family healthcare structure remains on the property. 
(j)  The Zoning Administrator may arrange the inspection of the temporary family healthcare structure at reasonable times convenient to the caregiver, not limited to the annual compliance confirmation. 
(k)  The following shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator with any application for a temporary family health care structure: 
1.  The name and contact information of the proposed caregiver, and the relationship of the caregiver to the physically or mentally impaired proposed occupant. 
2.  Address of the property. 
3.  Written certification of physical or mental impairment of the proposed occupant, including verification that the person requires assistance with two or more activities of daily living as defined in Section 63.2-2200 of the Code of Virginia, by a physician licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
4.  Written certification by a physician licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia that the spouse of the mentally or physically impaired person also requires assistance with one or more activities of daily living as defined in Section 63.2-2200 of the Code of Virginia. 
5.  Three copies of a plat drawn to a designated scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet, which may be prepared by the applicant, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The dimensions of the lot, the boundary lines thereof, and the area of land contained therein; and 
b.  The dimensions, height and distance to all lot lines of any existing structure on the lot and of the proposed temporary family health care structure. 
(l)  Temporary family health care structures shall be removed from the property within 60 days from the date on which the structure was last occupied by a mentally or physically impaired person receiving services or in need of the assistance provided for in this Section or Virginia Code § 15.2-22.92.1. 
(m)  A permit for a temporary health care structure may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator due to failure of the applicant to comply with any of the above provisions or the provisions of Virginia Code § 15.2-2292.1. Additionally, the Zoning Administrator may seek injunctive relief or other appropriate actions or proceedings in the Circuit Court of the City of Lynchburg to ensure compliance with this Section and Virginia Code § 15.2-2292.1. The Zoning Administrator shall be vested with all necessary authority on behalf of the City Council to ensure compliance with this section and Virginia Code § 15.2-2292.1. 
Sec. 35.2-71.15. - Accessory uses for institutions not located in IN Districts. 
(a)  When an educational institution is located outside an IN district, low impact accessory uses shall be permitted by right subject to applicable standards of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Low impact accessory uses include auditoriums, gymnasiums, pavilions, picnic areas, unlighted sports fields and sports courts, and other uses that the Zoning Administrator determines are customary accessory uses that will not be incompatible with adjacent land uses. 
Sec. 35.2-72. - Specific Use Standards. 
    For the uses listed in this section, compliance with the applicable provisions shall be required whether the use is allowed by right or as a conditional use. 
Sec. 35.2-72.1. - Airports. 
    An airport, air landing field or other air transportation facility (see LBCS Code 4110) may be approved for an airport if the proposed facility meets the following standards: 
(a)  The proposed facility will meet the standards and requirements of the federal aviation administration. 
(b)  The airport is of such size, with the runways so located, that the operation thereof, in accordance with the standards and requirements of the federal aviation administration, will not require limitation of the heights of structures on adjacent land to be less than the height limit specifically prescribed for the district in which such land is situated. 
(c)  Every land area used by any aircraft under its own power shall be provided with a dustless surface. 
(d)  No area used by any aircraft under its own power shall be located within a distance of 200 feet from any property line; 1,000 feet from any public or private institution where airport operations could interfere with the work of the institutions, including schools, hospitals, sanatoriums, and churches; or 1,000 feet from any residential or commercial zones on the approach and departure ends of the runway. Buildings, hangars, or other structures shall be at least 200 feet from any property line and no parking of vehicles shall be allowed within 100 feet of any property line. 
(e)  The airport shall be surrounded by a fence not less than six feet in height, with suitable gates, effectively controlling access to such area. 
(f)  Appropriate accessory uses may be permitted, such as restaurants and snack bars, auto rental agencies, airline business offices, and service facilities. 
(g)  The application shall be referred to the federal aviation administration for the report of such agency as to whether operations relating to such airport will interfere with those of other existing or proposed airports in the vicinity. 
(h)  Adequate off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided to serve airport activities and accessory uses. The number of parking and loading spaces to be required shall be determined by the City Planner. 
Sec. 35.2-72.2. - Arenas, auditoriums and stadiums. 
    Arenas, auditoriums and stadiums (see LBCS Codes 5170 & 5180), whether principal uses or accessory to another use, shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  Such use shall not draw vehicular traffic to and through local streets in nearby residential areas. 
(b)  Such use shall not be located within 200 feet of a residential district if the seating capacity exceeds 1,000 people. 
(c)  No racing of automobiles shall be permitted within one mile of any residential district. 
(d)  Adequate queuing space at the vehicular entrance and sufficient vehicular entrances and exits shall be provided to prevent traffic congestion. 
(e)  Vehicular entrances and exits for such use shall be provided separately and shall comply with section 35.2-66.3. 
(f)  Shall be located within 1/4 mile of existing or planned transit facilities approved by the City and linked by pedestrian and bicycle facilities. 
(g)  No automobile parking space shall be located within any required setback area or within 50 feet of any lot line. 
(h)  The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot. 
Sec. 35.2-72.3. - Automobile service stations. 
    Automobile service stations, as defined in Article XI and which provide light automobile repair services pursuant to LBCS functional use code 2117a, are permitted by conditional use permit in B-3, B-4, I-1 and I-2 districts, and shall meet the following standards. These standards shall also be used for automobile service stations (see LBCS Code 2117) in B-5 and I-3 districts. 
(a)  In addition to the buffer required by section 35.2-63.10, a solid wall or a substantial, solid fence not less than five feet and not more than eight feet in height shall be provided along any property line abutting a residential zoning district. Visibility at intersections shall be as provided for in section 35.2-66.4. 
(b)  Gasoline pumps or other service appliances shall be located on the lot at least 15 feet behind required setbacks and canopies over gasoline pumps shall not extend nearer than 20 feet to all the property lines. All service, storage or similar activities in connection with such use shall be conducted entirely within the building. Driveways shall comply with the access management provisions of section 35.2-66.2. 
(c)  Light automobile repair work may be done at an automobile service station; provided, that no major repairs, spray paint operations or body or fender repair is permitted. 
(d)  No unlicensed vehicle or junked or wrecked vehicle will be permitted to be parked or stored on the premises, and no trucks, trailers or school buses will be permitted to remain parked or stored upon the premises unless being worked upon or being serviced by employees of the station. 
(e)  There shall be no uncovered sheds, storage bins or similar facilities erected or permitted to remain on the premises. 
(f)  The minimum lot size for any automobile service station built under these regulations shall be 20,000 square feet. 
Sec. 35.2-72.4. - Boardinghouses, lodging houses or rooming houses. 
    Boardinghouses, lodging houses, or rooming houses as defined in Article XI and listed under LBCS Codes 1321 and 1322, are permitted by conditional use permit in certain residential districts subject to the following standards: 
(a)  The lot must contain the minimum area requirements of the respective district for each household unit, boarder or roomer as follows: 
Zoning District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Additional Lot Area per
Boarding Unit Maximum Number of Units per Acre,
Including Dwelling and Boarding Units R-1 15,000 sq. ft. 7,500 sq. ft. 5.8 R-2 10,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. 8.7 R-3 8,000 sq. ft. 4,000 sq. ft. 10.89 R-4 2,000 sq. ft. 2,000 sq. ft. 21.78 B-1 6,000 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft. 43  
(b)  The facility shall not exceed a total of nine boarders or six roomers, except when a resident manager, as defined herein, resides on the premises, in which case the maximum number of roomers shall not exceed nine including the manager. The resident manager shall be a responsible person who is designated to act on the behalf of the owner of a rooming house and shall keep proper order of such premises. 
(c)  The site must comply with the parking requirements of section 35.2-62 of the Zoning Ordinance, providing one space per boarder or roomer. 
(d)  The operator of the facility must obtain necessary licenses and inspections. 
(e)  The conditional use permit shall be granted only to the person or firm who will operate the boardinghouse, lodging house, or rooming house. 
(f)  The City Council may prescribe any additional conditions that are necessary or desirable in its judgment. 
Sec. 35.2-72.5. - Cemeteries and columbaria. 
    In residential and commercial districts, cemeteries and columbaria (see LBCS Codes 6722 and 6724) permitted by conditional use permit shall meet the following standards unless they are accessory to a church or other religious institution: 
(a)  Cemetery plots and urns, shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from the property line of any residential use or district and 25 feet from any commercial district, with a vegetative buffer according to the regulations of section 35.2-63.10 (Buffering) of this ordinance. 
(b)  Structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from the property line of any residential use or district and 25 feet from any commercial district with a vegetative buffer shall be provided according to the regulations of section 35.2-63.10 (Buffering) of this ordinance. 
(c)  Driveways and parking areas shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from the property line of any residential use or district and ten feet from any commercial district. 
Sec. 35.2-72.6. - Churches and other places of worship. 
    Churches and other places of worship (see LBCS Code 6600) permitted by conditional use permit shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  Parking requirements of Section 35.2-62 of this ordinance are met. 
(b)  Lot building coverage shall not exceed 25 percent of buildable lot area. 
(c)  Building shall be located at least 50 feet from any residential property line. 
(d)  The conditional use permit shall establish appropriate conditions to ensure that the impacts of principal and accessory uses are adequately addressed. 
(e)  A parsonage, pavilion, cemetery or columbarium may be established without the need for modification of the conditional use permit, but the addition of a school, other residences or an increase in seating by more than 50 percent of the approved conditional use permit shall require City Council approval of a modified conditional use permit. 
(f)  In any district, a church or other place of worship may be erected to a greater height than permitted in the schedule of regulations provided that the front, side and rear setbacks shall be increased one foot for each foot by which such building exceeds the height limitation established for the district in which such building is located. 
Sec. 35.2-72.7. - Campgrounds. 
    Areas for the temporary location of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, self-propelled campers, tents, and other temporary and movable overnight accommodations (see LBCS Code 5400) may be permitted by conditional use permit in B-5 or IN-2 districts if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The proposed site shall contain at least ten acres of area, with at least 5,500 square feet of land for each trailer site and shall provide at least 4,000 square feet of area in each vehicle or trailer space, which shall have at least 40 feet of frontage on a paved access road at least 20 feet in width leading to a public street. Every vehicle or trailer must be parked at least 20 feet from any other vehicle or trailer. 
(b)  The site shall be served by water supply and waste disposal systems acceptable to the state department of health. 
(c)  The site shall have direct access to an arterial road. 
(d)  Buffering in accordance with section 35.2-63.10 (Buffering) of this Ordinance shall be provided between areas used for the parking of trailers and any adjacent commercial or permanent residential uses. 
(e)  Trailer courts permitted under this section may not be used for the location of a trailer for more than 30 days. 
(f)  The following services shall be provided: 
1.  An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and trailer lots within the court. Each lot shall be provided with a cold water tap. Waste from this supply shall be emptied into a drain connected to an approved disposal system. 
2.  Toilet and other sanitary facilities shall be provided for males and females and shall either be in separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by soundproof walls; shall be marked with appropriate signs; and shall have doors at least eight feet apart. Each toilet and each shower stall shall be in a private compartment or stall. 
3.  Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than one flush toilet, one urinal, one shower with a dressing compartment with at least nine square feet, and one lavatory for every ten spaces or fraction thereof. 
4.  Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than two flush toilets, one shower with a dressing compartment with at least nine square feet and one lavatory for every ten spaces or fraction thereof. 
5.  Suitable laundry facilities shall be provided. 
6.  An adequate supply of hot and cold running water shall be provided for each shower, lavatory, and laundry. 
7.  Service buildings housing the toilets and sanitary facilities shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinance and statutes regulating buildings, electrical installation, and plumbing and sanitation systems and shall be located not closer than 20 feet nor further than 200 feet from any court unit. 
8.  All service buildings and the grounds of the court shall be maintained by the licensee or his agent and kept free of trash, wastes, standing water or any other condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance. 
9.  Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, and lavatories in service and other buildings within the court shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances or into a private sewer and disposal plant or septic tank system of such construction and in a manner approved by the Department of Health. 
(g)  Development in campgrounds must meet all other applicable regulations in this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-72.8. - Child and adult care centers. 
    Care centers for children or adults (see LBCS Code 6562) shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  All state health department regulations for adult or child care centers or kindergartens shall be met, as applicable. 
(b)  For persons over 18 years of age, there shall be an appropriately enclosed outside recreation area of not less than 30 square feet per person enrolled; for persons 18 years of age or less, there shall be an appropriately enclosed recreation area of not less than 75 square feet per person using the recreation area at any one time. 
(c)  The movement of traffic through the street on which the facility is located shall be capable of being controlled to the degree necessary to allow ingress and egress by small children. 
(d)  The minimum area and frontage regulations in Exhibit VII-2 shall apply in all districts except where the center is a part of a multi-household building or group of buildings. 
Exhibit VII-2: Care Center Area and Frontage Requirements 
Number of Persons Enrolled Minimum Lot Area
(sq. ft.) Minimum Street
Frontage
(feet) 6 to 10 7,000 70 11 to 20 10,000 100 More than 20 500 per person 200  
(e)  Screening as specified in Section 35.2-63.9 of this ordinance shall be provided, for the other perimeter of the parking and of the recreation area. 
(f)  If an off-site recreation area is used, there shall be safe pedestrian access between a care center and the recreational area. 
(g)  Setbacks for the facility shall comply with the applicable zoning regulations of the district in which the facility is located. 
(h)  Minimum off-street parking and loading space shall be provided as follows: 
1.  A minimum of two parking spaces is required for each care center; plus 
2.  Two parking spaces for every thirty (30) persons enrolled. 
(i)  Additional conditions may be imposed pursuant to the conditional use permit process when applicable. 
Sec. 35.2-72.9. - Group homes. 
    The intent of the provisions for group homes (see LBCS Codes 6522 and 6523) is to promote housing opportunities for those individuals that have had difficulty in obtaining adequate housing. Group homes, for no more than eight mentally ill persons and no more than four aged, infirm or physically disabled persons are exempt from the provisions of paragraphs (b) through (i) of this section. It is not the City's intent to suppress and the City will make reasonable efforts to accommodate housing that is protected under the Federal Fair Housing Act. Group homes do not include accommodations for pre-release and post-release individuals who have been incarcerated. Group homes may be permitted by conditional use permit in certain residential districts and in certain non-residential districts if the following requirements are met: 
(a)  Any applicable state health department regulations or other regulatory licensing for group homes shall be met. 
(b)  For residents over 18 years of age, there shall be an appropriately enclosed outside recreation area of not less than 30 square feet per resident enrolled; for residents 18 years of age or less, there shall be an appropriately enclosed outside recreation area of not less than 75 square feet per person using the facility at any one time. 
(c)  The movement of traffic through the street on which the facility is located shall be capable of being controlled to the degree necessary to allow ingress and egress. 
(d)  The minimum area and frontage regulations established in Exhibit VII-3 shall apply in all districts except where the group home is a part of a multi-household building or group of buildings. 
Exhibit VII-3: Group Home Area and Frontage Requirements 
Number of Persons Enrolled Minimum Lot Area
(sq. ft.) Minimum Street
Frontage
(feet) 4 to 10 7,000 70 11 to 20 10,000 100 More than 20 500 per person 200  
(e)  A facility for fewer than four individuals shall comply with the definition of "household" of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(f)  Screening as specified in section 35.2-63.9 of this ordinance shall be provided, for the outer perimeter of the recreation area. 
(g)  Setbacks for the facility shall comply with the applicable zoning regulations of the district in which the facility is located. 
(h)  Minimum off-street parking and loading space shall be provided as follows: 
1.  A minimum of two parking spaces is required for each group home; plus 
2.  One parking space for every eight residents, or one for every resident with a car, which is greater; and 
3.  One parking space for every three staff members. 
(i)  Additional conditions may be imposed pursuant to the conditional use permit process when applicable. 
Sec. 35.2-72.10. - Heliports and helipads. 
(a)  Heliports (see LBCS Code 4110) may be permitted by conditional use permit within I-1 and by right in the I-2 and I-3 district if they meet the following requirements: 
1.  The heliport is an appropriate use of the land and will not unduly interfere with surrounding land uses. 
2.  The proposed site will meet the standards and requirements of federal and state agencies concerned. 
3.  Every land area used by heliports for take-off or landing shall be of a dustproof surface. 
4.  No area used by any aircraft under its own power shall be located within a distance of 200 feet from any property line; 1,000 feet from any public or private institution where airport operations could interfere with the work of the institution, including schools, hospitals, sanatoriums and churches; or 1,000 feet from any departure ends of the runway. Buildings, hangars, or other structures shall be at least 200 feet from any property line. No parking of vehicles shall be allowed within 100 feet of any property line. 
5.  The Zoning Administrator shall refer the plans for the proposed facility to the Federal Aviation Administration for the report of that agency as to the possible interference of flight operation relating to the proposed facility with those of other existing or programmed airports or heliports and shall certify that no such interference will exist. 
(b)  A helipad may be allowed by right as an accessory use to an institutional facility in any district or for any other use in any non-residential district provided that any helipad is located at least 200 feet from the nearest residential district property line. 
Sec. 35.2-72.11. - Hospitals. 
    Hospitals (see LBCS Code 6530) may be permitted by conditional use permit in residential districts if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The site is easily accessible to ambulatory and non-ambulatory patients, visitors, staff members, personnel, ambulances, firefighting equipment, and for the delivery of supplies, avoiding congested areas while at the same time not causing congestion. 
(b)  Certification must be granted by the Virginia Department of Health Office of Licensure and Certifications. 
(c)  Accessory Uses. The Zoning Administrator may permit accessory uses, provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  That they will improve the ability of the hospital to function and provide community service. 
2.  That all potential adverse effects emanating from such uses are prevented. 
3.  That all requirements of this ordinance applicable to such uses are met, including those governing off-street parking and loading, lot area, setbacks, site plan review, and conditional use procedures. 
4.  In meeting minimum lot area and setback requirements for different uses, there is no pooling of open space between different uses. 
5.  Examples of accessory uses which may be allowed on a zoning lot whose principal uses is a hospital are as follows: 
a.  Staff residences (single-household, multi-household, dormitory). 
b.  Schools (medical, nursing, patient rehabilitation). 
c.  Recreation facilities (gymnasium, swimming pool, tennis courts). 
d.  Research laboratories. 
(d)  Site standards-The hospital shall meet all height, bulk, and setback regulations for the district in which it is located, as well as the regulations in Article VI of this ordinance, except that in no case shall any building which is a part of such an institution or an accessory use to such an institution be located within 50 feet of any lot line. 
Sec. 35.2-72.12. - Kennels and other small animal raising and boarding. 
    Facilities for the raising and boarding of pets and small animals (see LBCS Code 2722) within the City of Lynchburg shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  The minimum parcel size shall be one acre in other districts where these facilities are permitted. 
(b)  No outside pen, run or other off-leash area may be located within 200 feet of any residential district or within 50 feet of a lot line in any other district. 
(c)  Buffering outside pens, runs or off-lease areas as specified in section 35.2-63.10 (Buffering) of this Ordinance shall be provided on side and rear lot lines. 
(d)  Disposal of waste must ensure that streams and underground water will not be polluted by the wastes and that odors and other emissions are not perceptible at lot lines. 
Sec. 35.2-72.13. - Manufactured home communities. 
(a)  Individual manufactured homes (see definition in Article XI) not meeting regular building code regulations, but being certified as complying with HUD's "Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards," must be located in manufactured home park as regulated herein containing not fewer than five manufactured home lots or sites. 
(b)  Manufactured home communities (see LBCS Code 1116) may be permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and IN-2 districts by conditional use permit if the following standards are met: 
1.  The site shall contain no less than ten contiguous acres. 
2.  The site shall be served by public sewerage and water supply adequate for the proposed development, and provision shall be made on each site for the proper connection of each manufactured home to City sewer and water supply lines. All utility lines shall be placed underground. 
3.  The site shall have access to at least one collector street meeting the City's standards for cross-section and capacity. 
4.  The site shall be reasonably accessible to schools, shopping, employment, recreation areas, and police and fire protection. 
5.  The site shall not include conditions of soil, ground water level, drainage or topography that could cause hazards to property or the health or safety of the occupants. 
6.  Existing trees and shrubbery on the site shall be preserved to the greatest possible extent. 
7.  Street widths and layouts shall conform to the subdivision ordinance of the City of Lynchburg. 
8.  All manufactured homes shall be located at least 25 feet from any lot line and 30 feet from any street right-of-way. The side and rear setbacks shall provide a buffer as specified in section 35.2-63.10 of this ordinance where it is bounded by residential, commercial, or industrial development. 
9.  Parking shall be provided in an amount of two spaces per manufactured home unit. At least one space shall be provided within each individual lot. 
10.  Maximum density shall be that prescribed for the district in which the park is located, except that no manufactured home park shall exceed a density of eight units per acre. No individual lot shall be less than 4,000 square feet for single-wide units and 6,000 square feet for double-wide units. Nor shall any lot have frontage of less than 40 feet on a paved access road at least 20 feet in width leading to a public street. The minimum spacing between manufactured homes shall be 20 feet. 
11.  Lot coverage may not exceed 30 percent. 
12.  In manufactured home parks containing more than 20 units, usable recreation area totaling not less than ten percent of the total area of the park shall be provided. 
13.  Each manufactured home lot or space shall be provided with an outdoor living and service area. Such area shall be improved as necessary to assure reasonable privacy and comfort. The minimum area shall not be less than 300 square feet with at least a dimension of 15 feet and shall include a concrete or other hard surfaced terrace as a patio not less than 200 feet in area adjacent to the area designated for the manufactured home. 
14.  No existing manufactured home park shall be extended except in accordance with these regulations. 
15.  Existing mobile homes shall be considered non-conforming uses and no mobile home may be placed on a lot or space. However, a mobile home may be replaced with a manufactured home in accordance with Virginia Code 15.2-2307. 
(c)  Accessory Structures. No more than one utility building of 100 square feet or less shall be permitted for each manufactured home space or lot. 
(d)  Signs. Signs shall comply with the provisions of district regulations as required for R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts. 
Sec. 35.2-72.14. - Museums and art galleries. 
    Museums, art galleries and similar institutions (see LBCS Code 5200) are permitted by conditional use permit in R-C, R-1 and R-2 districts subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Relevant regulations of this ordinance, including those for parking, signs, and lighting shall be met. 
(b)  Streets serving the site shall be adequate to carry the traffic expected to be generated without disruption of residential neighborhoods. 
(c)  Commercial activities included in museums and art galleries shall be limited to the sale of postcards, prints, books, reproductions of sculpture or handcrafts, films, or similar merchandise related to the exhibitions in the building. 
Sec. 35.2-72.15. - Nursing homes. 
    Nursing homes (see LBCS Code 1200) may be permitted by conditional use permit in certain residential districts if the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The nursing home shall meet all requirements of federal, state and other public agencies for physical facilities and administration organization. 
(b)  The proposed site shall have direct access to at least one collector street or road of higher function but shall not be located on a heavily traveled arterial or freeway unless substantial screening is provided along such heavily traveled road. In general, road access must be adequate for the traffic expected to be generated by the proposed development. 
(c)  The minimum area and frontage regulations in Exhibit VII-4 shall apply in all districts except where the center is a part of a multi-household building or group of buildings. 
Exhibit VII-4: Nursing Home Area and Frontage Requirements 
Number of Persons Enrolled Minimum Lot Area
(sq. ft.) Minimum Street
Frontage
(feet) 4 to 10 7,000 70 11 to 20 10,000 100 More than 20 500 per person 200  
Note: A facility for fewer than four individuals shall comply with the definition of "household" of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  Screening as specified in section 35.2-63.9 of this ordinance shall be provided, for the outer perimeter of the parking area. 
(e)  The nursing home structure shall be at least 50 feet from any lot line. 
(f)  The design of the facility must be such that no sounds, smells or any other noxious emissions from such activities as kitchens or loading areas will become a nuisance to the community. 
(g)  Certification must be granted by the Virginia Department of Health Office of Licensure and Certifications. 
(h)  Additional conditions may be imposed pursuant to the conditional use permit process when applicable. 
Sec. 35.2-72.16. - Clubs and fraternal organizations. 
    Facilities for clubs and fraternal organizations (see LBCS Code 6830), excluding residential fraternities and sororities (see LBCS Code 1323) that are permitted by conditional use permit in residential districts shall conform to the following regulations: 
(a)  Residential structures shall comply with the setbacks of underlying zoning district and non-residential structures shall be located at a distance of not less than 100 feet from the side or rear lot lines from residential parcels. 
(b)  All buildings on the site shall not cover, in the aggregate, a ground floor area of more than 20 percent of the area of the site. 
(c)  Signs shall comply with section 35.2-64 et seq. 
Sec. 35.2-72.17. - Public uses owned by the City of Lynchburg. 
    The use of land or facilities owned or leased by, or subject to easements granted to the City of Lynchburg, shall not be subject to the use limitations established in the Zoning Ordinance. As a matter of policy, the City will generally comply with standards applicable to similar uses. 
Sec. 35.2-72.18. - Recreation facilities. 
    Outdoor recreation facilities (see LBCS Codes 5372-5374 & 5500), excluding facilities accessory to residential uses and City-owned recreational facilities, shall meet the following conditions: 
(a)  Applicable requirements of this ordinance, including those relating to signs, lights, and off-street parking, are complied with. 
(b)  Buffering as specified in section 35.2-63.10 (Buffering) of this Ordinance, is provided between areas to be used for games, athletics, or other active recreation and adjacent residential areas. 
(c)  Swimming pools, tennis courts, and other facilities presenting potential dangers to the life and limb of children shall be provided with fencing capable of restricting access to such facilities at times when they are not supervised. 
(d)  The use of sound amplifying devices shall be restricted to that necessary for safety purposes. 
Sec. 35.2-72.19. - Riding academies and stables. 
    Riding academies and stables (see LBCS Code 5374) shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Access to adequate trails or areas for horseback riding shall be available on the same zoning lot or within 600 feet of such zoning lot. 
(b)  The location and operation of such use will not be such as to result in any serious traffic hazards or conflicts on nearby streets. 
(c)  No stables or riding areas shall be located within 100 feet of any side or rear lot line. 
(d)  If not more than two horses are kept, the stable shall be located on a tract of not less than two acres. If three or more horses are kept, the stable shall be located on a tract of not less than ten acres. 
Sec. 35.2-72.20. - Sanitary or solid waste facilities. 
    Private owned sanitary or solid waste management facilities (see LBCS Code 4340) may be permitted by conditional use permit in the I-3 district if the following requirements are met. Existing privately owned facilities may be expanded by right in any zoning district, provided that the expansion meets all requirements of this section. 
(a)  Privately owned facilities shall be established only by and for the use of the specific industry generating all of the industrial waste deposited in the facility. 
(b)  All state and federal regulations must be complied with, all necessary permits be obtained, and copies of said permits be given to the Building Official, the City Planner, Director of Water Resources, and the City Engineer. 
(c)  The facility shall be located with direct access onto an arterial or collector street. Existing privately owned facilities and expansions shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(d)  Fencing or natural barriers shall completely enclose the disposal area to prevent unauthorized disposal or salvage activities and to prevent waste materials from blowing onto adjacent properties. 
(e)  The operation shall have a minimum setback of 100 feet from all adjacent property lines, except where the property abuts a residential zoning district, in which case a minimum setback of 200 feet shall be maintained. 
(f)  Within the required setback of 100 or 200 feet, all existing vegetation shall remain undisturbed as a buffer, except for the cleared fire-break which is 50 feet in width. Where existing vegetation is sparse or nonexistent, a vegetative buffer shall be provided according to the regulations of section 35.2-63.10 (Buffering) of this Ordinance. 
(g)  A plan shall be submitted to the City for review and approval indicating (1) how the area will be returned to a stable condition following the closure of the disposal operation, and (2) the intended future use of the site. 
(h)  A recordation shall be made with the deeds of all parcels on which landfill or other waste treatment or disposal facilities have been located to inform all future owners that the property was used for a sanitary or solid waste management facility, the types of materials disposed there, and the dates of its operation. Certification of such recordation shall be given to the Zoning Administrator at the time of facility closure. 
Sec. 35.2-72.21. - Schools, colleges, and vocational schools. 
    Schools, colleges, and vocational schools (see LBCS Code 6100) permitted by conditional use permit excluding City-owned schools shall conform to the following requirements, unless otherwise approved by the City Council: 
(a)  Minimum Area, Frontage and Setback Requirements. 
1.  Kindergartens. 
Number of
Children Enrolled Minimum Lot Area
(square feet) Minimum
Lot Frontage
(feet) Up to 5 5,000 50 6 to 10 7,000 70 11 to 20 10,000 100 Over 20 500 per child 200  
2.  Elementary schools. Minimum usable lot area: four acres plus one acre for each 100 pupils; frontage: 200 feet; setback: 25 feet from all lot lines. 
3.  Middle schools. Minimum usable lot area: ten acres plus one acre for each 100 pupils; frontage: 300 feet; setback: 50 feet from all lot lines. 
4.  Senior high schools. Minimum usable lot area: ten acres plus one acre for each 100 pupils; frontage: 300 feet; setback: 50 feet from all lot lines. 
5.  Colleges, junior colleges and universities with residents. 
a.  Minimum usable lot area: 50 acres plus one acre for each 100 pupils; 
b.  Minimum frontage: 500 feet; 
c.  Minimum setbacks: 100 feet from all lot lines. 
d.  Residents shall include students, whether housed in dormitories, fraternity houses or other living quarters; staff members and their families; and caretakers and their families who sleep for any part of the school year on the zoning lot. 
6.  Sources of potential nuisance factors, including cafeterias; power plants; kitchens; gymnasiums; unloading areas for supplies, food and garbage; and outdoor play areas shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any residential zoning lot and shall be provided with buffer areas according to the regulations of section 35.2-63.10 (Buffering) of this Ordinance. 
7.  Access drives shall be located at least 40 feet from any adjacent residential zoning lot. 
(b)  Schools for specific educational purposes such as for technical or vocational training may be established provided that all operations must be conducted within an enclosed building. 
(c)  The installation of a temporary modular classroom unit(s) at an existing school may be exempt from obtaining a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The need for the classroom unit(s) shall be of an emergency nature, which need could not have been foreseen enough in advance to follow the usual CUP application/public hearing process; 
2.  A written request describing the proposal and a site plan shall be submitted to the City Planner; 
3.  The classroom unit(s) shall be installed on a temporary basis to be in place no longer than the current school year. If, at the end of the current school year, it is determined that there is a continued need for the classroom unit(s) in that location, then a CUP petition shall be submitted; and the established CUP application/public hearing process shall be followed; 
4.  The unit(s) shall be located on the school property in such a way as to minimize impact on the neighborhood; 
5.  Adequate landscaping shall be provided to buffer the unit(s) from adjacent residential areas; according to the regulations of section 35.2-63.10 of this ordinance. 
6.  The exterior lighting for the modular classroom units(s) shall be controlled so that direct illumination shall not be visible beyond the property line; and 
7.  The proposal shall comply with any additional conditions that are deemed to be necessary or appropriate by the City Planner. The Technical Review Committee (TRC) will review each request and make a recommendation to the City Planner. If the City Planner determines that all of the above conditions have been met, written approval for the installation of the classroom unit(s) shall be granted. In the event of a substantive, later objection from the public, such administrative approval may be revoked by the City Planner with referral of the matter to the Planning Commission and City Council for a decision according to the established CUP application/public hearing process. 
Sec. 35.2-72.22. - Shooting ranges. 
(a)  Outdoor shooting ranges, including archery ranges (see LBCS Code 5375) may be permitted in conservation districts by conditional use permit. 
(b)  Indoor shooting ranges, including archery ranges (see LBCS Code 5376) may be permitted in B-3, B-5, IN-2, I-1 and I-2 districts by conditional use permit, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Building plans certified by a design professional are required. Plans shall include backstops, ventilation, bullet traps, bullet resistant material between each firing lane, lead abatement and noise buffering to meet or exceed all applicable State and Federal laws and regulations. 
2.  The operator shall cause a qualified design professional to perform annual inspections to verify continued compliance with all applicable design standards and safety procedures, a report of which shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. 
3.  The range operator shall maintain a valid certificate of public liability insurance for not less than $2 million with the City of Lynchburg Risk Management office. 
Sec. 35.2-72.23. - Temporary uses. 
(a)  Generally. The following uses shall be allowed as temporary uses by the Zoning Administrator subject to the procedures established in section 35.2-14.5 and the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Carnivals and Fairs, Temporary. Temporary carnivals and fairs (see use LBCS Code 9921) permitted within the boundaries of the City of Lynchburg shall meet the following standards: 
1.  A temporary use permit shall be required which shall have a maximum duration of thirty (30) days. 
2.  Such carnival or fair must be under the sponsorship of a nonprofit organization located within Lynchburg, Amherst, Campbell or Bedford County, or a City or town situated in one of those counties. 
3.  The location of the carnival or fair shall have direct access to an arterial or collector road. 
4.  Off-street parking, in amounts to be determined by the City Planner, shall be provided in sodded areas, parking lots ordinarily used for other purposes, or in such other ways that muddy conditions and erosion shall be minimized. 
5.  Exterior lights shall be shielded from any adjacent residential areas. 
6.  Amplified music or other noise shall cease between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
7.  After the duration of the fair or carnival, all grounds used shall be restored to their condition before the fair or carnival. It shall be the responsibility of the sponsoring organization to perform such restoration. 
(c)  Temporary Outdoor Promotional Attractions. Temporary outdoor promotional attractions (see LBCS Code 9922) incident to a shopping center or other business establishment, such as auto, boat or home shows, pony and hay rides, acrobatic acts and the like, may be permitted by temporary use permit subject in each case to approval by the Zoning Administrator and compliance with the following conditions: 
1.  A permit for any such attraction shall not be issued for a longer period than 15 days, but may be renewed by the Zoning Administrator with or without modification; or may be revoked. 
2.  A charge may be made for admission to or use of any such attraction. 
3.  No such attraction shall be located less than 150 feet of the nearest lot line of any adjacent dwelling, except multi-household or mixed use residential structures. 
4.  Lights, music, amplifiers and other noise shall be controlled so as not to be a nuisance to adjacent residents. 
5.  The hours of operation shall not extend beyond the normal business hours of the business establishments to which such attractions are incident. 
6.  In the event the Zoning Administrator refuses to issue a permit or revokes a permit previously issued for said promotional attractions, the applicant for such a permit shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-72.24. - Recycling collection centers. 
    Recycling collection centers that are open for public use shall be located in industrial or business districts in an area no larger than 5,000 square feet or at public school or public recreation sites for the collection of recyclable materials. The operation of the recycling bins and the materials allowed to be collected shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works, and the location of the recycling bins shall be approved by the director of community planning and development. The definition does not include recycling containers that are used on site by a private entity for the purpose of storing recyclable waste materials generated only by such private entity. 
Sec. 35.2-72.25. - Tourist homes or bed and breakfast establishments. 
    Tourist homes or bed and breakfast establishments (see LBCS Code 1310) shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  For R-1 and R-2 districts, not more than three rooms with not more than two persons per room may be offered for transient guests for compensation under the management of the occupants of the dwelling. 
(b)  For R-3 and R-4 districts, not more than five rooms with not more than four persons per room may be offered for transient guests for compensation under the management of the occupants of the dwelling. 
(c)  The primary use of the home shall remain as a residence. 
(d)  The parking requirements of section 35.2-62 et seq. of this ordinance. 
(e)  The operator of the facility must obtain a business license. 
Sec. 35.2-72.26. - Utilities and transportation services. 
    Public utilities and services (see LBCS Codes 4120, 4130 and 4300 et seq.), excluding City-owned utilities that are permitted by conditional use permit in residential or business districts shall meet the following conditions: 
(a)  General. 
1.  Public utility and transportation uses allowed by conditional use permit in residential or commercial districts shall not include any of the following: Power generating plants; incinerators; non-local area telephone and telegraph dial or repeater stations; public transit or railroad car barns, garages, yards, or shops; construction of building materials yards, service truck dispatching, or storage; or uses not enumerated below. 
2.  The architecture and landscaping shall be designed so that the uses blend harmoniously with other development in the area. 
3.  All such uses shall conform to the performance standards applicable to I-1 districts. 
4.  Appropriate conditions and safeguards may be prescribed to minimize adverse effects on the character of the surrounding area, including requirements for soundproofing, for the construction of fences, barriers, or other safety devices, for surfacing of all access roads and driveways, for shielding of floodlights, or other artificial illumination or for landscaping or screening. 
(b)  Public service establishment. In all districts, the City Council may permit electric or gas utility substations, limited in each case to a site of not more than 10,000 square feet; water or sewage pumping stations; or telephone exchanges or other communications equipment structures; provided, that the following findings are made: 
1.  That there are serious difficulties in locating the use in a district where it is permitted as of right that make it necessary to locate such use within the proposed district. 
2.  In the case of electric or gas utility substations or water or sewage pumping stations, that the site for such use has a minimum frontage of 50 feet and a minimum lot area of 5,700 square feet. 
(c)  Other public utility facilities. In all districts, the City Council may permit as a conditional use public utility stations for oil or gas metering or regulating or terminal facilities located at water crossings for access to electric, gas, or steam lines; provided, that the City Council finds that the proposed location, design and method of operation will not have a detrimental effect on the privacy and quiet of the neighborhood and the safety of its inhabitants. 
(d)  Public transit, railroad or electric utility substations. In all residential or commercial districts, the City Council may permit as a conditional use electric utility substations (including transformers, switches, or auxiliary apparatus) or public transit or railroad electric substations, limited in each case to a site of not more than 40,000 square feet, and in the case of electric utility substations to a site of not less than 10,000 square feet, provided that the following findings are made: 
1.  That such use will serve either the community within which it is proposed to be located and that there are serious difficulties in locating such use in a nearby district where it is permitted as of right. 
2.  In the case of public transit or railroad electric substations, that the site for such use has a minimum frontage of 50 feet and a minimum lot area of 5,700 square feet. 
(e)  Non-local area substations. The City Council may permit as a conditional use public transit, railroad, or utility electric substations which will serve a larger area than the residential community within which it is proposed to be located or the residential community immediately adjacent; provided, that the other findings enumerated in this section are made and provided that the site is not less than 40,000 square feet nor more than ten acres. 
(f)  Overhead electric power and energy transmission lines. Except for facilities under the exclusive jurisdiction of the State Corporation Commission (see 15.2-2232 and 56-46.1 of the Code of Virginia), in all residential and commercial districts, the City Council may permit as a conditional use overhead electric power and energy transmission lines suspended from multi-legged structures; provided, that the following findings are made: 
1.  That the proposed use does not adversely affect the Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the district as embodied in this ordinance and in any master plan or portion thereof adopted by the City Council. 
2.  That the proposed use will not adversely affect the health and safety of residents or workers in the area. 
3.  That the proposed use at the location selected is necessary for the public convenience and service. 
4.  That structures will be so located on the zoning lot that their minimum distance from any lot line will equal the maximum height of the structure above ground level. 
5.  The power lines or structures will not interfere with existing or planned air traffic. 
6.  That in the balancing of the equities between such convenience and service and any detriment to adjacent properties or the general neighborhood, such overhead line should be permitted at the location selected. 
(g)  In making the findings in paragraph (f), the fact that heavy storms occasionally cause overhead power lines to break and fall to the ground, causing vulnerability to electrocution and interference with circulation shall be considered. Location of overhead power lines should therefore be evaluated in terms of avoiding proximity of the line to schools, hospitals, fire-fighting equipment, police stations, employment centers, airports, pedestrian ways, major highways or streets, and other land uses to which a fallen power line would cause a special hazard or interference with an essential service. 
Sec. 35.2-72.27. - Mobile food vehicles. 
    All mobile food vehicles providing retail sales of food (food trucks, food trailers or food carts) shall comply with the regulations of this section. These regulations do not apply to "meals on wheels" program vehicles, ice cream trucks or food home delivery services. 
(a)  Districts Where Allowed. 
1.  Mobile food trucks and trailers for retail sales of food shall be limited to the B-3, B-4, B-5, IN-2, I-1, and I-2 districts. 
2.  Mobile food carts for retail sales of food shall be limited to the B-1, B-3, B-4, B-5, IN-1 and IN-2 districts. Food carts shall not be self-propelled or exceed four feet in width by ten feet in length or eight feet in height. 
(b)  Location Criteria. 
1.  Food trucks, trailers and carts shall be located a minimum distance of 15 feet from the edge of any driveway, utility box or vaults, handicapped ramp, building entrance, exit or emergency access/exit, emergency call box or fire hydrant. 
2.  Food trucks, trailers and carts shall not be located within any area of the lot or parcel that impedes, endangers, or interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
3.  Food trucks, trailers and carts shall not occupy any parking spaces required to fulfill the minimum requirements of the principal use, unless the principal use's hours of operation do not coincide with those of the food truck business. Nor shall any retail sales - food truck occupy parking spaces that may be leased to another business and used to fulfill its minimum parking requirements. 
4.  Food trucks, trailers and carts shall not occupy or limit access to any handicap accessible parking space. 
(c)  Mobile Food Vehicle Operations. 
1.  No freestanding signage or audio amplification shall be permitted as part of the mobile food vehicle operations. 
2.  No mobile food vehicle operations shall make or cause to be made any unreasonable or excessive noise in violation of City's Code. 
3.  No mobile food vehicle shall use flashing or moving lights as part of its operation. 
4.  Outside of business hours, the vehicle shall not be stored on the site of its operations. 
5.  When open for business, the food truck, trailer or cart operator, or his or her designee, must be present at all times, except in cases of an emergency. 
6.  The food truck, trailer or cart vendor is responsible for the proper disposal of waste and trash associated with the operation. City trash receptacles are not to be used for this purpose. Vendors shall remove all waste and trash from their approved location at the end of each day or as needed to maintain the health and safety of the public. The vendor shall keep all areas of the permitted lot free and clean of grease, trash, paper, cups, cans or other materials associated with the vending operation. No liquid waste or grease is to be disposed in tree pits, storm drains or onto the sidewalks, streets, or other public space. Under no circumstances shall grease be released or disposed of in the City's sanitary sewer system. 
7.  All equipment required for the operation shall be contained within, attached to or within 20 feet of the food truck, trailer or cart. All food preparation, storage, and sales-distribution shall be in compliance with all applicable City, State and Federal Health Department sanitary regulations. 
(d)  Authorization. 
1.  A City business license shall be obtained by the vendor prior to operations of a mobile food vehicle and shall be renewed annually. 
2.  The application shall include a sketch showing the footprint of the mobile food vehicle and all related dining or food service appurtenances. 
3.  Application approval does not grant or entitle the exclusive use of a location to the mobile food vehicle applicant. 
4.  The business license application shall include authorization from the property owner for any lot or parcel proposed to accommodate a mobile food vehicle. 
5.  Prior to issuance of the business license, the vendor shall provide evidence of all necessary permits authorizing the preparation and sales of food within the City of Lynchburg. 
6.  If at any time evidence is provided that the lot or parcel is being used other than in compliance with these regulations, the property owner may be cited for violation of this zoning ordinance. 
7.  Copies of the business license and all applicable permits shall be kept in the food truck, trailer or cart at all times. 
Sec. 35.2-73. - Telecommunications Towers. 
Sec. 35.2-73.1. - Findings. 
(a)  The City has the authority to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of towers, antennas support structures, and telecommunications facilities. 
(b)  The Federal Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 ("the act") grants the federal communications commission ("FCC") exclusive jurisdiction over: 
1.  The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions from telecommunications facilities. 
2.  The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the radio frequency spectrum. 
(c)  The City's regulation of towers and telecommunications facilities cannot have the effect of prohibiting any person from providing wireless telecommunications services in violation of the act. 
Sec. 35.2-73.2. - Purposes. 
    The general purpose of this article is to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of towers and telecommunications facilities in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in Lynchburg. Specifically, the purposes of this article are: 
(a)  To facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunications services to the residents and businesses of the City in an orderly fashion; 
(b)  To regulate the location of towers and telecommunications facilities in the City; 
(c)  To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of towers and telecommunications facilities; 
(d)  To minimize adverse visual impact of towers and telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(e)  To promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and antenna support structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
(f)  To avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and telecommunications facilities by ensuring that such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, and removed when no longer used or determined to be structurally unsound; 
(g)  To ensure that towers and telecommunications facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses; 
(h)  To promote the location of towers in industrial and business, rather than residential areas. 
Sec. 35.2-73.3. - Development and approval of towers. 
(a)  A tower and associated telecommunications facilities shall be a permitted use of land in business and industrial districts (B-1 through B3, B-5, and I-1 through I-3). A conditional use permit from the City Council shall be required for applicants seeking to locate towers, regardless of height, and related telecommunications facilities, in business districts zoned as B-4 and B-6 and in conservation and residential districts designated R-C through R-5. No structure, regardless of design or material, shall be permitted in any residential district as a telecommunications facility, except small equipment cabinets located on the tower or on the ground immediately adjacent to a telecommunications facility, provided they do not exceed seventy-two cubic feet above ground, and six feet in height. If another company collocates its antenna on the same tower, each company is permitted to have a small equipment cabinet of this size. Any proposal exceeding these parameters shall be subject to review by the City Council as part of a conditional use permit application. Application shall be made to the City Planner in the manner provided in Article II of this Zoning Ordinance. In districts for which a conditional use permit is required, the City Council shall make its decision to grant or deny such permit in writing and in a manner consistent with applicable state and federal law. 
(b)  Existing towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the districts where located. New towers shall not exceed a maximum height of 50 feet in any residential district, 100 feet in a B-1 district, or 150 feet in any other commercial or industrial district, unless the City Council approves a conditional use permit authorizing a maximum height in excess of these limits. 
(c)  The City may authorize the use of City property in appropriately zoned districts in accordance with the procedures of the City charter and code. The City shall have no obligation whatsoever to use City property for such purposes. 
(d)  No new tower shall be built, constructed, or erected in the City unless such tower, including the ground area for associated telecommunications facilities, is capable of supporting another person's operating telecommunications facilities comparable in weight, size, and surface area to the applicant's telecommunications facilities. For purposes of this section, the "applicant's facilities" shall mean those installed within six months of completion of tower construction. These provisions are encouraged for, but need not apply to, towers no greater than 50 feet in height. 
(e)  An application to develop a tower shall include: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated, the written consent of the owner, and the name, address, telephone number of the owner, shall be evidenced in the application. The application shall also contain an affirmative statement indicating that both the owner and applicant are aware of and agree to comply with the provisions in section 35.2-73.19 of this Zoning Ordinance regarding abandonment. 
2.  The legal description, valuation map number, and address of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated. 
3.  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all tower owners with towers or usable antenna support structures within a one mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including City-owned property. 
4.  Written documentation that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts for permission to install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on City-owned towers or usable antenna support structures located within a one mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
5.  Written documentation that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on existing or proposed towers, and their ground area, or usable support structures owned by other persons located within a one mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
6.  Written, technical evidence from a radio frequency engineer that the proposed tower or telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another person's tower or usable antenna support structure located within a one mile radius of the proposed tower site and must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system. 
7.  Written, technical evidence from a structural engineer that the proposed structure meets the standards set forth in this code, including but not limited to the requirements set forth in sections 35.2-73.3(d) and 35.2-73.6. 
8.  Written, technical evidence from a radio frequency engineer that the proposed facilities meet the standards set forth in this code, including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in section 35.2-73.4. 
9.  Written, technical evidence from an electrical engineer that the proposed site of the tower or telecommunications facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, fire, or other danger due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals. 
10.  A map of the City and the first half-mile of all bordering communities showing the design of the applicant's entire existing or proposed wireless telecommunications network. Such map shall, at minimum, indicate the general location of all proposed or existing tower and antenna sites, their dimensions, specifications, and signal area coverage. 
11.  Color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property or properties and from adjacent roadways. 
12.  An application fee that represents the site plan fee and conditional use fee otherwise required. The City reserves the right to employ an outside consultant to review any application. The applicant shall reimburse the City for the reasonable expenses related to such review as an additional application fee. 
13.  A site plan, including a description of the lot lines, setbacks, location of adjacent structures, proposed location of the tower, separation distances, proposed tower height, landscaping, screening, access, parking, and security. 
14.  An acknowledgment that the applicant currently complies and will continue to comply with all FCC standards, including reporting requirements regarding radio frequency emissions. 
15.  When seeking approval of a telecommunication tower or facility, the applicant shall furnish written documentation that: 
a.  The proposed communication tower is reasonably necessary to serve an adjacent residential area or areas; 
b.  Any variance (or conditional use permit) sought is the minimum necessary to address the need for the variance (or conditional use permit), subsequent to exploring all reasonable siting alternatives; 
c.  The location of the communication tower in relation to the existing structures, trees and other visual buffers shall minimize, to the greatest extent reasonably practicable under the circumstances, any impact on affected residentially zoned property; 
d.  The location of the communication tower will not have a significant detrimental impact on adjacent property values; and 
e.  Any other factors that the applicant deems to be relevant to the City's consideration of a tower or facility siting. 
f.  All information submitted with an application that is trade secret information or is for other reasons proprietary shall be clearly marked as such when submitted with an application. The City shall not disclose publicly, or to any third party, proprietary information unless compelled to do so by federal, state, or local law. 
Sec. 35.2-73.4. - Interference with public safety radio services. 
    In order to ensure that the City's public safety radio services will be free from harmful or destructive interference, all applicants requesting a permit to site a tower or telecommunications facilities must: 
(a)  Demonstrate compliance with good engineering practices; 
(b)  Provide the City a copy of all intermodulation studies submitted to the FCC; 
(c)  Not induce harmful or destructive interference to the City's public safety radio services; 
(d)  Comply with FCC regulations regarding susceptibility to radio frequency interference, frequency coordination requirements, general technical standards for power, antenna, bandwidth limitations, frequency stability, transmitter measurements, operating requirements, and any and all other federal statutory and regulatory requirements relating to radio frequency interference (RFI); and 
(e)  In the case of co-location of telecommunications facilities either in the same location or on the same tower as the City's, comply with FCC emissions requirements and not radiate any RFI or any electromagnetic interference (EMI) that may interfere with the City's public safety radio services. 
Sec. 35.2-73.5. - Setbacks and fall zones. 
(a)  Setbacks. 
1.  All towers and any telecommunications facilities in any business and industrial zoning districts shall be set back on all sides a distance equal to the underlying building setback requirement in the applicable zoning district. All towers in residential zoning districts shall be set back on all sides a distance equal to the tower height. In addition, in order to preserve the aesthetics of residential areas and to maintain property values, whenever a tower is located in a residential district, the tower shall be located a distance at least equal to twice the height of the tower from any adjacent property lines. When a tower is located in a commercial district or industrial district, the tower shall be located a distance at least equal to twice the height of the tower from any residential district. 
2.  Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the parcel on which it is located. 
(b)  Fall zones. 
1.  Every tower shall be designed to fall within the boundaries of the parcel on which the tower is located. The applicant shall submit written certification and supporting documentation from a structural engineer that a tower proposed for a residential area will fall within the specified fall zone. In the case of towers located in commercial or industrial areas that are specified and certified by a structural engineer to be collapsible or incapable of failure, the Zoning Administrator may reduce the fall zone accordingly. 
2.  In those instances, in which there is a conflict between the required setback and the required fall zone, the greater distance shall apply. 
Sec. 35.2-73.6. - Structural requirements. 
    All towers must be designed and certified by a structural engineer to be structurally sound and, at minimum, in conformance with the statewide uniform building code, and any other standards outlined in this article. 
Sec. 35.2-73.7. - Separation or buffer requirements. 
(a)  Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands and all residences (irrespective of zoning classification) by a minimum distance equal to 100 percent of the height of the proposed tower. 
(b)  Tower separation distances for the purpose of compliance with this article shall be measured from the base of a tower to the closest point of a designated area. The minimum tower separation distance shall be calculated and applied irrespective of City and county jurisdictional boundaries. 
Sec. 35.2-73.8. - Method of determining tower height. 
    Measurement of tower height for the purpose of determining compliance with all requirements of this article shall include the tower structure itself, the base pad, and any other telecommunications facilities attached thereto which extend over the top of the tower structure itself. Tower height shall be measured from grade. 
Sec. 35.2-73.9. - Illumination. 
    Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the federal aviation administration ("FAA"). Upon commencement of construction of a tower, in cases where there are residential uses located within a distance equal to the height of the tower from the tower, and when required by federal law, dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA. 
Sec. 35.2-73.10. - Exterior finish. 
    Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall be painted a neutral color (galvanized finish is considered a neutral color). 
Sec. 35.2-73.11. - Landscaping. 
    All landscaping on parcels containing towers, antenna support structures, or telecommunications facilities shall be designed to screen the tower, antenna support structure, and telecommunications facilities to a height of at least six feet from grade. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the inspections division if the base of the tower and facilities to be screened are not located in and not visible from any business or residential districts or visible from public streets. All landscaping must be continually maintained in a healthy and attractive manner. 
Sec. 35.2-73.12. - Security. 
    All towers must be reasonably posted and secured to protect against trespass. 
Sec. 35.2-73.13. - Access. 
    All parcels upon which towers are located must provide access during normal business hours to at least one paved vehicular parking space(s) on site. 
Sec. 35.2-73.14. - Certifications and inspections. 
(a)  All towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with the requirements of the City building code and all other construction standards set forth by the City Code and federal and state law. For new monopole towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 35.2-73.3(e) and every five years thereafter; for existing monopole towers, such certification shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of this article and then every five years thereafter; for new lattice or guyed towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 35.2-73.3(e) and every two years thereafter; and for existing lattice or guyed towers, such certification shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of this article and then every two years thereafter. The tower owner may be required by the City to submit more frequent certifications should there be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized. 
(b)  The City and its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a tower is located, between the inspections and certifications required above, to inspect the tower for the purpose of determining whether it complies with the statewide building code and all other construction standards provided by the City Code and federal and state law. 
(c)  The City reserves the right to conduct such reasonable and necessary inspections, upon reasonable notice to the tower owner. All expenses by the City related to such inspections shall be borne by the tower owner if any unresolved defects exist. 
(d)  The tower or telecommunication facilities owner shall certify to the City on an annual basis that it is in compliance with all of the requirements of this article, including the requirements set forth in section 35.2-73.15. 
Sec. 35.2-73.15. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. 
(b)  Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the national electric safety code and all FCC, state, and local regulations, and in such manner that will not interfere with the use of other property. 
(c)  All towers, telecommunications facilities, and antenna support structures shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person. 
(d)  All telecommunication facilities shall maintain compliance with current radio frequency emission standards of the FCC. 
(e)  In the event the use of a tower is discontinued by the tower owner, or in the event a tower owner files notice to the FCC of its interest to cease operating the tower owner shall provide written notice to the City of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. 
Sec. 35.2-73.16. - Stealth. 
    All towers and telecommunications facilities in business and residential districts shall be of stealth design. 
Sec. 35.2-73.17. - Telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures. 
(a)  Any telecommunications facilities which are not attached to a tower may be permitted as an accessory use to any antenna support structure at least 30 feet tall, regardless of the zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning district where the structure is located. Telecommunications facilities are prohibited on all other structures. 
(b)  The owner of such structure or telecommunication facilities shall, by written certification, graphic representation, and detailed plans to the technical review committee verify that: 
1.  The antenna support structure and telecommunications facilities comply with the statewide building code; 
2.  Any telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances, located upon the roof of an antenna support structure, are set back a distance at least equal to the height of the telecommunications facilities. However, this setback requirement shall not apply to telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances, located above the roof of an antenna support structure, if such facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of screening techniques that are compatible with the surrounding built environment and approved by the City. Setback requirements shall not apply to stealth antennas which are mounted to the exterior of antenna support structures below the roof, but which do not protrude more than 24 inches from the side of such an antenna support structure; and 
3.  All applicable standards of this article are being met. 
Sec. 35.2-73.18. - Existing towers. 
(a)  An existing tower may be modified or demolished and rebuilt to accommodate collocation of additional telecommunications facilities as follows: 
1.  Application for a permit shall be made to the division of inspections which shall have the authority to issue a permit without further approval by the City Council. 
2.  The total height of the modified tower and telecommunications facilities attached thereto shall not exceed the lesser of the height of the existing tower or the maximum height for towers allowed under this article. 
3.  A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocation of additional telecommunications facilities may be relocated on the same parcel subject to the setback requirements of this article. However, if it is impossible for the tower to be rebuilt in compliance with the setback requirements of this article, such set back requirements shall require approval of a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals to allow the tower to be rebuilt in its exact previous location. 
Sec. 35.2-73.19. - Abandonment. 
(a)  If the City receives notice pursuant to section 35.2-73.15, or if any tower shall cease to be used for a period of 365 consecutive days, the division of inspection shall notify the owner, with a copy to the applicant, that the site will be subject to a determination by the division of inspection that such site has been abandoned. The owner shall have 30 days from receipt of said notice to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period. If the owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period, the division of inspection shall issue a final determination of abandonment for the site. Upon issuance of the final determination of abandonment, the owner shall, within 75 days, dismantle and remove the tower. If an owner fails to remove an abandoned tower within 75 days of the final determination of abandonment, the City may dismantle and remove the tower and recover the costs of the same from the owner or by accessing the bond set forth below. For the purposes of this section, removal includes all physical improvements associated with towers, including foundation and tower grounding. 
(b)  To secure the obligation set forth above, the owner shall post a bond or provide a letter of credit in an amount to be determined by the City's risk manager based on the anticipated cost of removal of the tower. 
Sec. 35.2-73.20. - Reservation of rights. 
    The City reserves the right to impose any other reasonable conditions it determines are necessary for the proper placement, construction, or modification of towers or facilities, and/or to impose any other reasonable conditions on the issuance of a conditional use permit for placement, construction, or modification of a tower or facilities. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LAND USE DEVELOPMENT PATTERNS 

Sec. 35.2-80. - Residential Cluster Subdivisions. 
Sec. 35.2-80.1. - Applicability. 
    Authorized residential cluster subdivision development (see LBCS Code 9951) may be approved in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts subject to compliance with the requirements of this section and applicable subdivision regulations. 
Sec. 35.2-80.2. - Density. 
    Density on the site shall not exceed that permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
Sec. 35.2-80.3. - Authorized uses. 
    Uses shall comply with the use regulations of the applicable zoning district. 
Sec. 35.2-80.4. - Site development standards. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this section, cluster development shall comply with regulations of the applicable zoning district governing height, parking, landscaping, signs, lighting, access and public improvements. 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-80.5. - Internal access required. 
    Access to individual lots shall be provided via an internal circulation system, which may include public streets, alleys or private drives. Private drives shall not serve more than five (5) dwelling units. 
Sec. 35.2-80.6. - Common areas. 
(a)  Where clustering of dwellings is employed common open space, properties and facilities shall be placed in the ownership and control of a property owners' association capable of providing adequate maintenance in accordance section 35.2-10.15 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-80.7. - Single-household and duplex development standards. 
    Single-household and duplex cluster development shall comply with the standards established in Exhibit VIII-1. 
Exhibit VIII-1: Standards for Single-Household and Duplex Clusters 
Design Element Standards Minimum Size of Cluster Development 2 acres Minimum Lot Area 50% of minimum lot area for applicable zoning district,Maximum lot coverage shall not apply Minimum Lot Width 50% of minimum lot width for applicable zoning district, not to be reduced below 30 feet Minimum Lot Width if Abutting a Conforming Single Family or Duplex Use Zoned R-1 or R-2 80% of the minimum lot width for the district applicable to the abutting lot, unless the lots are separated by an open space area measuring at least 50 feet in width Setbacks 50% of setback for applicable zoning district except that side setbacks shall not be less than 5 feet Minimum Open Space 30%  
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-81. - Townhouse Development. 
Sec. 35.2-81.1. - Townhouse development standards. 
    Development of townhouse lots (see LBCS Code 1113) shall comply with the lot development standards established in Exhibit VIII-2 in addition to the standards established for parking, landscaping and other site improvements established in Article VI. Townhouses may be established by conditional use permit in the R-3, B-1, B-3 and B-5 districts and as a permitted use in the R-4 and IN-2 districts. 
Exhibit VIII-2: Standards for Townhouse Development 
Design Element Standards Additional Standards Minimum size of townhouse development 2 acres Minimum lot area 1,200 sq. ft. Excludes driveways, parking areas, common areas, sidewalks and required setbacks Minimum unit width 16 ft. Front setback 10 feet Measured between the building front and the front of lot, common area, driveways or parking areas. Not more than three (3) abutting units may have the same front setback Exterior side setback 16 feet Applies to distances separating units that are not attached, and between units and right-of-way, driveways or side parking areas Rear setback 25 feet Minimum side and rear perimeter setbacks when abutting a single-household district 50 feet Building access A paved walkway shall connect each unit with common areas, parking areas and public right-of-way Maximum number of attached townhouse units 9 units  
Sec. 35.2-81.2. - Common areas. 
    Open space and common areas provided in conjunction with a townhouse development shall comply with the standards established in section 35.2-80.6. 
Sec. 35.2-82. - Traditional Neighborhood Development. 
Sec. 35.2-82.1. - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  Traditional neighborhood development (TND) (see LBCS Code 9952) provides opportunities for the creation of new neighborhoods designed along the traditions of small town and urban neighborhood development prevalent in the United States from colonial times until the 1940's. These design traditions created neighborhoods and communities that fostered strong connections between people as they lived, worked, shopped, learned, recreated and worshiped. Because TNDs are tightly knit and incorporate an integrated mix of uses, they do not meet the development standards of the City's existing zones. Therefore, this TND section is provided to offer a flexible set of land use and design regulations based on performance standards that will allow traditional neighborhood development subject to site-specific City review. Where TNDs are deemed appropriate by the City Council, all dimensional specifications, setback, buffering, and landscaping requirements, and location of parking facilities and recreation facilities prescribed elsewhere in this ordinance are herein replaced by an approval process in which the approved TND plan and design guidelines become the basis for continuing land use controls. 
(b)  TNDs may be established by conditional use permit in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, B-1, B-3, B-4, B-5 and IN-2 districts. 
Sec. 35.2-82.2. - Objectives. 
    To carry out the intent of this section, a TND shall achieve the following objectives: 
(a)  The design of the neighborhood allows residents to work, shop, and carry out many of life's other activities within the neighborhood. 
(b)  A mix of land uses is provided. The proximity of uses allows residents to walk, ride a bicycle, or take transit for many trips between home, work, shopping, and school. 
(c)  A variety of housing types is provided at a range of densities, types (multi-household, townhouse, and single-household), and costs. Neighborhoods are heterogeneous mixes of residences in close proximity to commercial and employment uses. 
(d)  The neighborhood includes a retail, office, employment, services, and/or entertainment core to provide economic and social vitality and a major focus and meeting place in the community. 
(e)  The circulation system serves many modes of transportation and provides choices for alternative transportation routes. Streets, alleys, and pedestrian and bike paths connect to the surrounding area to the extent possible. Streets and alleys generally follow a grid pattern to provide these route choices and connections. Traffic calming techniques may be used to reduce vehicle speed and increase pedestrian and bicycle safety. 
(f)  The overall intensity of development is designed to be high enough to support transit service. 
(g)  A system of parks, open spaces, civic, public, and institutional uses is included to create a high quality of life and civic identity for the community. 
(h)  The cluster concept is embraced so as to concentrate development in environmentally suitable areas and to preserve and protect important environmental and cultural resources. 
Sec. 35.2-82.3. - General requirements for traditional neighborhood developments. 
(a)  Minimum Area. The minimum area required to qualify for a traditional neighborhood development shall be 30 contiguous acres of land. Where the applicant can demonstrate that the characteristics of a proposed project site will meet the objectives of this article, the City Council may consider projects of less acreage when considering a TND application. 
(b)  Location of Traditional Neighborhood Developments. A traditional neighborhood development may be established by a conditional use permit in the R-C, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 residential districts and the B-1 and B-3 business districts, where the applicant can demonstrate that the characteristics of the property will meet the objectives of this section and are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Lynchburg. 
(c)  Management and Ownership of Common Open Space, Common Property and Other Common Facilities in Traditional Neighborhood Developments. All common open space properties and common facilities, such as alleys, not deeded to the City shall be preserved for their intended purpose as expressed in the approved concept plan. The developer shall provide for the establishment of a property owners' association to ensure the maintenance of all common open space properties and common facilities. The property owners' association shall be established in accordance section 35.2-10.15 of this Zoning Ordinance 
(d)  Fee schedule for traditional neighborhood development review. The fees for TND review and action shall be the same as those for planned unit developments. 
Sec. 35.2-82.4. - Permitted uses in traditional neighborhood developments. 
    All uses within a traditional neighborhood development are determined by the provisions of this section and the approved conditional use permit for the project. 
(a)  Residential uses. 
1.  A variety of residential uses shall be provided in the traditional neighborhood development. Residences may be of any design and type, though the range of styles and materials shall be set by architectural design guidelines submitted with the TND application and made a part of the specific regulations governing the development of the TND. 
2.  In developing a balanced community, the provision of housing with a broad range of prices shall be deemed to be most in compliance with the intent of this article. 
3.  Generally, high density housing types (multi-household and single-household attached housing) shall be located within one-quarter mile of the core of the Development. Satellite high density residential areas are permitted if used to provide a transition between the neighborhood and abutting off-site high density housing areas, non-residential areas, or major transportation corridors. Satellite areas may include a commercial area or civic uses. 
4.  A maximum of 80 percent of the net development area shall be designated for residential uses. The total land area designated for residential use shall be equal to or exceed the total area designated for commercial/service and restricted industrial combined. 
5.  Of the total number of residential units to be constructed, no more than 70 percent shall be in one of the following categories: 
a.  Single-household detached (see LBCS Code 1111). 
b.  Single-household attached (duplexes and townhouses) (see LBCS Codes 1120 and 1113). 
c.  Multi-household (see LBCS Code 1130). 
6.  The maximum net density as measured in dwelling units per acre in the traditional neighborhood development shall not exceed the maximum net density set in the R-4 district. The acreage to be included in this calculation shall be all land area devoted to residential, associated park and open space uses, and associated alleys. 
(b)  Commercial and Service Uses. 
1.  Each traditional neighborhood development neighborhood shall have a core made up primarily of the uses permitted in the B-1 and B-3 districts and located within one quarter (1/4) mile of the identified center of the community. Small-scale satellite commercial/service uses are also permitted in the TND neighborhood outside the core area as long as in total they comprise less than one-third the gross commercial/service building square footage of the core. 
2.  In addition to B-1 and B-3 permitted uses, the following conditional, commercial and service uses shall be permitted if specifically included in the approved TND plan, otherwise they will be conditional uses once a TND plan is approved: 
a.  Automobile service stations (see LBCS Code 2117a); 
b.  Commercial recreation establishments, such as dancing, bowling, billiards and the like, when located in enclosed buildings (see LBCS Codes 5320, 5340, 5371, 5380 and 5390); 
c.  Temporary fairs, exhibitions, and circuses (see LBCS Code 9921); 
d.  Tourist homes or bed and breakfasts (see LBCS Code 1310); and 
e.  Veterinarian hospitals without outdoor kennels, including facilities for the sale and care of animals normally kept as pets but not farm animals (see LBCS Code 2721). 
3.  The maximum floor plate for any commercial/service building shall be 20,000 square feet, though this limitation may be waived during the conditional use permit approval process upon determination that a larger building as designed will not dominate the neighborhood or its streetscape. 
4.  A minimum of five percent and a maximum of 30 percent of the net development area shall be designated for commercial/service uses. 
(c)  Restricted Industrial Uses. 
1.  Traditional neighborhood developments may include industrial uses permitted under the I-1, restricted industrial district. 
2.  A maximum of 30 percent of the net development area may be designated for restricted industrial uses. 
3.  The maximum floor plate for any industrial building shall be 20,000 square feet, though this limitation may be waived during the concept plan approval process upon determination that a larger building as designed will not dominate the neighborhood or its streetscape. 
(d)  Civic Uses. 
1.  The following civic uses shall be permitted if specifically included in the approved traditional neighborhood development plan, otherwise they will be conditional uses once a TND plan is approved: 
a.  Child and adult care centers (see LBCS Code 6562); 
b.  Cemeteries and columbaria (see LBCS Codes 6722 and 6744; note that these uses are allowed by right if accessory to a church or other place of worship); 
c.  Churches and other places of worship, including parish houses and educational buildings (see LBCS Code 6600); 
d.  Clubs and fraternal organizations (see LBCS Code 6830); 
e.  Community swimming pools (see LBCS Codes 5371 and 5372); 
f.  Convents and monasteries (see LBCS Code 6600); 
g.  Group homes (see LBCS Code 6522); 
h.  Hospitals (see LBCS Code 6530); 
i.  Libraries (see LBCS Code 4242); 
j.  Museums and art galleries (see LBCS Code 5200); 
k.  Nursing homes and assisted living facilities (see LBCS Code 1200); 
l.  Public buildings, such as branch governmental centers, meeting halls, post offices (see LBCS Codes 4180 and 6300; note that City-owned buildings are allowed by right); 
m.  Public or community recreational facilities not operated for profit (see LBCS Codes 5371 and 5372); 
n.  Schools and colleges for general education (see LBCS Codes 6110, 6120 and 6130); and 
o.  Other community facilities and civic uses defined in Article XI. 
2.  A minimum of two percent of the net development area shall be designated for civic uses. Public utility uses shall not be included in this percentage. 
(e)  Parks, Squares and Other Open Space. 
1.  Since net densities of individual blocks may be high in a traditional neighborhood development, ample community open space shall be provided in parks, squares, and common open space distributed throughout the TND. In order for a parcel to be considered a park, a square, or common open space, it must be at least one-quarter acre in size. No residential unit of the neighborhood shall be located more than one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) from the boundary of a park, square, or common open space property. This requirement may be waived by City Council during the conditional use permit approval process in instances of unusual parcel shapes, the provision of ample private open space, or other mitigating factors. 
2.  A minimum of ten percent of the net development area shall be designated for park, square, and/or common open space uses. At least 1.0 acre total of parks or squares shall be provided in the core area of the TND. 
(f)  Accessory and Other Associated Uses. The following accessory uses and structures are permitted within a traditional neighborhood development: 
1.  Private and public garages (see LBCS Code 2640); 
2.  Private and public parking lots or structures (see LBCS Code 2640); 
3.  Signs in commercial/service and restricted industrial areas according to section 35.2-64 et seq. and the approved traditional neighborhood development design guidelines, provided no sign shall exceed the number and maximum area as established in Section 35.2-64.14. 
4.  Signs in residential, civic, and public use areas according to section 35.2-64.12. 
Sec. 35.2-82.5. - Setbacks in traditional neighborhood developments. 
    In a traditional neighborhood development, the fronts of buildings face on the public realm of the community (the sidewalks, streets, public parks and squares), while private yards and off-street parking are located to the rear. Therefore, buildings are to have minimal setbacks from the front property line. Commercial/service, multi-household residential, and single-household attached residential buildings are generally recommended to have front setbacks of zero to ten feet, and single-household detached residential buildings, front setbacks of zero to 25 feet. The TND design guidelines shall set forth the required minimum and maximum setbacks for proposed TND buildings. 
(a)  Streets, Alleys, Paths, and Block Patterns in Traditional Neighborhood Developments. 
(b)  The transportation system in traditional neighborhood developments shall be modeled on a grid street and alley pattern modified to accommodate the topography of the site and parcel shape. Culs-de-sac should be avoided to the extent possible and shall not exceed 20 percent of the total length of streets in the traditional neighborhood development, excluding alleys. 
(c)  Private streets and alleys, built to standards as approved by the technical review committee, are permitted in TNDs. Such private streets and alleys are permitted to serve multiple lots and uses. In other words, lots and uses are not required to have their own separate entrance on to a public street and may share a private street or alley entrance on to a public street. Private streets and alleys shall be maintained by the homeowners' association. 
(d)  All lots shall front on a public or private street or on a square. Alleys shall serve only the rear or sides of lots or uses. 
Exhibit VIII-3: Summary of TND Size, Land Use, Setback,
Density, and Bulk Standards 
Design Factor Standard Additional Provisions  Minimum Neighborhood Size 30 Acres Council may approve smaller area if bounded by an area having similar development patterns  Land Use Mix Minimum/Maximum  Parks, squares, & open space 10%/none  Civic 2%/none  Commercial 5%/30%  Industrial None/30%  Residential No less than commercial and industrial combined/80% No more than 70% of the total residential units may be single-household, townhouse, or multi-household units Proximity to parks or squares Each residential unit must be located within 1,320 feet of a park or square Minimum park or square area in the TND core is 1 acre Recommended Front Setbacks Minimum/Maximum (feet) To be established at the time of CUP and concept plan approval  Single-household detached 0/25  Single-household attached and multi-household and commercial 0/10 Maximum Residential Density 29.04 du/a Residential density is measured based on the total acreage of lots designated for residential or mixed-use structures Maximum floor plate for any commercial, service or industrial use 20,000 square feet  
(e)  Streets, alleys, paths, and block patterns in traditional neighborhood developments. 
(f)  The transportation system in traditional neighborhood developments shall be modeled on a grid street and alley pattern modified to accommodate the topography of the site and parcel shape. Culs-de-sac should be avoided to the extent possible and shall not exceed 20 percent of the total length of streets in the traditional neighborhood development, excluding alleys. 
(g)  Private streets and alleys, built to standards as approved by the technical review committee, are permitted in TNDs. Such private streets and alleys are permitted to serve multiple lots and uses. In other words, lots and uses are not required to have their own separate entrance on to a public street and may share a private street or alley entrance on to a public street. Private streets and alleys shall be maintained by the home owners' association. 
(h)  All lots shall front on a public or private street or on a square. Alleys shall serve only the rear or sides of lots or uses. 
(i)  In the TND core area, the blocks created by the grid of streets shall have a maximum block perimeter of 1,600 feet. Where slopes exceed ten percent, the block perimeter may exceed 1,600 feet to reduce the number of streets constructed perpendicular to the steep slopes provided that pedestrian access is provided across any block that exceeds 500 feet in length. Such access shall be provided within an easement of not less than ten feet in width. 
(j)  In areas where multi-household residential, commercial/service, and restricted industrial uses predominate, sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the street. In single-household detached and single-household attached residential areas, sidewalks shall be provided on at least one side of the street. 
(k)  Pedestrian and/or bicycle routes, lanes, or paths shall be provided to connect all uses and reduce motor vehicle use. Street design shall provide for the safety of pedestrians and bicyclists. 
Sec. 35.2-82.6. - Parking requirements in traditional neighborhood developments. 
(a)  Parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required in section 35.2-62 et seq. of the City Code except that on-street as well as off-street parking spaces shall be counted toward satisfaction of the requirements. On-street parking spaces assigned to a building or use shall be those spaces directly abutting the lot containing that building or use. All required handicapped parking spaces shall be provided off-street. 
(b)  Shared parking shall be permitted in accordance with the shared parking provisions of section 35.2-62.4(d). 
(c)  Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be located behind or to the side of buildings and may be served directly or indirectly by alleys. The TND design guidelines shall specify how off-street parking and loading areas shall be landscaped and screened from public streets. 
Sec. 35.2-82.7. - Traditional neighborhood development application and review. 
    Traditional neighborhood developments are permitted only by conditional use permit as established in section 35.2-11 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-82.8. - Traditional neighborhood development site plans. 
    Prior to securing a Building Permit for any construction in a traditional neighborhood development, approval of a concept plan and final site plan shall be obtained. The final site plan shall conform to the conditions of the TND conditional use permit and may be submitted for the entire site, or a portion of the site if the development is to be phased. Procedures for review of the final site plan shall be the same as those established in section 35.2-14.2. 
Sec. 35.2-82.9. - Traditional neighborhood development changes and appeals. 
    The procedures of section 35.2-12 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be followed if changes to the traditional neighborhood development conditional use permit are requested or if the applicant wishes to appeal any decision of any City official. 
Sec. 35.2-83. - Planned Unit Developments. 
Sec. 35.2-83.1. - Purpose. 
    Planned unit developments (PUDs) (see LBCS Code 9953) provide flexible land use and design regulations through the use of performance criteria so that small-to-large scale neighborhoods or portions thereof may be developed within the City that: 
(a)  Incorporate a variety of residential types meeting the full range of needs by Lynchburg residents; 
(b)  Contain both individual building sites and common property which are planned and developed as a unit; 
(c)  Are designed and organized to be capable of use and operation as a separate entity without necessarily needing the participation of other building sites or other common property in order to function as a neighborhood; 
(d)  Incorporate innovations in residential development so that the growing demands for housing at all economic levels may be met by greater variety in type, design, and siting of dwellings; 
(e)  Encourage conservation and more efficient use of land; 
(f)  Provide economies in the construction, maintenance and the provision of services; 
(g)  Provide amenities for occupants and the general public; 
(h)  Improve mobility for all modes of transportation; and 
(i)  Preserve natural conditions and facilitate innovative environmental design. 
Sec. 35.2-83.2. - Applicability. 
    Planned unit developments (see LBCS 9953) may be established by conditional use permit in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts. 
Sec. 35.2-83.3. - Findings. 
    The City recognizes that while the standard zoning and the subdivision regulations are appropriate for the regulation of land use in areas or neighborhoods that are already substantially developed, these controls can represent a type of pre-regulation, regulatory rigidity and uniformity. Thus, where development flexibility is deemed appropriate by the City Council, all dimensional specifications, setback requirements, buffering requirements, landscaping requirements, location of off-street parking facilities and location of recreation facilities elsewhere in this ordinance are herein replaced by an approval process in which an approved concept plan becomes the basis for continuing land use controls. 
Sec. 35.2-83.4. - Objectives. 
    To carry out the purposes of this section, a planned unit development shall achieve the following objectives: 
(a)  A choice in types of environment; occupancy tenure (e.g., cooperatives, individual ownership, condominium, leasing); types of housing (e.g., detached, attached, small houses); lot sizes (e.g., conventional and clustered lots); and community facilities available to existing and potential residents at all economic levels. 
(b)  More usable open space and recreation areas. 
(c)  The preservation of trees, outstanding natural topography and geologic features and prevention of soil erosion. 
(d)  A creative use of land and related physical development which allows an orderly transition of undeveloped land to urban areas. 
(e)  An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets, thereby lowering housing costs. 
(f)  A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the Lynchburg Comprehensive Plan. 
(g)  A more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of other articles of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-83.5. - General requirements for planned unit developments. 
(a)  Minimum Area. Generally, the minimum area required to qualify for a planned unit development shall be five contiguous acres of land. Where the applicant can demonstrate that the characteristics of his holdings will meet the objectives of this article, the City Council may consider projects with less acreage. 
(b)  Ownership. The tract of land for a project may be owned, leased, controlled or under option by a single person or corporation or by a group of individuals or corporations. An application must be filed by the owner or jointly by owners of all property included in the project or by the property owner's authorized agent with the power of attorney to sign the petition. In case of multiple ownership, the approved conditional use permit shall be binding on all owners. 
(c)  Location of Planned Unit Developments. A planned unit development may be established by a conditional use permit in any residential district of the City where the applicant can demonstrate that the characteristics of his holdings will meet the objectives of this article and is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Lynchburg. 
(d)  Management and Ownership of Common Open Space, Property and Facilities in Planned Unit Developments. All privately owned common open space designated in the approved final site plan shall be permanently preserved and maintained as open space. All deeds for property in a planned unit development shall include appropriate restrictions to ensure that all open space is permanently preserved as open space as shown on the approved conditional use permit. The property owner's association shall be established in accordance section 35.2-10.15 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-83.6. - Permitted uses in planned unit developments. 
    All uses within an area designated as a planned unit development are determined by the approved conditional use permit of the project concerned in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(a)  Residential Uses. Residences may be of any variety and type. In developing a balanced community, the use of a variety of housing types shall be deemed to be most in compliance with the intent of this article. However, at least 20 percent of the total number of dwelling units within any planned unit development shall be in single-household, detached structures. City Council may reduce or eliminate the mandatory single-household detached structure requirement. 
(b)  Accessory Commercial, Service and Other Nonresidential Uses. Commercial, service and other nonresidential uses may be permitted (or required) where such uses are designed to serve the residents of the planned unit development. The following proportions are deemed to be in keeping with the overall intent of the planned unit development concept: 
1.  Where the planned unit development contains 100 or more dwelling units, a maximum of 2,400 square feet of floor area for every 100 dwelling units may be used for limited commercial and/or service purposes. Such commercial or service area may be in separate buildings or incorporated within two-household or multi-household structures or in a suitable combination of these alternatives. 
2.  Where the planned unit development contains 300 or more dwelling units, a maximum of one-half acre of land for every 100 dwelling units may be used for commercial and/or service purposes. 
(c)  Accessory and Associate Uses. Customary accessory or associated uses such as private garages, storage spaces, recreational and community activities, churches, and schools shall also be permitted as appropriate to the planned unit development as provided in section 35.2-71 and the terms of the conditional use permit approval. 
Sec. 35.2-83.7. - Residential density in planned unit developments. 
(a)  Basic Density Calculations. The total number of dwelling units permitted shall be based on the densities established in the Comprehensive Plan for the applicable future land use category. Land designated for mixed-use development in the Comprehensive Plan shall not exceed residential densities of 24 dwellings per acre except as provided in paragraph (b). 
(b)  Density Bonus for Design Elements. The number of dwelling units permitted may be increased through the density bonus provisions established for the R-4 district in section 35.2-44.4(b) (Density and Height Bonuses). 
Sec. 35.2-84. - Retail Establishments, Large Scale. 
Sec. 35.2-84.1. - Purpose. 
    Large scale retail establishments (see LBCS Code 9954) are critical to the economic vitality of the City, convenience of citizens and ensuring that the City maintains its position as the economic center of the region. While retail establishments are important, their size can greatly impact the general health, safety and welfare of the City in terms of aesthetics, stormwater management, air pollution, light pollution, traffic, walkability and neighborhood compatibility. It is the intent of this ordinance to promote economic development and redevelopment which utilizes high-quality site, building design and land use to further the goals and objectives of creating accessible and attractive commercial districts, sustaining nature in the City, reinforcing neighborhood character, promoting a diverse, vital economy and providing effective support systems as stated in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 35.2-84.2. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to large scale retail establishments having a cumulative gross floor area of 75,000 new square feet or greater in floor area at time of site plan approval, whether such new gross floor area is contained entirely within a freestanding building or is within two or more buildings, whether located on a single lot or contiguous lots owned or operated as associated, integrated or cooperative business enterprises. 
(b)  The requirements of this ordinance shall be in addition to all other applicable ordinances, regulations and requirements, such as the erosion & sediment control ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, landscaping ordinance and sign ordinance. In the event that this ordinance and other applicable regulations of the Zoning Ordinance differ, the regulations of this ordinance shall apply. 
(c)  Large scale retail establishments shall be allowed as a permitted use in the B-3, B-4, B-5 and IN-2 districts. 
Sec. 35.2-84.3. - Transportation. 
(a)  The applicant shall submit a traffic study detailing impacts on the City's road network and traffic circulation for the site. The traffic study shall be prepared by a firm qualified to conduct traffic engineering studies. The methodology for the required traffic study shall be approved by the City's transportation engineer prior to commencement of the study. Technical guidelines for traffic studies may be obtained from the City's transportation engineer. 
(b)  The findings and recommendations for needed improvements as determined by the traffic study shall be made by the developer. Needed improvements may include but are not limited to: right and left turn lanes, sidewalks, new or modification of existing signals, trails or trail connections, sight distance improvements, street lighting, bus stops or transit pullout bays, access management techniques, and transportation systems management. Only those improvements where a clearly demonstrated nexus between the development and the need for the improvement exist shall be required. 
(c)  Shared direct access and internal vehicle circulation shall comply with the standards in section 35.2-66. 
(d)  Truck traffic shall be separated to the greatest extent possible from vehicular, pedestrian and bicyclist traffic. 
(e)  Entrances to the site shall be designed to maximize pedestrian, bicyclist and vehicular safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation and minimize the impact on adjacent neighborhoods. 

(f)  Adequate stacking for vehicles shall be provided at the access points to and from parking areas. 
(g)  Provisions for mass transit shall be made in the form of appropriately placed benches and shelters within the development or along public streets. 
(h)  Pedestrian walkways shall be provided between all buildings and between buildings and parking areas and all out parcels. Walkways within parking areas shall be located in a manner to provide safe efficient movement of pedestrians. Walkways shall be located in a manner so that no parking space is further than 120 feet from a walkway. Walkways and crosswalks shall be distinguishable from drive aisles. 
(i)  All pedestrian walkways shall be designed to provide safe efficient access for people with disabilities. Ramps shall be provided between all walkways and all crosswalks. 
Sec. 35.2-84.4. - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks shall be provided along the property frontage of all public streets. Connections between the sidewalk and internal walkways shall be provided. 
Sec. 35.2-84.5. - Lighting. 
    Lighting shall comply with the standards established in section 35.2-65 except that in no instance shall light poles exceed 35 feet in height. 
Sec. 35.2-84.6. - Building design and sustainability. 
(a)  Roofs. Parapets shall conceal flat roofs and all rooftop equipment such as heating ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) units from street level view. 
(b)  Entryways. The building shall have clearly defined, highly visible entryways. 
(c)  Building façade. Building facades greater than 150 feet in length measured horizontally and visible from a public street, shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least three feet to break up the expansiveness of the exterior. All recesses shall be properly lit to encourage a safe environment. 

(d)  Outdoor vending areas. Outdoor vending areas shall be incorporated into the facade of the building. 

(e)  Service areas incorporated into overall plan. Loading docks, truck parking, outside storage, cargo containers, trash collection, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash collection, and other service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design and landscaping so that the visual and acoustical impacts of these functions screened from view of public / private streets and all adjacent properties (unless those adjacent uses are other loading areas, truck parking areas and storage areas) and no attention is attracted to the functions by the use of screening materials that are different from or inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscaping. 
(f)  Buildings and sites shall be designed using crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) strategies. 
(g)  In all parking areas that are in excess of that required by section 35.2-62 et. seq., off-street parking and loading shall implement practices that will allow 25 percent of the stormwater attributable to the parking area for the one-year storm to infiltrate to the soil below. In cases where soil quality or other limiting factors will not allow for adequate infiltration, filtering practices with underdrains may be used as an alternative, subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-85. - Cluster Commercial Development. 
Sec. 35.2-85.1. - Purpose. 
    Cluster Commercial Developments (CCDs) (see LBCS Code 9955) are intended to provide for flexibility in the planning of certain tracts of land, under single or multiple ownership, through the modification of certain lot, setback, and use restrictions. Developments under these regulations should provide for increased amenity, safety, and other public and private benefits, as well as reduced public and private costs. CCDs are generally characterized by a unified or planned clustering of development served by common parking areas with a common means of ingress and egress. These Developments should be designed to mitigate potential increases in traffic congestion through enhanced pedestrian access between uses within the CCD and to reduce distractions from such sources as signs and artificial lighting. 
Sec. 35.2-85.2. - Prohibited uses. 
    Within any cluster commercial development, no lot, building, or structure shall be used and no building shall be erected that is intended or designed to be used in whole or in part for any industrial or manufacturing purpose. 
Sec. 35.2-85.3. - Uses permitted. 
    Subject the prohibitions in section 35.2-85.2, uses permitted by right in the R-3 through B-5 districts will be permitted through the Conditional Use Permit approval process in accordance with regulations contained herein. 
Sec. 35.2-85.4. - Permitted locations. 
    Cluster commercial development districts may be established in accordance with the regulations of this section and section 35.2-11, Applications Requiring Public Hearings Before City Council, in locations that: 
(a)  Are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Lynchburg and located in areas designated for the following future land uses: Neighborhood Commercial, Community Commercial, Mixed Use and Institution; 
(b)  Located in any B-1, B-3, B-5, and IN-2 zoning district by conditional use permit; 
(c)  Are located within one-quarter mile of an existing or planned transit route and have direct pedestrian access to the route. 
Sec. 35.2-85.5. - Cluster commercial development approvals required. 
(a)  CUP and Concept Plan Required. No development, including the filing of a subdivision plat, within this a cluster commercial development shall be commenced until a Concept Plan and Conditional Use Permit have been approved by the City Council pursuant to section 35.2-11 (Applications Requiring Public Hearings Before City Council). Final approval of the conditional use permit is contingent upon approval of the final site plan. 
(b)  Final Site Plan Required. Before any permit shall be issued for the erection of a permanent building in a proposed cluster commercial development may be issued, final site plan approval shall be required in accordance with section 35.2-14.2. (Site Plans). 
Sec. 35.2-85.6. - Cluster commercial development standards. 
(a)  General Standards. Cluster commercial developments shall comply with the site development standards established in Exhibit VIII-4 and subsequent provisions of this section. 
Exhibit VIII-4: Cluster Commercial Development Standards 
Design Element Standard Additional Provisions Minimum average lot area 6,000 sq. ft. Maximum building coverage 75 percent Measured for each lot Maximum floor area ratio 0.75 Measured for the entire development Maximum height 40 ft. Exceptions applicable within the B-1 district in section 35.2-61.2(c) shall apply Setbacks See B-1 standards in section 35.2-45 et seq. Setbacks may be modified through the conditional use permit approval process Signs See B-1 standards in section 35.2-64.13 Parking and loading See parking and loading standards in section 35.2-62 et seq. Additional standards are established in paragraph (b) below Minimum area for amenities 5% of gross development area. 
Amenities may include open space, parks, playgrounds and trails. This minimum may be reduced or eliminated by the City Council through the CUP process if no need for such space is found within the CCD  
(b)  Parking Requirements. 
1.  Required parking spaces shall be provided within the perimeter of the cluster commercial development and no further than 500 feet from the facilities to be served. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be screened from residential areas and shall be designed to produce the minimum possible interference with pedestrian circulation within the development. 
2.  On-street parking shall be encouraged and shall count towards required parking for uses on abutting sites. 
3.  Parking lots shall be located in the middle of blocks and shall be located behind the front building lines of structures. 
4.  Shared parking shall be encouraged in accordance with the shared parking provisions of section 35.2-62.4(d). 
(c)  Access and Circulation. 
1.  Interior vehicular circulation and access shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-66 et seq. A CCD shall be subject to the intersection visibility standards of the B-4 district where buildings are located within five feet of streets. 
2.  To improve connectivity between uses within the CCD, maximum block length within the CCD shall be 400 feet unless convenient and safe pedestrian cross-block access will be provided to mitigate the impacts of longer blocks. 
3.  Sidewalks are required pursuant to section 35.2-67. 
(d)  Utilities. All utilities within a CCD shall be located underground. 
(e)  Concentration of Development. Building entrances along streets shall be separated by no more than 150 feet from the next building entrance along a block face. 
Sec. 35.2-86. - Flexible Space Development. 
Sec. 35.2-86.1. - Purpose. 
    As described in the City's Comprehensive Plan, the demand for industrial and commercial space is changing. At this time, the demand is for concentrations of industrial, office, and technology uses where the owners of one business can interact with other complementary businesses in close proximity. By encouraging the clustering of complementary and related uses in flexible space developments (see LBCS Code 9956), the City seeks to preserve and expand the City's employment base, concentrate infrastructure investment, and minimize potential use conflicts. While limited commercial uses may be appropriate to serve the needs of employers and employees in these developments, retail and service uses should be limited. 
Sec. 35.2-86.2. - Objectives. 
    To carry out the intent of this section, a flexible space development shall achieve the following objectives: 
(a)  These developments are intended to promote the efficient use of developable lands by clustering similar and complementary land uses in close proximity to one another. A flexible space development shall resemble and function like a well-planned business park. 
(b)  These developments shall be substantially consistent with the goals and objectives of City's Comprehensive Plan and the Future Land Use Map. 
(c)  Land uses incorporated in these developments will generate moderate levels of truck traffic and be minimal sources of noise, vibration, dust, air and water pollution, or other nuisances so as to limit impacts on neighboring areas. 
(d)  Circulation patterns will, to the greatest extent feasible, separate truck traffic from automobiles, bicycles, and pedestrians. 
(e)  Natural buffer zones shall be preserved and/or created, as needed, between flexible space developments and surrounding residential areas. 
(f)  Preservation of trees, outstanding natural topography, and geologic features is strongly encouraged. Soil erosion is to be prevented. 
(g)  Regional stormwater management practices shall be followed. 
(h)  Large-scale retail uses are not permitted in flexible space developments. 
(i)  Provision of at least one amenity to encourage business development is required. Examples include, but are not limited to, bike paths, health trails, outdoor recreation areas, sidewalks, and other amenities. 
(j)  Environmentally sustainable development through green building design and innovative site design is encouraged. 
(k)  Renovation and adaptive reuse of existing structures and/or developments through redesign, renovation, and repositioning are encouraged. 
(l)  Isolated residential uses remaining in areas covered by these developments shall gradually be removed or relocated. 
Sec. 35.2-86.3. - General regulations for flexible space developments. 
(a)  Minimum Area. Generally, the minimum area required to qualify for a flexible space development shall be five contiguous acres of land. Where the project proponent can demonstrate that the characteristics of a proposed project site will meet the objectives of this article, the City Council may consider projects of less acreage. 
(b)  Location of Flexible Space Developments. Flexible space developments are permitted by right in I-1, restricted industrial districts, and I-2, light industrial districts. Flexible space developments are permitted in B-5, general business districts, by conditional use permit (CUP), where the project proponent can demonstrate that the characteristics of the property will meet the objectives of this section and are consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Ownership. The tract of land for a flexible space development may be owned, leased, controlled, or under option by a single person or by a corporation or by a group of individuals or corporations. An application must be filed by the owner or jointly by owners of all property included in the development or by the property owner's authorized agent with the power of attorney to sign the application. In case of multiple ownership, the approved site plan shall be binding on all owners. 
(d)  Concept Plan. A concept plan for the overall site will be prepared and submitted for review by the planning division and the technical review committee (TRC). Once the concept plan has been approved by the City Council or City Planner, a final site plan will be submitted to the City Planner for review and approval. This final site plan may be prepared for each phase of a phased development. Final site plans shall be in substantial compliance with the concept plan. 
(e)  Management and Ownership of Common Open Space and Other Common Facilities. All privately owned common open space and common facilities designated in the approved final site plan shall be permanently preserved and maintained as open space or common facilities. All deeds for property in a flexible space development shall include appropriate restrictions to ensure that all open space and common facilities are permanently preserved as open space as shown on the approved final site plan. The property owners' association shall be established pursuant to section 35.2-10.15 of this Zoning Ordinance. Flexible space developments with one owner will not require a property owners' association. 
(f)  Fee Schedule for Flexible Space Development Review. The fees for flexible space development review and action shall be the same as those for planned unit developments. 
Exhibit VIII-5: Illustration of a Hypothetical Flexible Space Development 

Sec. 35.2-86.4. - Permitted uses in flexible space developments. 
    All uses within a flexible space development are determined by the provisions of this section and the approved site plan of the project. 
(a)  Permitted uses by right include any use that meets the objectives of section 35.2-86.2 including, but not limited to, the manufacturing, assembly, distribution, repair, and servicing of: 
1.  Apparel and accessories (see LBCS Codes 3130 and 3140); 
2.  Artisan and craft work (see LBCS Codes 3410-3430); 
3.  Automobile and truck parts (see LBCS Code 3370); 
4.  Building and construction materials, supplies, and equipment (see LBCS Codes 3320, 3330, 3240 and 3350); 
5.  Carpentry and cabinet making shops (see LBCS Code 7310); 
6.  Computers, business machines, parts, and accessories (see LBCS Code 3360); 
7.  Contractors' establishments, offices, and display rooms, but not equipment storage yards or plants, or rental equipment (see LBCS Code 7300); 
8.  Data switching and processing equipment and services (see LBCS Code 4244); 
9.  Electrical appliances, lighting, testing, transmission, and distribution equipment (see LBCS Code 3350); 
10.  Employment service or agency (see LBCS Code 2423a); 
11.  Engineering, professional, research, and scientific instruments and equipment, photographic and optical goods, watches and clocks, parts and supplies (see LBCS Code 2410); 
12.  Fabric products and supplies (see LBCS Code 3130); 
13.  General hardware and hand tools (see LBCS Codes 3350 and 3450); 
14.  Home and office furnishings, fixtures, and equipment (see LBCS Codes 3230 and 3430); 
15.  Medical equipment, instruments, and supplies (see LBCS Code 3360); 
16.  Metal products and machinery, metal finishing (see LBCS Codes 3350 and 3450); 
17.  Musical instruments and parts (see LBCS Code 3420); 
18.  Office buildings with a minimum of 7,200 square feet each of gross floor area (see LBCS Code 2400); 
19.  Optical equipment (see LBCS Codes 3330 and 3360); 
20.  Packaging and paper products (see LBCS Code 3220); 
21.  Personal care products (e.g., cosmetics, toiletries) (see LBCS Code 3320); 
22.  Plastics (see LBCS Code 3310); 
23.  Printing, publishing, copying, and binding (see LBCS Code 3220) 
24.  Research, development, testing, medical, and dental laboratories (see LBCS Codes 2410 and 6513); 
25.  Signs and advertising displays (see LBCS Code 3440); 
26.  Sporting and athletic equipment, toys, and games (see LBCS Code 3420); 
27.  Static transformer stations, transmission lines, gas and water mains, conduits for the transmission of electric energy including telephone, telegraph, and noncommercial radio and television poles and appurtenances thereto (see LBCS Codes 3320-3360); and 
28.  Telephone exchanges (see LBCS Code 4240). 
(b)  Permitted Accessory Uses. The following uses are permitted when serving as an accessory use to one or more of the by-right uses listed in section 35.2-86.4: 
1.  Banks, credit unions, and similar establishments (see LBCS Code 2110); 
2.  Bus and other transit stations (see LBCS Code 4151-4154); 
3.  Convenience and service establishments, such as, but not limited to, barber shops, beauty parlors, convenience stores, dry cleaning/laundry establishments, medical clinics, newsstands, and tailors. Automobile gas stations or other establishments with gas pumps are not permitted. Convenience and service establishments shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross floor area of all buildings in the development (see LBCS Codes 2151-2154 and 2510-2530); 
4.  Daycare centers for employer-sponsored child day or adult day care intended to serve employees of businesses in the development (see LBCS Code 6562); 
5.  Depositories for the storage of office records, microfilm, computer tapes, or similar records (see LBCS Code 4240); 
6.  Janitorial or exterminating service (see LBCS Code 2422); 
7.  Mailing and shipping outlets intended to serve businesses and employees in the development (see LBCS Codes 2455, 4180 and 4190); 
8.  Motor freight terminals (see LBCS Code 4140); 
9.  Off-street parking garages and lots incidental to businesses in this development (see LBCS Code 2640); 
10.  Offices, general, directly related to primary use; 
11.  Recreational facilities for employees of businesses in the development (see LBCS Code 5370); 
12.  Retail showrooms for products of the businesses in the development; 
13.  Residential quarters for bona fide caretakers or watchmen and their families, when essential for the operation of the business; 
14.  Restaurants and food service facilities (see LBCS Codes 2510-2530); 
15.  Security service office or station; 
16.  Telecommunications towers and facilities, when collocated on existing structures as an accessory use (see Article XI. Telecommunications towers and facilities); and 
17.  Warehouses and storage (see LBCS Code 3600). 
(c)  Uses That May Be Allowed by Conditional Use Permit. 
1.  Cluster commercial development (see LBCS Code 9955); 
2.  Hotels and motels intended to serve visitors to businesses in the development (see LBCS Code 1330); 
3.  Radio and television broadcasting stations, studios, or offices; 
4.  Trade expositions (see LBCS Code 5240); 
5.  Trade or business school (see LBCS Code 6140); and 
6.  Transmitting and receiving facilities and towers for cellular communications systems and similar communications systems in accordance with Article VII of this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-86.5. - Development standards for flexible space developments. 
(a)  Area Regulations. The minimum lot area in flexible space developments shall be 20,000 square feet. 
(b)  Site Development Requirements. The minimum setback and frontage requirements for flexible space developments shall comply with Exhibit VIII-6. 
Exhibit VIII-6: Site Development Requirements for Flexible Space Developments 
Design Element Requirement Additional
Provisions Minimum front setback 20 feet This provision shall not be applicable to limited access highways. Minimum setback abutting a residential district 100 feet Minimum side setback 15 feet Minimum rear setback 15 feet Minimum separation between buildings on the same lot 30 feet Minimum lot width 100 feet Maximum area covered by buildings, other structures, parking and paved areas 75%  
(c)  Utilities. 
1.  Utilities shall be located underground. 
2.  Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be located or screened so that it is not visible from the street. 
3.  Transformers, utility meters, junction boxes, conduits, and connections shall be enclosed or screened from view. 
4.  HVAC equipment mounted on the ground shall be screened so that it is not visible from the street. 
5.  Dumpsters shall not be located in front or exterior side yards and shall be screened from view with opaque fences, walls, or evergreen plantings. 
(d)  Traffic and Pedestrian Circulation. 
1.  Separate entrances to and separate roadways within the flexible space development shall be provided for trucks and automobiles, unless, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the number and size of trucks expected to serve the uses in the development can be accommodated safely on the road network used by automobiles. Separate entrances shall be clearly marked. 
2.  Each occupant of a flexible space development shall have access only onto interior roadways. 
3.  The development shall be laid out so that individual buildings have access onto interior streets. Individual buildings or occupants shall not be provided with separate access points onto exterior roadways. Entrance(s) to the development shall serve all occupants and visitors. 
4.  The interior road circulation network shall be laid out to discourage cut-through traffic from adjacent developments or residential areas. 
5.  Pedestrian and/or bicycle routes, lanes, or paths shall be provided within the development to accommodate pedestrian and/or bicycle traffic between transit stops, parking areas, and buildings. Street design shall provide for the safety of pedestrians and bicyclists by clearly marking routes with striping and/or delineating them through the use of contrasting materials (e.g., bricks or pavers). 
6.  Where a flexible space development abuts a street with transit service past the development, the development shall include a bus stop with shelter, unless the general manager of the Greater Lynchburg Transit Company, or its successor company, determines that a bus stop is not appropriate. 
7.  The number of curb cuts onto interior roadways that serve as entrances to parking lots shall be limited to no more than two per parking lot. 
(e)  Parking and Loading Requirements. 
1.  Parking spaces shall be provided as required in section 35.2-62 et seq. of this Zoning Ordinance. 
2.  Handicapped and visitor/client/customer parking may be provided near the front entrance(s) of buildings. All other parking (i.e., employees, service personnel) shall be located at the side or the rear of the buildings. 
3.  Parking shall be shared among occupants to the maximum extent feasible. 
4.  No paving or parking facilities shall be located with 25 feet of any residential district. 
5.  Truck loading areas or docks shall be located on the side of the building away from public view or screened with landscaping, opaque fences, walls, or doors. 
(f)  Signs. Signs shall comply with the applicable requirements for the underlying district(s). 
(g)  Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards established in section 35.2-65. 
(h)  Landscaping. 
1.  Where a flexible space development abuts a limited access highway, the area of the development abutting the highway shall be landscaped according to the requirements of section 35.2-56.7(c) (Building Bulk Softening). 
(i)  Building Types and Materials. 
1.  Types of buildings located in a flexible space development include: flex-tech, multitenant, office, and showroom, with space for storage, distribution, and related uses. These buildings are to be laid out in a business park or campus-like setting. 
2.  Vegetative buffering as provided in section 35.2-63.10 (Buffering) of this ordinance shall be required between buildings in the flex space development and adjoining public right-of-way, single-household districts and two-household districts except where: 
a.  Individual buildings are designed so they can be converted to other uses and reused; 
b.  The main entrances of buildings are oriented toward the interior roadways, except for those buildings that are sited between the main exterior street and an interior roadway. These buildings may be oriented toward the exterior street. For buildings oriented toward an exterior street, the rear of the building shall be designed to complement the facades of adjacent buildings. A second entrance to accommodate employees and visitors may be provided on the side of the building facing the interior street; 
c.  No portion of a building constructed of unadorned cinderblock or corrugated and/or sheet metal is visible from any exterior or interior roadway or from any adjacent residential or commercial development; and 
d.  Buildings are designed to use to the greatest extent feasible building materials that are compatible with a business park or campus type of development, such as rock, stone, brick, and/or wood. 
3.  No outdoor storage or processing shall be permitted in a flexible space development. 
(j)  Erosion and Sediment Control. All flexible space developments shall comply with the requirements given in Article 16.1, of the City Code. 
(k)  Stormwater Management. All flexible space developments shall comply with the requirements given in Article 16.2 of the City Code. 
Sec. 35.2-86.6. - Flexible space development site plans. 
    Prior to securing a Building Permit for any construction in a flexible space development, approval of a concept and final site plan shall be obtained. The final site plan shall conform to the concept plan approved for the flexible space development, and may be submitted for the entire site or a portion of the site if the development is to be phased. Procedures for review shall be the same as those outlined in section 35.2-14.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-87. - Corporate Campus Development. 
Sec. 35.2-87.1. - Purpose. 
    A corporate campus (see LBCS Code 9957) is a master planned mixed-use development under unified ownership or control that permits offices and industrial space, with retail, restaurants, lodging and residences as secondary support uses by right in an I-1 or I-2 district or through the Conditional Use Permit process in the B-5 or IN-2 districts. Limited residential development may be located in mixed-use buildings or in transitional areas abutting residential districts as provided herein. 
Sec. 35.2-87.2. - Uses permitted. 
    No building, structure or land shall be used for any purpose except the following: 
(a)  Residential development within mixed-use buildings (see LBCS Code 1130). 
(b)  Professional, medical, scientific and technical offices/services (see LBCS Code 2400). 
(c)  Manufacturing, processing or product assembly where all operations are contained within a structure. Warehousing and distribution facilities are allowed as an accessory to these uses (see LBCS Code 3100, 3200, 3320-3370 and 3400). 
(d)  Scientific laboratories and research enterprises/facilities (see LBCS Code 2416 and 6514). 
(e)  Finance, insurance, management, administrative and support offices and services (see LBCS Codes 2210 and 2230-2250). 
(f)  Support uses, including hotels, motels and restaurants, provided that no such use may be established unless included in a phasing plan and that the square footage of such uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total floor area of the project at any time (see LBCS Codes 1330, 2116, 2151-2154 and 2510-2530). 
Sec. 35.2-87.3. - Development intensity/density. 
(a)  Exhibit VIII-7 establishes the maximum potential density and the maximum floor area ratio. The achievable density or intensity permitted for any particular lot may be limited by site conditions or other standards set forth in this Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Density is the number of dwelling units per gross acre of lot area on the lot on which the residential units are located. If open space is reserved adjacent to and accessible to residential units, the open space area may be used in the calculation of residential density. 
(c)  Floor area ratio shall apply to all non-residential uses excluding lodging and residences. It is measured by dividing the total building floor area (excluding lodging units and dwelling units) by the lot area. Lodging unit intensity is measured by the number of lodging units per acre of the lot on which the units are located. 
(d)  For buildings with dwelling units or lodging units located above non-residential floor area, maximum residential unit or lodging accommodation unit density and the floor area ratio shall be calculated using the total lot area. For example: a one acre lot would be allowed to have up to 43,560 square feet (one acre) of non-residential floor area plus 24 lodging units plus 12 dwelling units. 
Exhibit VIII-7: Intensity/Density Standards 
Maximum Non-Residential Floor Area Maximum Lodging
Units per Acre Maximum Dwelling Units per Acre 1.0 24 12  
Sec. 35.2-87.4. - Corporate campus development standards. 
(a)  Height. The maximum building height shall be 100 feet. 
(b)  Height Transitions Abutting Residential Districts. Where a lot abuts a residential zoning district or a mixed-use project, the maximum building height shall be no taller than the maximum height of the abutting district within 100 feet of the property line. The building height may be increased by one foot for each additional one foot for the applicable portion of the building separated from the property line. 
(c)  Building Orientation and Entries. In corporate campus developments entrances shall be located on the front of the building. All buildings shall have clearly defined, visible entrances, featuring no fewer than three of the following: 
1.  Canopies or porticos 
2.  Awnings 
3.  Overhangs 
4.  Recesses/projections 
5.  Arcades 
6.  Raised corniced parapets over the door 
7.  Peaked roof forms or arches 
8.  Outdoor patios 
9.  Display windows 
(d)  Building Materials. Vegetative buffering as provided in section 35.2-63.10 (Buffering) of this ordinance shall be required between buildings in the corporate campus and adjoining public right-of-way, single-household districts and two-household districts except where: 
1.  Predominant wall materials have the appearance of brick, stucco or textured masonry; 
2.  Predominant wall materials shall cover at least 80 percent of walls, exclusive of windows and doors; and 
3.  Materials with the appearance of concrete block, smooth concrete, corrugated or standing seam metal are prohibited. 
(e)  Building Articulation. Front and street-facing side facades greater than 100 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least three percent of the length of the facade and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the façade. 
(f)  Rooflines. 
1.  Rooflines shall be varied in height at least every 100 linear feet. Hips, gables or changes in parapet elevation shall be used to provide relief in height. 
2.  Gable and hip roofs, and parapets with cornices shall be used to conceal flat roofs and rooftop mechanical equipment from public view. 
3.  The parapet design shall be a minimum of three feet in height and shall incorporate a three-dimensional cornice treatment. 
(g)  Building Setbacks. Building setbacks shall be established at the time of concept plan and conditional use permit approval by the City Council. 
(h)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall comply with the provisions of section 35.2-63 et seq. except as otherwise modified through the conditional use permit approval process. 
(i)  Common and Civic Areas. Common and civic areas shall be established as follows: 
1.  At least ten percent of the total project area shall be devoted to common and civic areas, which may include courtyards, plazas and landscape/buffering areas. Retention ponds with a minimum 4:1 (run to rise) side slopes, with walkways and seating areas may be counted towards the required common and civic areas. 
2.  Formal clusters of small deciduous trees shall be planted in civic areas to provide shade. 
3.  At least one small deciduous tree shall be planted for every 200 square feet of civic area. 
4.  At least one large deciduous tree shall be planted for every 800 square feet of civic area. 
Illustrations of Common and Civic Areas  
(j)  Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage, where authorized by the conditional use permit shall be screened as provided in this section. 
1.  The storage of bulk commodities shall be consolidated into a single area located in a rear or side yard and visually screened by buildings, walls, fences and/or landscaping. Outdoor storage is prohibited within 50 feet of any street or residential zoning district. 
2.  Screening shall include an opaque wall or fence enclosure measuring at least six feet high and no more than eight feet high. 
3.  A minimum ten feet wide planting strip shall be provided along the wall with the following plant materials: 
a.  Minimum one evergreen tree for every 40 linear feet of wall; and 
b.  Minimum one shrub for every three linear feet of wall. 

(k)  Fences and Walls. No fence or wall shall be established in any front or street side yard except as established in this section. Where used, masonry walls shall have graffiti-resistant paint or finishes. 
1.  Wrought-iron or metal picket fencing with a maximum height of three feet may be used to delineate outdoor patios/eating areas in any location on a lot. 
2.  Masonry wall finishes shall match the principal building material; decorative wall cap and offsets or columns shall be provided every 50 linear feet. 
Illustrations of Allowed Fences  
(l)  Parking and Loading. Parking and loading shall be located as required in Section 35.2-62 except as modified by this section. 
1.  Parking lots which accommodate more than 100 vehicles shall be divided into a series of connected smaller lots and separated by roads, open areas, structures or landscape strips measuring at least ten feet in width and having at least one large deciduous tree planted every 40 linear feet. 
2.  Pedestrian walkways shall be provided between all buildings and between buildings and parking areas and all out parcels. Walkways within parking areas shall be located in a manner to provide safe efficient movement of pedestrians. Walkways shall be located in a manner so that no parking space is further than 120 feet from a walkway. Walkways and crosswalks shall be distinguishable from drive aisles. 
3.  All pedestrian walkways shall be designed to provide safe efficient access for people with disabilities. Ramps shall be provided between all walkways and all crosswalks. 
4.  Truck access and parking areas shall be separate from car parking areas and located in the rear yard. 
5.  Parking spaces shall not be located between buildings and a front or side street. 
6.  Parking structures shall be located behind the primary structure. 
7.  Required off-street parking shall be provided within a five-minute (one-quarter mile) radius of the site that it serves. 
Illustrations of Parking Areas  
(m)  Loading. Loading standards shall comply with section 35.2-62.5 and the following standards. 
1.  Loading and service dock areas shall be located to the rear or sides of a building, away from the main building entrance, or related high visibility areas. 
2.  Loading docks shall not be located between a building and a residential zoning district unless there is a minimum 100 feet setback between the loading dock and the residential district and the setback includes a landscape buffer and masonry wall. 
3.  Loading spaces, their access drives and maneuvering areas shall be located and designed so that their use does not impede the normal use of parking spaces and access drives. 
4.  Loading and service docks shall be screened by a masonry wall measuring not less than six feet in height and not more than eight feet in height or a landscape screen consisting of evergreen hedge that will measure at least five feet in height within one year of planting. 
Loading Area Illustrations  
(n)  Bicycles. 
1.  Internal bicycle circulation systems and easements shall be integrated into site design and connect to existing and future bicycle routes and trails. 
2.  Bicycle lanes shall be provided along all collector or arterial streets internal to the development and shall be at least three feet in width. This provision may be waived where multi-purpose trails are provided. 
3.  Bicycle racks shall be provided in accordance with section 35.2-62.6 of this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE IX. - NON-CONFORMING SITUATIONS 

Sec. 35.2-90. - Non-Conforming Uses. 
Sec. 35.2-90.1. - Legislative intent. 
    There are a number of land uses, buildings, structures and activities on land that existed prior to the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance and that do not conform to the regulations herein. These non-conforming uses are, in most cases, incompatible with their surrounding uses, since the objective of district regulations is to permit compatible uses and to restrict incompatible uses. Therefore, some limitations on the continued operation of non-conforming uses are appropriate in the public interest. While they are generally permitted to remain, the regulations herein restrict their further intensification or expansion and provide for their prohibition, if they are discontinued for a two-year period of time. 
Sec. 35.2-90.2. - Continuing existing uses. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the Zoning Ordinance, the lawfully permitted use of land, buildings or structures existing at the time of the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance may be continued, although such use does not conform to the standards specified by this ordinance for the zone in which such land or building is located. Said uses shall be deemed non-conforming uses. 
Sec. 35.2-90.3. - Existing conditional uses. 
    Any use lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance, or of any amendment thereto, in the district in which such use is classified herein as a conditional use, shall continue as a conditional use in such district. 
Sec. 35.2-90.4. - Non-conforming use of land with minor improvements. 
    Where no building is involved, the non-conforming use of land with minor improvements may be continued; provided, however: 
(a)  That no such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor shall it be extended to occupy a greater area of land than that occupied by such use at the time of the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance, unless specifically allowed by other provisions in this ordinance. 
(b)  That no such non-conforming use be moved, in whole or in part, to any other portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such non-conforming use at the time of the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance and no non-conforming building or structure may be moved to any other lot which is not properly zoned to permit such non-conforming use. 
(c)  That if such non-conforming use of land, or any portion thereof, ceases for any reason for any continuous period of more than two years or is changed to a conforming use, any future use of the land shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  That no non-conforming use of land shall be changed to another non-conforming use. 
Sec. 35.2-90.5. - Non-conforming use of buildings and structures. 
    The following standards apply to buildings or structures used for purposes that do not conform to the use regulations of the applicable zoning district. 
(a)  Enlargements or Extensions. The building or a structure shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered, unless the use therein is changed to a conforming use or the use in the enlargement or extension is a conforming use. 
(b)  Structural Alterations. The building or structure shall not be reconstructed or structurally altered, unless such reconstruction or alterations are required by law. 
(c)  Change of Use. If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a building or structure may, as a conditional use after public notice and hearing in accordance with section 35.2-11, be changed to another non-conforming use. In considering whether to approve such a conditional use, the Council may consider the extent to which the proposed use is equally restricted or more restricted than the existing non-conforming use. In permitting such change, the City Council may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  Discontinuing, Moving. If any non-conforming use of a building or structure ceases for any reason for a continuous period of more than two years or is changed to a conforming use or if the building or structure in which such use is conducted or maintained is moved for any distance whatever, for any reason, then any future use of such building shall be in conformity with the standards specified by this ordinance for the district in which such building is located. If any building or structure in which any non-conforming use is conducted or maintained is hereafter removed, the subsequent use of the land on which such building was located, and the subsequent use of any building or structure thereon, shall be in conformity with the standards specified by the Zoning Ordinance for the district in which such land or building is located. 
Sec. 35.2-91. - Non-Conforming Structures. 
Sec. 35.2-91.1. - Intent. 
    A building that is conforming in use, but does not conform to the height, setback, land coverage, parking or loading requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, shall not be considered to be non-conforming within the meaning of this section (Non-Conforming Structures). However, no development approval shall be issued that will result in the increase of any such nonconformity. 
Sec. 35.2-91.2. - Completion of buildings under construction. 
    Any building, the construction of which has been started pursuant to plans on file with the division of inspections and for which a lawful Building Permit was issued before the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance or of an amendment thereto, and the ground story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, has been completed within one year after the adoption of this ordinance or amendment thereto, may be completed in accordance with said plans on file with the division of inspections; provided that such construction is diligently prosecuted and the building is completed within two years of the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-91.3. - Restoration of damaged building and structures. 
(a)  Damage 50 percent or More of Value. Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, if any non-conforming building or structure is damaged to an extent of 50 percent or more of the value of the structure above the foundation, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance for the district in which it is located. If the structure is not restored, it must be removed at the owner's expense within 60 days from the Zoning Administrator's determination that the non-conforming building or structure was damaged to the extent of 50 percent or more of the value of the structure above the foundation. 
(b)  Damage Less Than 50 percent of Value. Where the destruction of such non-conforming structure is less than 50 percent, as described above, it may be restored in substantially the same location and the non-conforming use continued. Nothing in the Zoning Ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any wall declared to be unsafe by the Building Official. 
(c)  Unsafe Buildings. Any unsafe building or structure shall be made safe through compliance with the building code or shall be taken down and removed if determined necessary by the Building Official. 
(d)  Acts of God. 
1.  If a residential or commercial building is damaged or destroyed by a natural disaster or other act of God, such building may be repaired, rebuilt or replaced to eliminate or reduce the non-conforming features to the extent possible, without the need to obtain a variance as provided in section 35.2-12 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
2.  If such building cannot be repaired, rebuilt or replaced except to restore it to its original non-conforming condition, the owner shall have the right to do so. The owner shall apply for a Building Permit and any work done to repair, rebuild or replace such building shall be in compliance with the provisions of the building code and any work done to repair, rebuild or replace such building shall be in compliance with the provisions of the flood plain regulations. 
3.  Unless such building is repaired or rebuilt within two years of the date of the natural disaster or replaced within two years of the date of the natural disaster or other act of God, such building shall only be repaired, rebuilt or replaced in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
4.  If the non-conforming building is in an area under a federal disaster declaration and the building has been damaged or destroyed as a direct result of conditions that gave rise to the declaration, then the owner shall have a total of four years to repair, rebuild or replace said building in accordance with all other regulations listed above. 
Sec. 35.2-91.4. - Non-conforming signs. 
(a)  All signs that do not conform with any of the sign regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, including regulations governing size, height, installation, location, and lighting, shall be deemed non-conforming and may be continued so long as the existing use continues and is not discontinued for more than two years, and so long as the non-conforming sign is maintained in its then structural condition. 
(b)  Except as provided in sections 35.2-64 et seq. whenever a non-conforming sign is enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered it shall conform to the existing zoning regulations. However, a non-conforming sign may be re-faced without losing its non-conforming status. 
(c)  Whenever a non-conforming sign requires repairs in a dollar amount greater than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the entire sign such sign shall be brought into compliance with the existing zoning regulations. A non-conforming sign shall not be moved on the same lot or to any other lot that is not properly zoned to permit such non-conforming sign. 
(d)  To make repairs to a non-conforming billboard sign, the owner shall make a written request to the commonwealth transportation commissioner as provided in Section 33.2-1219 of the Code of Virginia and submit the documentation required by 24 VAC 30-120-170. The commissioner shall review the written request and if the commissioner determines that the cost of requested repairs does not exceed a dollar amount greater than 50 percent of the current replacement cost of the entire billboard sign or structure, the commissioner shall provide the owner of the billboard sign with a letter approving the billboard sign repairs. However, in no case shall a non-conforming billboard sign be replaced or rebuilt if the cost of the replacement or rebuilding exceeds 50 percent of the current replacement cost. The owner of the billboard sign shall apply for a Building Permit from the City and provide a copy of the approval letter from the commissioner as part of the application for the Building Permit. The commissioner's determination as to whether the owner of the billboard sign has complied with this section shall be binding upon the City, unless the City's building official, for good cause shown, submits to the commissioner documentation objecting to the commissioner's determination, within 30 days of the Building Permit application, with a copy of such documentation being provided to the billboard sign owner. The commissioner shall consider any documentation submitted by the building official and shall reissue a determination in accordance with this section, which determination shall be binding upon the City, unless the City's Zoning Administrator appeals such decision in accordance with the provisions of the administrative process act. 
Sec. 35.2-92. - Non-conforming Lot or Site. 
    Provisions for development of lots with less than the minimum required area are established in section 35.2-61.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
ARTICLE X. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 35.2-100. - Responsibilities for Administration. 
Sec. 35.2-100.1. - City Manager. 
    The City Manager or the Manager's designee shall be responsible for appointing the City Planner, Zoning Administrator, City Engineer and Transportation Engineer. 
Sec. 35.2-100.2. - City Planner. 
    The City Planner shall be appointed by the City Manager or the Manager's designee and shall, serving as the agent of the Zoning Administrator, have responsibility for managing the Site Plan approval process, granting of exceptions related to site plan approvals, and coordinating activities of the Technical Review Committee. The City Planner also shall serve as the secretary to the Historic Preservation Commission and the Planning Commission. 
Sec. 35.2-100.3. - Zoning Administrator. 
    The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the City Manager or the Manager's designee and shall have all of the responsibilities, duties and powers set forth in Title 15.2, Article 22, Article 7, and in particular, Section 15.2-2286 of the Code of Virginia, and any successors or amendments thereto, except where otherwise designated to another person or committee by this Zoning Ordinance. The City shall also employ such zoning officials as may be necessary to assist the Zoning Administrator in the administration and enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator also serves as the secretary to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Sec. 35.2-100.4. - City Engineer and Transportation Engineer. 
    The City Engineer and Transportation Engineer shall be appointed by the City Manager or the Manager's designee and shall, serving as the agent of the Zoning Administrator, have the responsibility for reviewing all plans related to sanitary or solid waste facilities; waiving undergrounding requirements for on-site utilities; reviewing sidewalk designs and alignments; reviewing and modifying driveway and intersections designs; and approving alternative parking surface materials and any other responsibilities set forth in this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-100.5. - Technical Review Committee. 
    The Technical Review Committee members shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall have responsibility for reviewing and making recommendations on concept plans and final site plans, plans for floodplain development, minor exceptions and temporary use permits. 
Sec. 35.2-100.6. - City Council. 
    The City Council shall be the approval body for amendments to the Comprehensive Plan text or maps, amendments to the Zoning Ordinance text and the Official Zoning Map, approval of conditional rezonings and related proffers, approval of conditional use permits and other responsibilities assigned by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-100.7. - Planning Commission. 
(a)  Composition. The City Planning Commission shall be composed of seven members. 
(b)  Appointment. The members of the City Planning Commission shall be appointed by the City Council. In December of each year, the Council shall appoint three or two members, as the case may be, to the City Planning Commission for terms beginning the succeeding January, to take the place of those whose terms expire. All members appointed to the Commission shall serve from the January first succeeding their appointment for a term of three years, or until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Secretary. The City Planner shall serve as the Planning Commission's secretary. The secretary shall keep such records and perform such duties as may be assigned him by the Commission. 
(d)  Duties and Powers. In addition to the powers granted under Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, the Planning Commission shall advise with the various department heads of the City as to the location of projected thoroughfares, streets and avenues, parks, and public playgrounds, their enlargement, widening, etc.; review the capital improvements program; make suggestions as to the location and character of public buildings and public improvements generally; work and advise with any expert who may be employed by the City dealing with such questions; recommend to Council their approval or disapproval of plans for subdivisions; recommend the opening and closing of streets, the widening of the same and the establishment of setback building lines; make plans looking to the future development of the city, both within and without the present corporate limits; and generally act in an advisory capacity to the Board of Zoning Appeals and the City Council with reference to plans for the development of the City. 
Sec. 35.2-100.8. - Board of Zoning Appeals. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals is established pursuant to section 15.2-2308 of the Code of Virginia. 
(a)  Organization. 
1.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five residents of the City of Lynchburg, appointed by the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg. Their terms of office shall be five years, with the term of one member expiring in each year. The secretary of the Board shall notify the court at least 30 days in advance of the expiration of any term of office and shall also notify the court promptly if any vacancy occurs. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may be reappointed to succeed themselves. Members of the board shall hold no other public office in the City except that one may be a member of the Planning Commission. A member whose term expires shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed and qualifies. 
2.  The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall not be less than a majority of all members of the Board. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedures, consistent with ordinances of the City of Lynchburg, Virginia, and general laws of the Commonwealth for the conduct of its affairs. The Board shall keep a full public record of its proceedings and shall submit a report of its activities to the City Council at least once each year. 
3.  The Zoning Administrator shall serve as the secretary to the Board. 
(b)  Powers and Duties. 
1.  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this ordinance. No such appeal shall be heard by the Board except in accordance with section 35.2-12. 
2.  To authorize upon appeal or original application in specific cases a variance as defined in Article XI of this ordinance, provided that the burden of proof shall be on the applicant for a variance to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his application meets the standard for a variance as defined in Article XI and the criteria established in section 35.2-12. 
3.  To hear and decide applications for appeals to the Zoning Administrator's interpretation of the Official Zoning Map where there is an uncertainty as to the location of a zoning district boundary. After notice to the owners of the property affected by any such question, and after public hearings with notice, the Board may interpret the Official Zoning Map in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the ordinance for the particular section or district in question as specified in Section 35.2-12. The Board shall not have the power, however, to rezone property or to substantially change the locations of district boundaries as established by ordinance. 
4.  No provisions of this section shall be construed as granting the Board the power to rezone property or grant a conditional use permit. 
(c)  Rules, Hearings, Records and Minutes. The Board shall adopt from time to time such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to interpret and carry into effect the provisions of this ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chair and at such other times as the board may determine. Such Chair or, in the Chair's absence, the Vice Chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. A copy of the minutes of each meeting shall be sent to the secretary of the planning commission. The presence of three members shall constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the ordinance, or to affect any variation in this ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-100.9. - Historic Preservation Commission. 
    There is hereby created and established a Historic Preservation Commission pursuant to section 15.2-2306 of the Code of Virginia, hereinafter referred to as the HPC, formerly known as the board of historic and architectural review, which shall consist of seven members. 
(a)  Role. The role of the HPC is to administer the City's historic districts ordinance and to provide professional assistance and guidance to property owners in achieving appropriate alterations to their historic properties. 
(b)  Composition. The members of the HPC shall be appointed by City Council and shall be residents of the City of Lynchburg. At least one member of the HPC shall be an architect or an architectural historian and at least one member shall be an owner and a resident of property in a historic district that is defined as a neighborhood but excludes single-structure districts. Not more than one person shall be appointed who is principally engaged in the buying and selling of, or investment in, real estate. All members shall have a demonstrated interest, competence and knowledge in historic preservation. At least two members shall have professional training in or equivalent experience in any of the following disciplines: architecture, history, architectural history, archaeology or planning as provided in the Professional Standards Qualifications used by the National Park Service and published in the Code of Federal Regulations, 36 CFR Part 61. 
(c)  Terms of Office. All appointments shall be made for a term of three years until they are reappointed or their successors are appointed. No member shall serve for more than three consecutive terms. 
(d)  Organization; officers; meetings. 
1.  The HPC shall elect a chair and a vice-chair. The department of community development shall designate an administrative liaison to act as the secretary to the HPC. 
2.  A permanent record shall be kept of the resolutions, transactions, and determinations of the HPC. This record shall be kept and maintained in the department of community development. 
3.  The HPC is authorized to adopt rules of procedure for its meetings and the administration of the historic districts ordinance. 
Sec. 35.2-101. - Fees. 
    Fees shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
Sec. 35.2-102. - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. 
Sec. 35.2-102.1. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator shall have the responsibility for enforcing the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator may, as necessary, solicit the assistance of other local and state officials and agencies to assist with this enforcement. 
(b)  Property owners, permit applicants, and/or establishment owners/managers, as applicable, shall be notified in writing of violations of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. The Administrator shall, in the notice of violation, state the nature of the violation, the date that it was observed, and the remedy or remedies necessary to correct the violation. The Administrator may establish a reasonable time period for the correction of the violation; however, in no case shall such time period exceed 90 days from the date of written notification. 
(c)  Every written notice of violation or written order of the Administrator shall include a statement informing the recipient that he or she has a right to appeal the notice of zoning violation or written order within 30 days in accordance with this Section, and that the decision shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within 30 days. The 30 day appeal period begins when the first notice of violation is provided under subsection (b) above. The notice of violation or written order shall also include the amount of the appeal fee and a reference to where additional information may be obtained regarding the filing of an appeal. 
(d)  An appeal from the Administrator's written notice of violation or written order shall be in writing and shall state the grounds thereof. 
(e)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the Administrator certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of record, on application and notice to the Administrator and for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. O-17-013 , § 1, 2-14-17) 
Sec. 35.2-102.2. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  The owner or general agent of the building or premises where a violation of any provisions of this Zoning Ordinance has been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(b)  If the violation is uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, within a time period established by the court. Failure to remove or abate a Zoning Ordinance within the specified time period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, and any such failure during any succeeding 30-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each 30-day period punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(c)  However, any conviction resulting from a violation of provisions regulating the number of unrelated persons in single-family residential dwellings shall be punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00. Failure to abate the violation within the specified time period shall be punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00, and any such failure during any succeeding ten-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each ten-day period punishable by a fine of up to $2,500.00. A conviction resulting from a violation of provisions regulating the number of unrelated persons in single-family residential dwellings shall not be punishable by a jail term. 
Sec. 35.2-102.3. - Civil enforcement procedures. 
    The Zoning Administrator is authorized to bring legal action, including injunction, abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding. This remedy is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedy available to the Administrator. 
Sec. 35.2-102.4. - Civil penalties. 
    Any owner or general agent of the building or premises where a violation of any provisions of this Zoning Ordinance has been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist, shall be punishable by a civil penalty. 
(a)  Any violation of the following provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $200.00 for the first violation, a civil penalty of $350.00 for the second violation and a civil penalty of $500.00 for each additional violation thereafter arising from the same set of operative facts: 
1.  Occupancy of a dwelling unit or lot. 
2.  Any erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, adding to, or alteration of any structure, or the establishment of any land use without approvals required in Article II of this Zoning Ordinance 
3.  Any violation of a proffer, or a planned development application plan, conditional use permit, variance, site plan, certificate of zoning compliance, or any condition related thereto. 
4.  Any violation of Article VI, which regulates site development. 
5.  Each use of a lot, including the use of any structure thereon, not authorized either as a matter of right or by conditional use permit by the zoning regulations applicable to the district in which the lot is located. 
(b)  Designation of a particular violation of this Zoning Ordinance shall be in lieu of criminal sanctions, except when such violation results in injury to any person or persons. 
(c)  Each day during which a violation is found to exist shall be a separate offense. However, the same scheduled violation arising from the same operative set of facts may be charged not more than once in a ten-day period, and the total civil penalties from a series of such violations arising from the same set of operative facts shall not exceed $5,000.00. 
(d)  The Zoning Administrator may issue a civil summons for a scheduled violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a scheduled violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the department of finance prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offence charged. Such persons shall be informed of their right to stand trial and that a signature to an admission of liability will have the same force and effect as a judgment of court. 
(e)  If a person charged with a scheduled violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(f)  No provision herein shall be construed to allow the imposition of civil penalties for activities related to land development or for violation of any provision of this Zoning Ordinance relating to the posting of signs on public property or public rights-of-way. 
(g)  No civil penalty shall accrue or be assessed during the pendency of the applicable appeal period. 
Sec. 35.2-102.5. - Prevention of illegal proceedings. 
(a)  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired or converted or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the proper authorities of the City, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or conversion, or restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. 
(b)  When a Building Permit has been issued and the construction of the building for which such permit was issued is subsequently sought to be prevented, restrained, corrected or abated as a violation of the Zoning Ordinance, by suit filed within 15 days after the start of construction by a person who had no actual notice of the permit, the court may hear and determine the issues raised in the litigation even though no appeal was taken from the decision of the administrative officer to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Sec. 35.2-102.6. - Inspection warrants. 
(a)  As provided by Section 15.2-2286(15) of the Code of Virginia and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter in instances directly related to: 
1.  Non-permitted uses; or 
2.  Any violation of the occupancy limits in a residential dwelling unit. 
(b)  The Zoning Administrator, or his duly authorized agent, shall have the authority to apply for the issuance of inspection warrants by a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by Virginia Code § 15.2-2286(A)(15) of the Code of Virginia for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance in instances directly relating to: 
1.  The time and location of the court where such testimony will be presented and 
2.  That the owner and tenant may appear and testify before that court or, in lieu of that appearance, offer a written statement to that court setting forth any reasons for the court not granting the requested inspection warrant. 
(c)  If such sworn testimony, together with the testimony or written statement(s) provided by the owner and/or tenant, establishes probable cause that a Zoning Ordinance violation has occurred, the court shall grant the zoning administrator or his agent an inspection warrant to enable the zoning administrator or his agent to enter the subject dwelling during a specified period of time during daylight business hours and for the purpose of determining whether violations of the Zoning Ordinance exist. 
(d)  If such inspection warrant is issued, the zoning administrator or his agent shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner or tenant of the premises that an inspection will be conducted. That notice must include the date and time period of the inspection. The notices required herein shall include but are not necessarily limited to (i) mailing that notice to the last known postal address of the owner(s) and (ii) posting it at the front door of the premises no less than five business days prior to the court hearing and five business days before the day of the inspection, as the case may be. The zoning administrator or his agent shall make any and all other reasonable efforts to obtain consent from the owner or tenant of the subject dwelling prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant under this section. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of the Zoning Ordinance for any owner, managing agent, tenant, occupant or other person, to deny the zoning administrator, or his duly authorized agent, access to any dwelling after the zoning administrator, or his duly authorized agent have obtained an inspections warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction and the foregoing notice requirements have been satisfied. 
ARTICLE XI. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 35.2-110. - Rules of Construction. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of the Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  The particular shall control the general. 
(b)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine shall include the feminine (e.g., his/her, he/she) 
(d)  A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
(e)  The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association or any other similar entity. 
(f)  Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by conjunctions, such conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  "And" indicates that all the connected words or phrases shall apply. 
2.  "Or" indicates that the connected words or phrases may apply singly or in any combination. 
3.  "Either...or" indicates that the connected words or phrases shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(g)  The words "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the specified examples but are intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like, kind or character. 
(h)  The word "state" means the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the word "city" means the City of Lynchburg, Virginia. 
Sec. 35.2-111. - Interpretations. 
    Words and phrases used in this Zoning Ordinance shall be interpreted as follows: 
(a)  The Zoning Ordinance shall be interpreted by considering, among others: 
1.  The intent of the City Council when adopting this Zoning Ordinance; the occasion and necessity for the provision; the circumstances under which it was enacted; 
2.  The threat to the public health, safety and welfare to be remedied; 
3.  The former provision, if any, including other provisions upon the same or similar subjects; 
4.  The consequences of a particular interpretation; 
5.  Legislative, administrative, and City Attorney interpretations of the provision. 
(b)  Every provision shall be construed, if possible, to give effect to all its terms. When the words of a provision in its application to an existing situation are clear and free from all ambiguity, the letter of the provision shall not be disregarded under the pretext of pursuing the spirit. 
(c)  General words are construed to be restricted in their meaning by particular and specific words. When a general provision is in conflict with a specific provision, the two shall be construed, if possible, to give effect to both meanings. If irreconcilable, the specific shall prevail and be construed as an exception to the general, unless the general was enacted as a later amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  In the case of a difference in meaning or implication between the text of the Zoning Ordinance and the captions for each section, the text shall control. 
(e)  Where an amendment is adopted and conflicts with or overlooks a provision of the Zoning Ordinance, the two shall be interpreted together, if possible, and effect shall be given to each. If the amendment is irreconcilable, the most recent amendment shall prevail. 
(f)  When the Zoning Ordinance has been amended more than once, the latest amendment shall be read into the Zoning Ordinance as amended and not as originally adopted. 
(g)  Words and phrases are construed according to the rules of grammar and according to their common and approved usage; but technical words and phrases and such others as have acquired a special meaning, or are defined by this Zoning Ordinance, are construed according to the special meaning or their definition. 
(h)  All words, terms and phrases not otherwise defined herein shall be given their usual and customary meaning, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning was intended. Terms that are not specifically defined in this section or elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance will have the meaning as defined in Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary, Eleventh Edition, Merriam-Webster, Inc, 2003 (ISBN-13: 008-1413008074). 
Sec. 35.2-112. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the meanings established in this section. 
1. AFP - approximated flood plain district 2. AS - airport safety overlay district 3. B-1 - limited business district (Combined with B-2) 4. B-3 - community business district 5. B-4 - urban commercial district (Combined with B-6) 6. B-5 - general business district 7. BZA - City of Lynchburg Board of Zoning Appeals 8. CCD - cluster commercial development pattern 9. CUP - conditional use permit 10. FEMA - Federal Emergency Management Agency 11. FF - floodway fringe district 12. FSC - Fifth Street corridor overlay district 13. Ft or ' - foot 14. FW - floodway district 15. HD - historic district 16. HPC - Historic Preservation Commission 17. HUD - United States Department of Housing and Urban Development 18. I-1 - restricted industrial district 19. I-2 - light industrial district 20. I-3 - heavy industrial district 21. IN-1 - institutional district 1 22. IN-2 - institutional district 2 23. LBCS - Land Based Classification Structure 24. PUD - Planned Unit Development pattern 25. R-1 - low-density residential district 26. R-2 - low-medium density residential district 27. R-3 - medium-density residential district 28. R-4 - medium-high density residential district (Combined with R-5) 29. R-C - conservation district 30. SC - scenic corridor overlay district 31. Sq. ft. or s.f. - square feet 32. TND - Traditional Neighborhood Development pattern 33. TRC - Technical Review Committee  
Sec. 35.2-113. - Definitions. 
    The following terms shall have the meanings established in this section unless specifically modified by provisions of the applicable section of the Zoning Ordinance. 
1. Abut: To adjoin or touch at one or more points along a common boundary. 2. Accessible: Dwellings that meet prescribed requirements for accessible housing. Mandatory requirements for accessible housing in the Department of Housing and Urban Development's program 202 and 811, section 504, and the Fair Housing Amendments Act requirements. 
Accessible features in dwellings include items such as wide doors, sufficient clear floor space for wheelchairs, lower countertop segments, lever and loop type handles on hardware, seats at bathing fixtures, grab bars in bathrooms, knee spaces under sinks and counters, audible and visual signals, switches and controls in easily reached locations, entrances free of steps and stairs, and an accessible route through the house. Most "accessible" features are permanently fixed in place and very apparent. 3. Accessory use or accessory: 1. A use conducted on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is related (whether located within the same or an accessory building or other structure, or on an accessory use of land), except that, where specifically provided in the applicable regulations, accessory off-street parking or loading need not be located on the same zoning lot. 2. A use that is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, such principal use. 3. A use subordinate in area, floor area, intensity, extent and purpose to the principal use. 4.  A use either in the same ownership as such principal use, or operated and maintained on the same zoning lot substantially for the benefit or convenience of the owners, occupants, employees, customers or visitors of the principal use. 5.  When "accessory" is used in the text, it shall have the same meaning as "accessory use" 4. Accessory structure: A structure subordinate to, and located on, the same zoning lot with a main building, the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building or to the principal use of the land, and which is not attached by any part of a common wall or a common roof to the main building. 5. Address sign: A sign displaying only the assigned address of a property or building that is attached to a building or sign structure or part thereof. An address sign shall not be included in the maximum permissible sign area of the district in which it is located. 6. Adjacent: To abut or be located on the opposite side of a right-of-way or easement. 7. Administrator or Zoning Administrator: the official charged with the enforcement of this zoning ordinance except where responsibility is specifically delegated. 8. Agriculture: Any use of land which involves the tilling of soil, the growing of crops or plant growth of any kind, or the raising of livestock or poultry for profit. "For profit" means in excess of what a household would normally grow or raise for its own use or consumption, and shall include the processing and retail sale, in a farm produce stand, or otherwise on the premises, of the products of only the farm on which such processing is conducted. 9. Airport elevation: The highest point on any usable landing surface expressed in feet above mean sea level. 10. Airport or air landing field: Any area of land or water designated and set aside for the landing or taking-off of aircraft, the discharge or receiving of cargoes and/or passengers, or the repair, fueling or storage of aircraft. 11. Airport: Lynchburg Regional Airport and/or Falwell Airport. 12. Alteration: Any change, modification or addition to a part of or all of the exterior of any building or structure. 13. Amend or amendment: Any repeal, modification or addition to a regulation; any new regulation; any change in the numbers, shape, boundary, or area of a district or any repeal or abolition of any map, part thereof, or addition thereto. 14. Antenna support structure: Any building or other structure 30 feet in height or taller other than a tower which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities. 15. Apartment house: See dwelling, multi-household. 16. Apartment: A room or suite of two or more rooms, which is designed or intended for residential occupancy by, or which is occupied by, one household doing its cooking therein. 17. Applicant: Any person who applies for any development approval. 18. Application or development application: The process by which the owner, or the owner's legal representative, of a plot of land within the City submits a request to develop approval. Application includes all written documentation, verbal statements, and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the City concerning such a request. 19. Approach surface: A surface, whose design standards are referenced in section 35.2-57.3., longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface, and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 35.2-57.4. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 20. Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones: The airspace zones as set forth in section 35.2-57.4. 21. Arcade: A public or private pedestrian walkway that is open to the street and covered by the upper floors of a building front. 22. Arterial or arterial street: A public street currently classified in the comprehensive plan functional classification map as an arterial. 23. Automobile graveyard: Any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five motor vehicles of any kind that are incapable of being operated and which it would not be economically practical to make operative, are placed, located or found. The movement or rearrangement of vehicles within an existing lot or facility does not render this definition inapplicable. The provisions established by this definition shall begin with the first day that the vehicle is placed on the subject property. 24. Automobile service station: A location providing light automobile repairs as listed in LBCS functional use code 2117a. A building, lot, or both, in or upon which gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and where, in addition, the following services may be rendered and sales made, and no other: 1. Sales and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and distributor parts. 2. Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving. 3. Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hoses, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and the like. 4. Radiator cleaning and flushing. 5. Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing materials. 6. Greasing and lubrication. 7. Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps and lines. 8. Electrical system repairs 9. Adjusting and repairing brakes. 10. Minor motor adjustments not involving racing the motor. 11. Retail sales of convenience goods. 12. Virginia state inspection station. Uses permissible at an automobile service station do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in service stations. 25. Awning: A permanent roof like structure that projects from the wall of a building, covered with any material designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment including those types which can be retracted, folded, or collapsed against the face of the supporting building. 26. Banner: A sign consisting of a piece of fabric or any other material, other than a flag or pennant, used to advertise a business, service, product, goods, special promotion, activity or event. 27. Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 28. Base flood elevation: The Federal Emergency Management Agency designated 100-year water surface elevation. 29. Basement: Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 30. Bed and breakfast or tourist home: A dwelling, occupied as such, in which sleeping accommodations in less than six rooms with not more than four persons per room are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation, under the management of the occupants of that dwelling for dwelling purposes. A tourist home or bed and breakfast shall not be deemed a home occupation. 31. Billboard or poster panel: Any exterior sign or advertising structure or portion thereof, including any sign painted directly on any exterior wall, roof, or part of a building or other object, displaying any information other than the name and occupation of the user of the premises or the nature of the business conducted thereon or the products sold, manufactured, processed or available thereon. 32. Block face: The edge of a block fronting on a street. 33. Block: An area of land bounded by streets providing access to such area. 34. Board of Zoning Appeals: The board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the Zoning Administrator in the interpretation of this ordinance as described in this ordinance and regulated by the Code of Virginia. 35. Boardinghouse or lodging house: A residence where the owner resides in which, for compensation, lodging, or meals, or both, are furnished to transient or non-transient guests. A boardinghouse shall not be deemed a home occupation. 36. Boarding unit or lodging unit: Any building or part thereof constituting a separate, independent transient accommodation that is physically separated from other such units so as to provide secure and private temporary accommodations. 37. Buffer: An area of land, including landscaping, or combination of landscaping berms, solid fences and/or walls that is located between land uses of different character and is intended to mitigate negative impacts of the more intense use. 38. Building, accessory: A building subordinate to, and located on, the same zoning lot with a main building, the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building or to the principal use of the land, and which is not attached by any part of a common wall or a common roof to the main building. 39. Building envelope: The area in which a building may be constructed, which is bounded by the minimum front, side and rear setbacks and the maximum building height. 40. Building group: A group of two or more main buildings and any buildings accessory thereto occupying a single zoning lot. 41. Building line or setback: A line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of a required setback. 42. Building mounted sign: A permanently attached sign, erected or painted on the outside wall, window, or door of a building. 43. Building permit: A document issued by the City of Lynchburg to permit the construction, erection of alteration of any structure. 44. Building, height of: The vertical distance measured from the level of approved street grade opposite the middle of the front of the building to the highest point of roof surface of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard floor; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; except as otherwise provided in section 35.2-61.2. 45. Building, main: The building in which is conducted the principal use of the zoning lot on which it is situated in any residential zone; any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the zoning lot on which the same is located if the lot is used primarily for residential purposes. 46. Building, temporary: Any structure which is intended to be used or occupied for only a limited time or which is not permanently supported by a foundation. 47. Building: Any structure designed or intended for support, shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property. 48. Business district: A zoning district whose designation begins with the letter "B". 49. Business incubator: A facility that provides start-up or emerging businesses with space and shared office equipment, support and business development services, such as management and marketing assistance, for a limited period of time. A business incubator shall meet the following criteria: (1) It shall contain uses authorized in the applicable zoning district under one roof with a minimum of six tenant spaces. (2) Companies housed in a business incubator shall either provide services or support to existing basic industries, or shall conduct light manufacturing or distribution businesses. (3)  Display rooms for retail sales shall not exceed ten percent of the gross floor area of the tenant space. (4) A tenant shall not be allowed to occupy the facility for more than 48 months. 50. Caliper: Trunk diameter of a tree measured six inches from the ground. If the caliper is greater than four inches, the measurement is taken 12 inches from the ground. 51. Campus: A designated area of land including the buildings and grounds of institutional uses such as schools, colleges, universities, senior living facilities, medical facilities and churches. A campus may be divided by public or private rights-of-way. 52. Care center: A day nursery, nursery school, day camp, summer camp or other place where reception or care is provided with or without compensation, of persons of any age and the primary use of the facility where said reception or care is provided is not a residence. 53. Cemetery: A place used for the permanent commercial interment of dead bodies or the cremated remains thereof. It may be either a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a columbarium for cinerary interments or a combination thereof. 54. Certificate of appropriateness (COA): The approval statement signed by the Historic Preservation Commission chair and/or the secretary that certifies the appropriateness of a particular request for the construction, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, or demolition of all or a part of any building or structure within a historic district, subject to the issuance of all other permits needed for the matter sought to be accomplished. 55. Certificate of Occupancy: Authorization granted by the City for use of a lot or structure. 56. Changeable copy sign: A sign, or part of a sign, with copy that can be changed by manual, mechanical, or electronic means. Copy may not change more than once every six seconds. Changeable copy signs include electronic message centers. 57. Channel enclosure: Continuous c-shaped metal, or similar opaque material, surrounding three-quarters of the circumference of neon tubing of a sign. 58. Channel: A natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent with a definite bed and banks to confine and conduct flowing water. 59. Civic uses: Public or quasi-public uses serving the needs of the community that promote human interaction, such as: care centers, religious institutions, civic clubs and fraternal organizations, community swimming pools, libraries, museums, art galleries, public buildings, meeting halls, public or community recreational facilities, parks, schools and colleges. 60. Collector street: A public street currently classified as a collector street in the functional classification map of the Comprehensive Plan. 61. Commercial amusement (temporary): A temporary outdoor amusement center, bazaar, circus, carnival, or fair, either involving use of special purpose equipment or conducted by professional operators, or both, and where activities include such things as rides, exhibitions, food service, sales or small-scale games. 62. Commercial amusement: The provision of entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee, including but not limited to a bowling alley, video arcade, dance hall, billiard parlor, golf driving range, skating rinks, swimming pools or miniature golf course. This use does not include circuses, carnivals, race tracks, or shooting ranges. 63. Commercial building: A building used only for a commercial use. 64. Commercial recreation: The provision of entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee, with higher noise and safety restrictions than a commercial amusement. A facility designed or used for shooting at targets with firearms and/or archery and which is completely enclosed within a building or structure. Does not include outdoor shooting or archery ranges. 65. Commercial use: Any use involving in part or in whole the storage of merchandise, sale of merchandise, materials or services, but not including home occupations. 66. Community facility use: A public use in private or public ownership run on a nonprofit basis. Examples are: churches, welfare centers, voluntary hospitals, or privately-endowed museums or libraries. Facilities of private, nonprofit membership organizations for use only by members thereof are also community facilities. Examples may be country clubs, golf courses or community swimming pools. 67. Comprehensive Zoning Map amendment: An amendment to the official Zoning Map where any of the following conditions exist: (1) The area to be rezoned constitutes an entire neighborhood as defined in the Comprehensive Plan, or a group of such neighborhoods. (2) The area to be rezoned includes at least 400 acres of ground. (3) The area to be rezoned includes at least five lots, except where all of the said lots are included in a subdivision to be developed as a whole by one developer. 68. Community owned: Facilities owned and operated by a public, non-profit or not-for-profit entity and open to the general public. 69. Concept Plan: (1) A plan that establishes the general layout and intensity of proposed development in enough detail to demonstrate compliance with the applicable development approval criteria for discretionary approvals by the City Council. (2) A generalized, illustrative plan for the IN-1 and IN-2 districts, indicating how off site impacts such as traffic, water and sanitary sewer availability/capacity, stormwater management, lighting and noise are mitigated and providing an assessment of existing and future development of the institution's campus, including buildings, parking areas, recreational facilities, open space and access points to City streets. 70. Conditional use: A permit to grant restricted use of property for uses other than those permitted by right. 71. Conditional zoning or zone: A zoning district or portion thereof, which has been established pursuant to provisions this Zoning Ordinance and which is subject to reasonable conditions proffered in writing by the owner of the subject property and agreed to by the City Council in a zoning map amendment to which such conditions are applicable in addition to those regulations provided for that particular zoning district, or portion thereof, by the overall Zoning Ordinance. 72. Conical surface: An imaginary surface, whose design standards are referenced in extending and sloping horizontally and vertically from the periphery of the horizontal surface of an airport flight path. 73. Conservation: Any action designed to keep a structure, area containing structures, or places from being damaged, lost or wasted. 74. Construction sign: A temporary sign that notifies the public of a specific building or development under construction or reconstruction or to be constructed or reconstructed within the next three months. The sign may also identify the architect, contractor, subcontractor and/or material supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located. 75. Construction, start of: The date the building permit was issued for new construction or substantial improvements, meaning the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. 76. Contributing property: Those properties which by reason of form, materials, architectural details and relation to surrounding properties contribute favorably to the general character of the historic district in which they are located. 77. Coverage, lot: The proportion of a lot covered by the maximum horizontal projected area of a building and its accessory buildings, including overhangs and projections. 78. Decorative landscape stone: Stone that has natural or manmade distinguishing characteristics such as color and shape. Decorative landscape stone may be used as mulch. 79. Delineated wetland: An area delineated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as a wetland. 80. Demolition: The dismantling or tearing down of all or part of any building or structure and all operations incidental thereto. 81. Depth of lot: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot line of a lot. 82. Detached building: A building surrounded by yards or other open area on the same zoning lot. 83. Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the erection, placement or modification of buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; or the establishment or expansion of a use on a site. 84. Development approval: Any City approval required for development. 85. Development area/disturbed area: All areas shown within the limits of clearing and grading on a concept plan or final site plan. 86. Development pattern: See land use development pattern 87. Digital sign or electronic message center: An electrically activated changeable copy sign with a variable message and/or graphic presentation capability that can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote location or at the sign. These signs typically use arrays of LED lights to create an illuminated message. 88. Directional sign: An on-premises sign whose message is exclusively limited to guiding the circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as enter, exit, or one-way. 89. Dwelling: A building containing one or more dwelling units. The term "dwelling" or any combination thereof shall not be deemed to include hotel, rooming house, motel, clubhouse, hospital or other accommodations used for more or less transient occupancy. 90. Dwelling unit: One or more rooms in a residential building or in a mixed building which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use by one or more persons living together and which include lawful cooking space and lawful sanitary facilities reserved for the occupants thereof. 91. Dwelling, cluster or cluster development: A development pattern defined in Article VIII of this Zoning Ordinance characterized by small lots and the retention of common open space. 92. Dwelling, detached: A building containing only dwelling units surrounded by yards or other open area on the same zoning lot. 93. Dwelling, group: A building group consisting only of dwellings occupying a parcel of land in one ownership and having any yard or service area in common. 94. Dwelling, multi-household for the elderly: A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied by more than two families, and all living units of which are to be maintained under single ownership or management. This shall be interpreted to include a cooperative apartment house. Provided further, that all occupants of said residential units must be (a) persons 62 years of age or older; (b) married couples either of which is 62 years of age or older; or (c) handicapped persons under 62 years of age who have physical impairments which are expected to be of long-continued or indefinite duration, and which substantially impede the ability of such person to live independently. 95. Dwelling, multi-household: A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied by more than two families, and all living units of which are to be maintained under single ownership or management. This shall be interpreted to include cooperative apartment houses. 96. Dwelling, semi-detached: One of two buildings, arranged or designed as dwellings located on abutting lots, separated from each other by a party wall, without openings, extending from the cellar floor to the highest point of the roof along the dividing lot line, and separated from any other building or structures by space on all sides. 97. Dwelling, single-household: A building containing not more than one dwelling unit and occupied by not more than one household. 98. Dwelling, townhouse, or row house: One of a series of three or more attached dwelling units separated from one another by continuous vertical party walls without openings from basement floor to roof. 99. Dwelling, two-household (duplex): A building located on one zoning lot containing not more than two dwelling units, arranged one above the other, front to back, or side by side, and occupied by not more than two households. 100. Easement: A grant by a property owner of the use of a designated part of his land by another party for a specified purpose and for a specified time, which shall be included in the conveyance of land by such easement. 101. Eave: The underside of the projection of a roof beyond the outer wall of a building. 102. Electrical engineer: An electrical engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 103. Electronic message center (EMC): See digital sign 104. Elevated building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated about the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings or columns (posts and piers). 105. Encroachment, floodplain: The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 106. Encroachment lines: The lateral limits or line drawn along each side of and generally parallel to a watercourse or body of water, to preserve the flood carrying capacity of the stream or other body of water and its floodplain, and to assure attainment of the basic objective of improvement plans that may be considered or proposed. Their location along a stream should be such that the floodways between them will effectively carry and discharge a flood not less than the magnitude of the 100-year flood. 107. Enlargement, or to enlarge: An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an increase in the size of any other structure, or an increase in that portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use. To "enlarge" is to make an enlargement. 108. Equal degree of encroachment: A standard applied in determining the location of encroachment lines so that the hydraulic capacity of flood plain lands on each side of a channel are reduced by an equal amount when calculating the increases in flood stages due to flood plain encroachments. 109. Evergreen tree: A tree or shrub that has foliage that persists and stays green throughout the year. 110. Existing tower: A telecommunications tower that is in existence or is being constructed on December 9, 1997 111. Extension, or to extend: An increase in the amount of existing floor area used for an existing use within an existing building. To "extend" is to make an extension. 112. Exterior architectural features: The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, details, features or elements. 113. Façade: The outer surface of a building. 114. Fall zone: That area within a prescribed radius (equal to the height of the tower) as measured from the base of a tower. A fall zone is based on physical phenomena that can result in a hazard beneath a tall structure and is the area within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris or collapsing material. A fall zone is distinct from a setback. 115. Family day home: A child day program offered in the residence of the provider or the home of any of the children in care for one through 12 children under the age of 13, exclusive of the provider's own children and any children who reside in the home, when at least one child receives care for compensation and meets the requirements of Article 63.2-100 of the Code of Virginia. The term shall not include any family-type facility which provides child care to not more than five children placed by order of any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any public welfare department or other government agency having responsibility of placing children for care. 116. Final site plan: A site plan that when approved in accordance with this ordinance enables an applicant to apply for a building permit. 117. Fire district: The territory defined and limited by the provisions of the BOCA Basic Building Code for the restriction of types of construction to ensure adequate fire protection. 118. Flag pole: A freestanding structure or a structure attached to a building or the roof of a building for the sole purpose of displaying flags. 119. Flag: Any fabric or any other flexible material attached to or designed to be flown from a flagpole or similar device. 120. Flashing sign: A sign that involves motion or rotation of any part of the structure, moving reflective disks, running animation or video, or displays an intermittent light or lights. Signs that display an on-premise message changed by electronic means or remote control, programmed or sequenced to change no more than once every six seconds shall not be considered a flashing sign. 121. Flea market: A market, whether held indoors or outdoors, where antiques, used household goods, curios and similar items are sold or traded by or on behalf of multiple vendors. 122. Flood hazard area: The maximum area of the 100-year flood plain (as defined in regulations for the national flood insurance program) which is likely to be flooded, or for which mudslides can be reasonably anticipated. 123. Flood or flooding: 1. A general or temporary condition or partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:   a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or,   b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 2. The collapse or subsistence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual an unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (1)a. of this definition. 124. Floodplains: The areas of land adjoining a watercourse that have in the past, or can be reasonably expected in the future, to be covered temporarily by flood waters. 125. Flood-prone area: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 126. Floodproofing: Combinations of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings in the regulatory flood plain. 127. Floodway fringe: That portion of the 100-year flood plain outside of the floodway. 128. Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plains which are reasonably required to discharge the water of the 100-year flood (base flood), without causing a more than one foot rise at any point in the City as shown in the City's flood insurance study published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 129. Floor area: The sum of the gross areas of the several floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls separating two buildings. In particular, floor area includes: 1. Basement space, except such space in a basement which has at least one-third of its height below curb level, and which is located in a residential building with not more than two stories entirely above curb level. 2. Elevator shafts or stairwells at each floor. 3. Floor space in penthouses. 4. Attic space (whether or not a floor has been laid) providing structural headroom of eight feet or more. 5. Floor space in interior balconies or mezzanines. 6. Floor space in open or roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways, or porches, if more than 50 percent of the perimeter of such terrace, balcony, breezeway or porch is enclosed. 7. Any other floor space used for dwelling purposes, no matter where located within a building, when not specifically excluded. 8. Floor space in accessory buildings except for floor space used for accessory off-street parking. Floor area of a building shall not include: 1. Cellar space, except that cellar space used for retailing shall be included for the purpose of calculating requirements for accessory off-street parking spaces and accessory off-street loading berths. 2. Elevator or stair bulkheads, accessory water tanks or cooling towers. 3. Uncovered steps. 4. Attic space, whether or not a floor actually has been laid, providing structural headroom of less than eight feet. 5. Floor space in open or roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways or porches, provided that not more than 50 percent of the perimeter of such terrace, balcony, breezeway or porch is enclosed. 6.  Unenclosed floor space used for permitted or required accessory off-street parking spaces. 7. Floor space used for accessory off-street loading berths. 8. Floor space used for mechanical equipment. 130. Floor area ratio: The total floor area on a zoning lot, divided by the lot area of that zoning lot. (For example, a building containing 20,000 square feet of floor area on a zoning lot of 10,000 square feet has a floor area ratio of 2.0.) 131. Floor plate: The floor area of the ground floor or footprint of a building. 132. Food Establishment: A business operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends or otherwise provides food for human consumption. 133. Foundation planting: Trees and shrubs planted along and adjacent to the perimeter of a building. 134. Freeboard: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed. 135. Freestanding sign: A non-movable sign supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and not attached to a building. 136. Frontage: The horizontal length of the front lot line of a zoning lot abutting a public street, road, or highway, or rural right-of-way. 137. Gambrel roof: A roof gable roof, each sloping side of which has two sloping planes, with the lower plane being steeper than the upper plane (e.g., barn roof) 138. Garden apartment units: Group multiple dwellings consisting of more than one main building containing more than one unit per building for single-household occupancy. 139. Gasoline station: See Automobile service station. 140. Graphic: Any logo, emblem, insignia, or text, formed by writing, drawing, painting or engraving. 141. Ground cover: Any evergreen or broadleaf plant that does not generally attain a mature height of more than one foot, characterized by a growth habit in which the plant spreads across the ground to connect with other similar plants forming a continuous vegetative cover on the ground. Sod and seeding shall be considered an appropriate ground cover. 142. Group Home: A residential facility wherein (a) the operator is not legally related to the individuals supervised and may be licensed by the state, and wherein (b) four or more individuals are provided with room, board, specialized and distinctive care, and daily supervision. For the purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, a facility providing care to less than four persons shall not be considered a group home. The term "Group Home" would include but not be limited to such groups as: foster family homes, homes for adults, abused women, individuals with mental illness, intellectual disability, or developmental disabilities, or physically handicapped. This definition does not include pre-release or post-release individuals who have been incarcerated. 1. A residential facility in which no more than eight individuals with mental illness, intellectual disability, or developmental disabilities reside, with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons, shall be considered for all purposes residential occupancy by a single-household. For the purposes of this section, mental illness and developmental disability shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Section 54.1-3401 of the Code of Virginia. No conditions more restrictive than those imposed on residences occupied by persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption shall be imposed on such facility. This type of residential facility shall be deemed to be any group home or other residential facility for which the department of behavioral health and developmental services is the licensing authority pursuant to this code. 2. A residential facility, in which no more than four aged, infirm or physically disabled persons reside, with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons, shall be considered for all purposes residential occupancy by a single-household. No conditions, more restrictive than those imposed on residences occupied by persons related by blood, marriage or adoption shall be imposed on such a facility. For purposes of the Zoning Ordinance, "residential facility" means any group home or residential facility in which aged, infirm or disabled persons reside with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons and for which the Virginia department of social services is the licensing authority pursuant to the Code of Virginia. 143. Guest: Any person hiring and occupying a room for sleeping purposes. 144. Hazard to air navigation: An obstruction determined by the Virginia Department of Aviation or the Federal Aviation Administration to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of navigable airspace in the Commonwealth. 145. Hazardous materials: Includes any substance or material [that] could adversely affect the safety of the public, handlers or carriers during transportation, including, but not limited to materials that require a Hazardous Materials Endorsement by the United States Patriot Act and the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles. 146. Heat island effect: An elevated temperature over an urban area caused by pavement, buildings, other infrastructure and pollutant emissions. 147. Height of building: See Building, height of. 148. Height of sign: The distance to the topmost extent of the sign structure when measured from and perpendicular to the elevation of the edge of pavement of the closest adjacent roadway on which the sign is located. In no instance shall the sign structure be required to be less than ten feet in height, except as otherwise specifically required by the Zoning Ordinance. 149. Height: for the purpose of determining the height limits affected by airport operations in all zones set forth in section 35.2-57.4 and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean sea level (M.S.L.) elevation unless otherwise specified. 150. Helipad: Landing facility for up to two helicopters that may be lit, but does not include facilities for storage, fueling or servicing of helicopters. 151. Heliport: Facilities for the landing helicopters that may include facilities for storage, servicing and/or fueling one or more helicopters at a time. 152. Historic area, historic place, or historic structure: 1. Any structure, area containing structures, or place in which historic events occurred; or having special public value because of notable architectural or other features, relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation. 2. Any structure that is:  a. Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the department of the interior) as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register;  b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;  c. Individually listed on a state inventory or historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or  d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:   i. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or   ii. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 153. Historic building map: The map of Lynchburg indicating certain structures as historic buildings. 154. Historic district: A geographically defined area consisting of public and/or private property within the City, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings or structures, areas of unique architectural value, landmarks or encompassing parcels of contiguous land united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual buildings or structures separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by City Council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in (d)(1) of this ordinance. The historic district overlay zone defines the area in which the requirements of the historic districts ordinance shall apply. The historic district overlay zone shall be in addition to and shall overlay all other zoning districts where it is applied so that any parcel of land lying in the historic district overlay zone shall also lie within one or more of the other zoning districts provided by this ordinance. 155. Home occupation: An accessory use which: 1. Is clearly incidental to or secondary to the residential use of a dwelling unit. 2. Is customarily and traditionally carried on within a dwelling unit by one or more occupants of such dwelling unit, except that, in connection with the practice of a profession, one person not residing in such dwelling unit may be employed. 3. Occupies not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of such dwelling unit, and in no event more than 500 square feet of floor area. 156. Home owners' or property owners' association: An incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which (a) each lot and/or property owner in a planned unit or other described land area is automatically a member; and (b) each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the home association's activities, such as common property maintenance. 157. Horizontal surface: An imaginary horizontal plane, whose design standards are referenced in section 35.2-57.3, above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 158. Hospitals: An institution receiving in-patients and rendering medical, surgical, and/or obstetrical care to private and charity patients, and usually including research and training activities. This shall include general hospitals and institutions in which service is limited to special fields, such as cardiac, eye, ear, nose and throat, pediatric, orthopedic, skin and cancer, tuberculosis, chronic disease and obstetrics. Hospital patients generally require intensive care for periods generally not exceeding several months. 159. Hotel: A building or part thereof containing five or more guest rooms, without kitchens, where lodging is provided for compensation, excluding a fraternity or sorority house, a school or college dormitory, or a tourist home. 160. Household: The occupants of a single dwelling unit, which shall not exceed three (3) unrelated individuals unless otherwise permitted by this Zoning Ordinance. 161. Identification sign: A sign that is permanently attached to or painted on a building and contains only the building name. (Example, the "Allied Arts" Building.) Identification signs shall not be included in the maximum permissible sign area of the district in which it is located. 162. Illegal use: Any use, whether of a building or other structure or of a tract of land, in which a violation of any provision of the Zoning Ordinance has been committed or shall exist. 163. Illuminated sign: A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign. 164. Industrial district: Includes the I-1, I-2 and I-3 zoning districts. 165. Institutional district: Any district whose designation begins with the letters "IN". 166. Inflatable item: Any item that is capable of being expanded by air, water or other means that exceeds 24 inches in diameter, used to advertise a business, service, product, goods, special promotion, activity or event. 167. Inventory, historic: The inventory of historic landmarks, buildings and structures as prepared by the board of historic and architectural review. 168. Junk yard: The use of any space, whether inside or outside a building, for the abandonment, storage, keeping, collection, disassembling or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metal, or other scrap or discarded materials, or for the abandonment, demolition, dismantling, or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof; provided, that this definition shall not apply to any such use conducted solely as an accessory use and occupying not more than 100 square feet of the area of any lot other than any portion of that half thereof that adjoins any street. 169. Kennel: Any building, enclosure, structure, establishment and/or land where dogs, cats, household pets or any other domestic animals are sheltered, fed or watered, groomed, shown, trained, bred, boarded and exercised, cared for or sold for either commercial gain or in exchange for a fee. 170. Land Use Development Pattern or Development Pattern: One or more uses arranged to create a specific type of development that are defined in Article VIII of this ordinance and that may be allowed by right or conditional use permit pursuant to LBCS classifications 9950 et seq. 171. Land with minor improvements: For purposes of the City's floodplain regulations, a tract of land which: 1. Does not include any building or other structure. 2. Includes a building or other structure with a floor area of less than 400 square feet. 172. Landscape island: An area containing a shade tree and other required landscaping not less than 108 square feet for a parking row or 216 square feet for a parking bay. 173. Large deciduous tree: A large deciduous tree shall be of a species having an average minimum mature crown spread of greater than 30 feet. A minimum caliper of at least two and one-half inches at the time of planting shall be required. 174. Large farm animal: An animal with an adult weight of 50 pounds or more that may be kept for agricultural purposes, including, but not limited to horses, cattle, goats, llamas, alpacas, ostriches, emus, ponies and bison, but not including dogs. 175. Large scale retail establishment: Retail establishments having a cumulative gross floor area of 75,000 square feet or greater in floor area, whether such gross floor area is contained entirely within a freestanding building or is within two or more buildings, whether located on a single lot or contiguous lots owned or operated as associated, integrated or cooperative business enterprises. 176. Level of Service (LOS): A scale that measures the amount of traffic that a roadway or intersection can effectively and efficiently accommodate, based on such factors as volume, capacity, queues and delay. LOS is graded on a scale of A through F, where LOS-A is free-flowing traffic and LOS-F is a condition where traffic flow is unstable and excessive delay and queuing is expected. 177. Limited Access Highway or Freeway: A public highway to which access is forbidden except at interchanges with other public highways and, in some cases, at specially designed facilities providing automobile, restaurant and other similar services to motorists using the highway. 178. Limited time: A period of time assumed to be not more than one year unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Ordinance or development approval. 179. Loading berth: A space measuring at least ten feet wide by 35 feet long that is used for the loading or unloading of vehicles. 180. Local street: A public street not classified as a freeway, arterial or collector street under the definitions in this section. 181. Lodging house: See Boardinghouse. 182. Logo: Any emblem used as the symbol of an organization, or residential or nonresidential community. A logo may include a graphic, text, or both. 183. Lot: 1. A lot of record existing on the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance or any applicable subsequent amendment thereto. 2. A tract of land, either unsubdivided or consisting of two or more contiguous lots of record, located within a single block which on the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance or any applicable amendment thereto was in single ownership or control. 3. A tract of land located within a single block, which at the time of filing for a Building Permit (or, if no Building Permit is required, at the time of filing for a Certificate of Occupancy), is designated by its owner or developers as a tract all of which is to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. 184. Lot area per dwelling unit: That portion of the lot area required for each dwelling unit located on a zoning lot. 185. Lot area: The area of a lot; provided, that if that lot includes any part of the area of a street closed subsequent to the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance, not more than one-half the area of such closed street shall be counted as lot area for purposes of determining the maximum floor area ratio or the required lot area per dwelling unit or lot area per room for such zoning lot. 186. Lot, corner: Either a lot bounded by streets on two or more sides or a lot in which the interior angle formed by the extensions of the street lines in the directions which they take at their intersections with lot lines other than street lines forms an angle of 135 degrees or less. 187. Lot coverage: See Coverage, lot. 188. Lot depth: See Depth of lot. 189. Lot, interior: Any lot neither a corner lot nor a through lot. 190. Lot line, front: A street line determined by the Zoning Administrator to be the front of the lot based on prevailing lot patterns and lot dimensions. 191. Lot line, rear: The lot line, opposite or furthest from the front lot line. For triangular lots, the rear lot line shall be the lot line that does not follow a street right-of-way. 192. Lot line, side: Any lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 193. Lot line: A boundary of a lot. 194. Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the City clerk, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 195. Lot width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a zoning lot at the building line. 196. Lot, through: Any lot, not a corner lot, which adjoins two streets that are parallel or within 45 degrees of being parallel to each other. 197. Low explosives: Substances that deflagrate (burn) rather than detonate (explode). These are primarily used as propellants. The cut-off speed between high and low explosives is 3,300 fps (feet per second). An example of a low explosive is black powder. High explosives are designed to shatter (brisance) rather than push. Detonation velocities for high explosives range from 3,300 fps to 29,900 fps. Blasting caps, dynamite, TNT, plastic explosives, binaries and blasting agents are examples of high explosives. 198. Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal Code 44CFR § 60.3. 199. Lumen per Square Foot: a measure of illuminance equal to one foot-candle 200. Lynchburg commercial historic districts design review guidelines: A publication adopted by City Council, that gives detailed guidance to property owners of the commercial historic districts who are contemplating changes or additions to their building or property; and assists the Historic Preservation Commission by providing them with minimum standards to guide their decision making. All future editions of the commercial guidelines document and all amendments thereto are automatically adopted and incorporated into the City Code. 201. Lynchburg residential historic districts design review guidelines: A publication adopted by City Council, that gives detailed guidance to property owners of the residential historic districts who are contemplating changes or additions to their building or property; and assists the Historic Preservation Commission by providing them with minimum standards to guide their decision making. All future editions of the residential guidelines document and all amendments thereto are automatically adopted and incorporated into the City Code. 202. Mansard roof: A roof having two slopes on all sides with the lower slope steeper than the upper one. 203. Manufactured home: 1. A structure, transportable in one or more sections that is certified as complying with HUD's "Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards," which is built after 1978 on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 2. For flood plain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes mobile homes, park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. 204. Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home spaces or lots for rent or sale. 205. Market for agricultural products: A market selling produce, or other edible products made from and entirely processed on the site of an agricultural operation. 206. Medical or dental clinics: Any building or group of buildings occupied by two or more medical or dental practitioners for the purpose of providing health services to people on an out-patient basis. 207. Medical practitioner: A licensed physician, dentist, osteopath, chiropractor, chiropodist (podiatrist), psychologist or optometrist (but not optician). 208. M edium shrubs: Shrubs and hedge forms having a minimum height of at least two feet at the time of planting. 209. Metes and bounds: The specific boundaries of an area as measured between geographical points. 210. Minor map amendment: A change in the official Zoning Map that is not included in the definition of comprehensive Zoning Map amendment. 211. Mobile food cart: A mobile food establishment that is up to ten feet long and five feet wide and is designed to be pushed by hand or pedaled. 212. Mobile food trailer: A mobile food establishment that is less than 20 feet long by eight feet wide and is designed to be towed behind a vehicle and capable of vending foods without being connected to another vehicle. 213. Mobile food truck: A self-propelled food establishment that is up to 26 feet long and eight feet wide. 214. Mobile food vehicle: A Food Establishment that is located upon a vehicle including cars, trucks, carts, motorcycles and bicycles, or which is pulled by a vehicle, where food or beverage is cooked, prepared, or served for individual portion service. This definition includes but is not limited to: mobile food kitchens, pushcart vendors, bicycle cart vendors, mobile food trucks, canteen trucks, and coffee trucks. 215. Mobile home: A structure built on a permanent chassis that is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation that does not comply with the HUD's Manufactured Home Construction standards or that was built prior to 1978. 216. Modified sign: A sign that is allowed to deviate from the standards set forth in the Zoning Ordinance pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued by the Historic Preservation Commission. 217. Modular home or industrialized building: A prefabricated homes or industrialized buildings that consist of one or more sections that do not have axles or frames and typically are transported to their site by means of flat-bed trucks. 218. Monument sign: A permanent structure built on-grade in which the sign and the structure are an integral part of one another, not a pole(s) mounted sign. 219. Motel or tourist cabin: A building or group of buildings containing ten or more guest rooms or suites designed or intended to be used, let or hired out which: 1. Contain living or sleeping accommodations used primarily for transient occupancy. 2. Have individual entrances from outside the building to serve each such living or sleeping unit. 220. Mulch: A protective covering, usually of organic matter placed around plants to prevent evaporation, root freezing and weed growth. 221. Mural: A painting, fresco, or mosaic applied to a wall for the sole purposes of decoration or artistic expression. A mural is not considered a sign unless it includes words or graphics that advertise the products or service of any entity. 222. Naturalized planting area: Any area planted for bio-retention containing native or indigenous species that mimics local natural surroundings and is allowed to grow undisturbed. Naturalized planting areas require minimal maintenance. 223. Neighborhood norm: A measure of the average or typical setbacks along two opposing block faces or for three abutting lots (see Sec. 35.2-61.3(f)). 224. Neon tubing: A vacuum tight transparent tube not exceeding one inch in diameter containing, but not limited to neon, argon, helium, xenon, or krypton that produces light when connected to an electrical current. 225. New construction: 1. Any construction within a historic district that is independent and exclusive of an existing building or structure or part thereof in the historic district. 2. For flood plain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a flood plain management regulation adopted by the City. 226. Non-conforming use: any preexisting structure or object of natural growth that is inconsistent with the provisions of this section or any amendment to this section. 227. Non-contributing property: A property so designated on the inventory map of historic districts and properties which are adopted as a part of this ordinance, being generally those properties which by reason of age, condition, amount of alterations, form, materials, architectural details and relation to surrounding properties do not contribute favorably to the general character of the part of the historic district in which they are located. 228. Nonconforming: Any lawful use, whether of a building or other structure or of a tract of land, which does not conform to the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located, either on the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance, or as a result of any subsequent amendment thereto. 
A nonconforming use shall result from failure to conform to the applicable district regulations on either permitted uses or performance standards. However, no existing use shall be deemed nonconforming solely because of any of the following: 1.  The existence of less than the required accessory off-street parking spaces or loading berths. 2. The existence of nonconforming accessory signs. 229. Normal business hours: means those hours during which most businesses in the community are open to serve customers, which shall be considered from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. unless otherwise specified herein. 230. Nursing homes: Rest homes and convalescent homes devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of residential facilities for the treatment and care of any persons suffering from illnesses, diseases, deformities or injuries not requiring the intensive care that is normally provided by hospitals, but do require care in excess of room and board and who need medical, nursing, convalescent or chronic care. Institutions primarily for the treatment and care of mental patients, alcoholics or drug addicts, and facilities serving less than four persons shall not, for the purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, be considered to be a nursing home. (See also Medical clinics, Hospitals and Sanatorium). 231. Obstruction: 1. For purposes of floodplain regulations, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or flood hazard area which may impede, retard or change the direction of flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property. 2. For purposes of airport overlay zoning, any structure, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height, or penetrates any surface or zone floor, set forth in section 35.2-57.4. 232. Off-site directional sign: A sign that directs traffic to a site other than the site on which the sign is located. 233. Off-street loading berth: A space for temporarily parking vehicles for loading or unloading that measures at least 30 feet in length by 12 feet wide and having at least 14 feet of clearance. 234. Official Zoning Map: That map dividing the City into specific zones or districts. 235. One hundred-year flood (base flood): A flood that has one chance in 100 or a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 236. Open Space: Any land or area, the preservation of which would: conserve and enhance scenic resources, protect streams, promote conservation of soils or provide for passive or active recreational space. Open spaces may include plaza areas, provided they contain a landscaped component. Required setback areas may be included in the computation of required open space. 237. Opinion sign: A sign which does not advertise products, goods, businesses, or services, and which expresses an opinion or other point of view. 238. Ornamental tree: Deciduous tree that grows to a mature height of less than 30 feet with flowering or other distinguishing characteristics. 239. Outdoor storage: 1. For residential properties, anything that is not normally found in residential yards and on porches, including, but not limited to indoor furniture, construction materials, auto parts, appliances and the clutter of various personal items, inoperable vehicles or stacks of containers in plain view. Equipment regularly used for lawn maintenance, outdoor furniture, children's toys, bicycles and neatly stacked firewood are not generally considered to be outdoor storage, however an excess of those items, or equipment in disrepair may be considered illegal outdoor storage. 2. For non-residential and mixed-use properties, the outdoor storage includes the storage of goods, materials, inoperable vehicles, appliances or other materials that are not a specifically authorized outdoor display. 240. Outparcel: A parcel located on the outside perimeter of a commercial development fronting a right-of-way. 241. Owner: means any person with fee simple title to any plot of land within the City who desires to develop, construct, build, modify, or erect a tower upon such land. 242. Parapet wall: A wall that extends above the top of a flat roof or flat portion of a roof. 243. Parcel: is considered to be that plot of land described by property lines. When multiple parcels are owned and used by the same party, the grouping may be considered to constitute the parcel. 244. Parking area, off-street: An off-street area containing one or more parking spaces, with passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto. In general, there shall be an average of at least 300 square feet of parking area per parking space and the required number of usable parking spaces. 245. Parking bay: Two parking rows abutting one another or separated by ten feet or less. 246. Parking garages: A building occupied by a public, community, commercial or private establishment providing space for the temporary storage of six or more automobiles and other vehicles, where service or repair facilities are not permitted. A parking garage shall not be considered an accessory use, nor shall it be used for the storage of dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles, parts thereof, or junk, nor shall the sale of automobiles or trailers take place within it unless otherwise permitted by the Zoning Ordinance. 247. Parking lot: An open lot serving the functions defined above for a parking garage. 248. Parking row: One single line of parking spaces. 249. Parking space: 1. An off-street space available for the parking of one motor vehicle on a transient basis and having a minimum width of nine feet and an area of not less than 162 square feet, exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and having direct usable access to the street. 2. An on-street space available for the parking of one motor vehicle on a transient basis, having a minimum width of nine feet and an area of not less than 162 square feet. 250. Pedestrian facility: A sidewalk, walking path, bike path or transit/shuttle stop. 251. Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other similar material, whether or not containing copy suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 252. Permanent sign: Any sign attached to the ground or any structure, intended to exist for the life of the structure or use, and which cannot be removed without involving any structural or support changes. 253. Permeable or Porous: Capable of allowing water to be conducted through a material, as in permeable surfaces such as grass or soils and porous pavement. 254. Person: Except as provided in section 35.2-60.2(e), a person is any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not for profit. 255. Phasing Plan: A plan for the development in more than one stage or phase in accordance with section 35.2-11.4. 256. Planned unit development or PUD: A multiple-unit residential development of at least five acres arranged in harmony with purposes, provisions and procedures for the planned unit development. 257. Pole mounted sign: A sign that is mounted on one or more freestanding poles or similar supports. 258. Political sign: A temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a person running for a governmental office or promoting a position on an issue to be voted on at a government election. 259. Porch: an area elevated above grade that adjoins an entry to a building that may be covered or open. 260. Portable sign: A sign which is movable without involving any structural or support changes, not permanently attached to the ground, a structure or any other sign not an integral part of a building to which it is accessory. This category includes, but is not limited to, an A-frame sign, a sign attached to or placed on a vehicle, which is used primarily for the purpose of display, and similar devices used to attract attention. This shall not include bumper stickers or identification signs directly applied to or painted on vehicles identifying the owner of the vehicle, a business name, logo or emblem. 261. Preservation: Any activity designed to prevent deterioration or destruction of a structure, a group of structures, or an area or a district. 262. Primary surface: An imaginary surface, whose design standards are referenced in section 35.2-57.3, longitudinally centered on an airport runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 263. Private recreational facilities: A facility such as a swimming pool, tennis court or basketball court which is an accessory use located on a residential lot, the use of which is restricted to the occupants of the principal use and guests for whom no admission or membership fees are charged. 264. Programmed: For the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance, the word "programmed" shall refer to a public facility which has been formally scheduled for construction within the following ten years. Such formal scheduling may be in terms of an approved capital improvements program, an officially adopted thoroughfare, public utilities or community facilities plan specifying the approximate date of construction of the facility, or a similar official plan or program. 265. Projecting sign: A sign that is attached to and projects at an angle and extends more than 15 inches from the face of the wall of a building. 266. Property ownership: For purposes of the occupancy requirements of this ordinance, the owner who resides on the lot shall be: a. An individual who owns at least a 50% interest in the lot by deeded title and who resides on the lot as his or her primary residence; or b. An individual who owns at least a 50% interest in a corporation, a limited liability company, or a similar legal entity that owns a 100% interest in the lot by deeded title and who resides on the lot as his or her primary residence; or c. An individual who is a beneficiary of a trust that owns a 100% interest in the lot by deeded title and who resides on the lot as his or her primary residence. 267. Public utility: A public utility is an activity, or a building housing such an activity, which operates to serve the community as a whole, or a portion of the community, which is publicly run or subject to special government controls and which is overseen by the State Corporation Commission. 268. Public: Any land, structure or building owned, used or maintained by the City government, or a regional authority of which the City is a member, or their agencies. 269. Radio frequency engineer: means a professional engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia with appropriate documented expertise in radio frequency engineering. 270. Raising: Providing vertical clearance under tree canopy by using appropriate pruning techniques. 271. Re-facing: The replacement of a sign face, regardless of change in copy, of equal size to the original, without altering the sign box, sign frame or sign structure. 272. Reach: Longitudinal segments of a river or stream, which will be affected by the placement of an obstruction in a floodway or floodway fringe. 273. Real estate sign: A temporary sign used to offer property for sale, lease, rent and/or development or to advertise an open house. 274. Reconstruction: Any activity designed to rebuild entirely, or partially, a structure. 275. Recreation facility, active: A field, court building or other structure designed for a specific range of sports or other physical activities, including but not limited to ball fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, gyms and other indoor athletic facilities and playground equipment. 276. Recreation facility, passive: An open field, woods, trail or other public open space that may be used for a wide range of activities, including, but not limited to hiking, biking, picnicking or playing a variety of different sports. Passive recreation facilities may include picnic tables, water fountains and surfaced trails, but do not include buildings or structures devoted to limited ranges of sports activities. 277. Recreational vehicle: A vehicle which is: 1. Built on a single chassis; 2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and, 4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use. 278. Regulatory flood protection level: That level delineated by the 100-year flood. 279. Rehabilitation: Any activity designed to place a structure into a usable condition with or without architectural change. 280. Religious Institution: A church, synagogue, temple, mosque, convent, monastery or other place of worship 281. Related People: Related individuals include people who are related by blood, are married to each other or are in a substantially similar relationship, and children under their care. 282. Renovation: Any activity relating to the updating and/or the modernization of an older structure involving architectural change. 283. Repairs in like material and like design: Any work or all work involving the replacement of existing material with equivalent material for the purpose of maintenance, but not including any addition, change or modification in construction design. 284. Residence: 1. A building or part of a building containing dwelling units or rooming units, including single-household or two-household houses, multiple dwellings, boarding or rooming houses or apartment hotels. Residences do not include the following:  a. Such transient accommodations as transient hotels, motels, tourist cabins or trailer courts.  b. Dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses, monasteries or convents.  c. In a mixed building, that part of the building used for any nonresidential uses, except accessory to residential uses. 2. For the purposes of determining setback and/or height requirements for IN-1 District, a residence shall not include any properties owned, leased, or used by the institution regardless of zoning or land use. 285. Residence, single-household: A building containing only one dwelling unit. 286. Residential: Pertaining to one or more residences. 287. Residential district: Any district whose designation begins with the letter "R". 288. Residential street: any local City street where the majority of land use on one or both sides of the street within the block is residential. 289. Restoration: Any or all work connected with the returning to or restoring of a building, or part of any building, to its original condition through the use of original or nearly original materials. 290. Retail establishment: A commercial enterprise that provides a combination of goods and/or services directly to the consumer, where the principal use is providing goods that are available for immediate small quantity purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser. 291. Riding stable: Any zoning lot used or designed for the boarding, breeding or care of horses or ponies, other than for farming or agricultural purposes, either with or without instruction in riding. 292. Riprap: A permanent, large, loose angular stone generally used for erosion and sediment control in concentrated high velocity flow areas. 293. Roof sign: A sign installed or constructed upon or above a roof. 294. Rooming house: A dwelling consisting of one single building in which, for compensation, lodging or meals, or both, are furnished to transient or non-transient guests. A rooming house shall not be deemed a home occupation. 295. Runway: A specified area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft. 296. Sanitary or solid waste management facility, private: A sanitary or solid waste management facility that is not a public sanitary or solid waste management facility, and which is owned and operated by a private entity for the purpose of handling sanitary or solid waste generated only by such private entity. 297. Sanitary or solid waste management facility, public: A sanitary or solid waste management facility owned or operated by or on behalf of the City of Lynchburg or a regional solid waste management authority of which the City of Lynchburg is a member. 298. Sanitary or solid waste management facility: Any facility or zoning lot used for: (i) the disposal of solid waste materials by abandonment, discarding, dumping, reduction, burial, incineration or any other means, including accessory uses such as recycling, cogeneration, and methane recovery, or (ii) a transfer station for solid waste storage or collection at which solid waste is transferred from collection vehicles to haulage vehicles, including but not limited to trucks, trains, and tandem trailers, for transportation to a central solid waste management facility for disposal or resource recovery. This definition does not include transportable waste receptacles of commercial solid waste generated by establishments engaged in business operations other than manufacturing. This category includes, but is not limited to, solid waste resulting from the operation of stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers, motels, hotels, multiple residences, picnic grounds and day-use recreation areas. This definition also does not include recycling bins. 299. School: An institution, including kindergartens providing full-time day instruction and a course of study that meets the requirements of the laws of the State of Virginia. 300. Screening: A method of visually shielding or obscuring items such as a structure, receptacle, parking area, equipment, or stormwater management pond by densely planted landscaping, or a combination of landscaping, berms, solid fences and/or walls. 301. Service station: See Automobile service station. 302. Setback: See building line. 303. Shade tree: Deciduous tree that grows to be more than 30 feet at maturity and planted chiefly to provide shade from sunlight. 304. Shallow flooding area: A special flood hazard area with the base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 305. Shrub, large: A shrub with a minimum height of three feet at planting. 306. Shrub medium: A shrub with a minimum height of two feet at planting. 307. Shrub small: A shrub with a minimum height of one foot at planting. 308. Shrub: A woody plant deciduous or evergreen that generally exhibits several erect, spreading stems with a bushy appearance growing to a height of no more than 15 feet. 309. Sign base: The area below any writing, pictorial representation, emblem or any other figure of similar character on a sign face. This shall include solid bases, poles, supports, uprights, skirts and/or enclosures. 310. Sign box: A structure that encloses the sign face(s) and any internal illumination. 311. Sign face: The area or display surface used for the message, not including the sign frame or sign structure. 312. Sign frame: The enclosure and/or embellishment that surround the sign face. 313. Sign structure: An assembly of material used to support a sign face and/or sign frame. 314. Sign: Any writing (including letter, word or numeral), pictorial representation (including illustration or decoration), emblem (including device, symbol, logo, or trademark) or any other figure or graphic of similar character for the purpose of communicating information to the public which is: 1. Attached to or painted on a structure, or in any other manner represented on a building, other structure or motor vehicle; 2. Used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise; 3. Visible from the outside of a building. A sign shall include writing, pictorial representation, emblem or any other figure of similar character within a building when located less than 12 inches away from the inside face of an exterior window pane; and 4. Accessory to the permitted uses in the zoning district. 315. Slope: The deviation of a surface from the horizontal. 316. Solid waste: Any discarded material, including, but not limited to, garbage, trash, refuse, junk, debris, leaves, brush, land clearing debris, demolition materials, ash, sludge, spoil, used or waste oil, and machinery or vehicles or parts thereof. 317. Stable, riding: See Riding stable. 318. Standard project flood limit (SPFL): That portion of land inside the floodplain that would be required to carry 40 percent to 60 percent of the maximum probable flood, and normally could be expected to occur at a 500-year frequency. 319. Start of construction: The date the Building Permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of the property accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 320. State: The Commonwealth of Virginia. 321. Stealth: Any tower or telecommunications facility that is designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of camouflage or other appropriate landscaping or construction techniques. 322. Story: That part of a building between the surface of a floor (whether or not counted for purposes of computing floor area ratio) and the ceiling immediately above. However, a cellar is not a story. 323. Streamer: Any long narrow strip of cloth, paper, plastic or other material. 324. Street line: A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and separating the street from abutting property or lots. If, on the master plan of streets and highways duly adopted by the City, a street is scheduled for future widening, the proposed right-of-way line shown on the master plan shall be the street line. 325. Street width: The distance between street lines, measured at right angles to the center line of the street. 326. Street, center line of: A line established as a center line of a street by any state, City or other official agency or governing body having jurisdiction thereof and shown as such on an officially adopted or legally recorded map. If there is no official center line of a street, the center line shall be a line lying midway between the street or right-of-way lines thereof. Where street lines are indeterminate and a pavement or a traveled way exists, the center line shall be established by the City Engineer or, in the absence of a determination by the department of public works, shall be assumed to be a line midway between the edges of such pavement or traveled way. 327. Street: A street, highway, avenue, lane, marginal access street, service drive, alley, bridge, viaduct, or any segment thereof, lying within a public right-of-way at least 20 feet in width. 328. Structural engineer: A structural engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 329. Structure: 1. Any object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by any person, including but not limited to buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, poles and electric lines of overhead transmission routes, and flag poles. 2. For purposes of floodplain regulation, anything constructed, set, placed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, manufactured homes and other similar items which shall be anchored and floodproofed within the flood plain. 330. Subdivision: The division of any tract or parcel of land, including frontage along an existing street or highway, into two or more zoning lots; or any improvement of land by two or more principal buildings for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of building development for rental, lease or sale, which may include changes in street or lot lines; provided, however, that this definition of a subdivision shall not include the divisions of land into ten acres or more for agricultural uses. 331. Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damaged occurred. 332. Substantial improvement: 1. For purposes of the historic district, any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:  a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or  b. Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 2. For purposes of floodplain regulation,  a. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:   i. before the improvement or repair is started; or   ii. if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.  b. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:   i. any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or   ii. any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic places or a state inventory of historic places.  c. The repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads in a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced. 333. Surface area of sign: The entire area of the sign within a single continuous perimeter including the extreme limits of writing, pictorial representation, emblem, figure, graphic, or any figure of similar character. The sign base, box, frame, and/or structure shall not be considered the surface area of a sign unless there is writing or internal illumination on such sign components. For the purpose of computing, the surface area of a double-faced sign or a V-type sign shall be considered a single structure; provided, that the interior angle of the V-type sign does not exceed 45 degrees. 334. Swimming pool, commercial: A swimming pool and/or wading pool, including buildings necessary or incidental thereto, open to the general public and operated for profit. 335. Swimming pool, community: A swimming pool and/or wading pool, including buildings necessary or incidental thereto, operated by members of more than two families for the benefit of such group and not open to the general public, whether incorporated or unincorporated, whether organized as a club or cooperative or association, providing that it is not organized for profit and that the right to use said pool is restricted to such families and their guests. A swimming pool and/or wading pool operated as part of a multiple dwelling is also a community swimming pool, providing that it is not operated for profit, and that the right to use said pool is restricted to tenants of the multiple dwelling and their guests. 336. Swimming pool, private: See private recreational facilities. 337. Telecommunications facilities: means any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, and any other equipment associated with the transmission or reception of communications (other than radio or television broadcast communications) which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. The term telecommunications facilities shall not include: 1. Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less which is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; or 2. Any satellite earth station antenna one meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category; or 3. Any federally-licensed amateur radio station operators. 338. Temporary sign: A sign designed or intended to be displayed for a limited period of time as indicated in the Zoning Ordinance. 339. Thrift store: A store selling used items, particularly clothing for the benefit of a charitable organization. 340. Topping: An inappropriate practice of making heading cuts to plants through a stem more than two years old that drastically reduces tree height, destroys tree architecture and results in discoloration, decay of the cut stem, or death of the tree. 341. Tourist home or bed and breakfast: A dwelling, occupied as such, in which sleeping accommodations in less than six rooms with not more than four persons per room are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation, under the management of the occupants of that dwelling for dwelling purposes. A tourist home or bed and breakfast shall not be deemed a home occupation. 342. Tower owner: means the person that owns or controls a telecommunications tower. 343. Tower: means a self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade that supports telecommunications facilities. The term tower shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the FCC. 344. Townhouse: One of a series of from three to nine attached dwelling units separated from one another by common vertical walls with no openings; provided, that the maximum density permitted hereunder shall not be exceeded. 345. Trailer: A residence, house car, camp car or any portable or mobile vehicle on wheels, skids or rollers, not structurally anchored to a foundation, either self-propelled or propelled by an attached vehicle, animal, person or other propelling apparatus, which is used or may be used for residential, commercial, recreational, hauling or storage purposes. 346. Transitional surfaces: Imaginary surfaces for airport operations, whose design standards are referenced in section 35.2-57.3, which extend outward perpendicular to the runway centerline sloping from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. 347. Tree, small deciduous. A small deciduous tree shall be of a species having an average minimum mature crown spread of greater than 12 feet. A minimum caliper of at least one and three-fourths inches at the time of planting shall be required. 348. Unified and coordinated building mounted signs: Signs that are similar in construction technique, but not including font, or color. 349. Unified Ownership or Control: The interest in title to a unit of land legally or beneficially held or controlled by one or more individual persons or entities related by a common business organization or other type of organization, as indicated by the fact that all land abutting such unit is owned or controlled by persons or entities who do not differ to any extent in identity or interest held. 350. Use, accessory: See accessory use. 351. Use: 1. Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied. 2. Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land. 3. The term "permitted use," or its equivalent, shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use. 352. Utility line, distribution: A utility line that has the primary purpose of distributing services within easements or rights-of-way and connecting to service utility lines. 353. Utility line, service: A utility line providing a connection between a utility distribution line and the end user. 354. Utility line, transmission: A utility line intended to convey high capacities of services through the community and between communities from the source of the services (treatment or generation plant) to a substation connecting to the distribution system. 355. Wall plane projections: An architectural feature or wall jutting out at least three feet from the primary plane of a building wall. 356. Water feature: A stormwater management structural measure such as a stormwater retention pond, bio-retention, forebay, or landscape garden pond that is wet permanently or intermittently during rain events and contains landscaping that is hydric or water tolerant. 357. Water surface profiles: The elevations in relation to the mean sea level expected to be reached by floods of various magnitudes and frequencies at pertinent points along a stream. 358. Watercourse: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 359. Window sign: A sign attached to, applied directly to, or located within 12 inches from a door or window. 360. Yard Sale: Permitted in Zoning Districts used for residential purposes provided the following is adhered to: 1. A total of two sales permitted per calendar year per street address. 2. A sale shall not exceed two consecutive days. 3. Sale shall consist primarily of those personal items accumulated and used by the occupant of the premises. 4. There shall be a minimum interval of four months between sales. 5. One sign not exceeding three square feet in area will be permitted on premises the day of the sale and shall be promptly removed at end of each sale day. 6. Signs advertising a sale are prohibited on street rights-of-way. 7. Permitted sale shall not create adverse conditions such as noise, nor impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 361. Yard, front: The area between the front lot line and the front of the building and extending from the front corners of the building to the side property lines. 362. Yard, rear: An area between the rear of the building and the rear property line and extending from the rear corners of the building to the side property lines. 363. Yard, side: The area between the side of a building and the side property lines. 364. Zone, airport: For purposes of the airport overlay district, all areas, generally described in three dimensions by reference to ground elevation, vertical distances from the ground elevation, horizontal distances from the runway centerline and the primary and horizontal surfaces, with the zone floor set at specific vertical limits by the surfaces. 365. Zoning district: The base or overlay zoning designation assigned to each parcel of land within the City of Lynchburg. 366. Zoning maps: Maps designating the adopted base and overlay zoning district designations for each parcel of land within the City of Lynchburg.  
APPENDIX A: - TABLE OF AUTHORIZED LAND USES 
    Green highlight indicates use was allowed in one of two consolidated districts. Blue highlight indicates a new use in a district. 
Land Use LBCS # Description RC R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-3 B-4 B-5 IN-1 IN-2 I-1 I-2 I-3 Residence or Accommodation Functions 1000 Homes, apartments, housing for the elderly, and hotels   Detached Units 1110S    single-household detached 1111S Typical single-household dwelling P P P P P P P C P    single-household semi-detached 1122S One of two dwellings separated by a party wall, on abutting lots P P C P    single-household attached (townhouse) 1140S Each unit on a separate lot; fire wall may protrude from roof or roofs may be staggered C P C C P C P    modular home 1114S A prefabricated home without axles or frames (see definitions) P P P P P P P C P    manufactured home 1115S A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built after 1978 on a permanent chasis, and designed for use with or without a permanenent foundation when connected to the required utilities (see definitions) C C C    manufactured home community 1116S Includes manufactured home subdivision and manufactured home parks with 5 or more lots or sites (see definitions) C C C C C    Attached Units 1120S   Two-household (duplex) 1121S A building located on one zoning lot containing not more than two dwelling units P P C C C P   Multi-household structures (see district regulations for limitations) 1200S Includes triplexes, four-plexes, and other multi-household dwellings P C C P C P    Mixed-use residential structures (see district regulations for limitations 1201S Typically commercial uses on lower floors and residential uses on upper floors P   Housing Services 1200 Housing and custodial services for those who cannot care for themselves. Includes nursing and retirement homes, congregate living, assisted and continuing care living, but excludes rehab uses in LBCS #6520) C C C C P P P P P P Hotels, Motels, or Other Accommodation Services 1300 Lodging and short-term accommodation for travelers   Bed and Breakfast and Tourist Homes 1310 Guest rooms in a private home or accessory building to a private home C C C C C P P P P P   Rooming and boarding 1320 Dormitory, fraternity or sorority house or other specific group of members    boarding house 1321 Transient or non-transient lodging that may include meals and is owner occupied C C C C P P P P P    rooming house 1322 Transient or non-transient lodging that may include meals C C P P P P P    dormitory, sorority or fraternity house 1323 Allowed only as accessory uses to and owned by a college or university C C C C C C C C P P   Hotel, motel, or tourist court 1330 Hotels that do not have gambling services; includes extended-stay hotels P P P P C   Other traveler accommodations 1350 Youth hostels and similar short-term lodging General Sales or Services 2000 Comprises the vast majority of establishments associated with commercial land use Retail Sales or Service and Repair 2100 Establishments with displays of merchandise sold to the general public and other businesses, or after-sales services such as repair. Auctions are allowed where sales of items to be auctioned are allowed pursuant to applicable district regulations.   Automobile sales or service establishment 2110 Motor vehicle and parts dealers including repair and maintenance    car, motorcycle, manufactured homes or RV dealer 2111-
2113 New or used automobiles, light trucks, motorcycles, RV's, manufactured homes, and buses P P    bicycles 2113b New or used bicycle sales, rental and repair P P P P P    boat or marine craft dealer 2114 New or used boats sales, rental and related repair services P P P    parts, accessories, or tires 2115 Automotive parts and supply stores, automotive stereo stores. P P P P    gasoline service 2116 Gas stations with or without convenience stores or food marts, excludes truck stops, light auto repair, and heavy auto repair P C P P C    automotive repair and maintenance 2117 Repair garages, body and paint shops, oil change, car wash     light auto repair (automobile service station) 2117a Oil change, light auto repair and car wash. May include gasoline and other retail sales. C C P P P P     heavy auto repair 2117b Auto repair, paint and body shops. May include gasoline and other retail sales. C P P P P    truck stop 2118 Retailing fuels primarily to trucks or in combination with activities such as providing repair or food services   Heavy consumer goods sales or service 2120 Heavy or durable goods sales or services    furniture or home furnishings, hardware, home center, lawn and garden supplies, department store, warehouse club or superstore, electronics and appliances 2121-
2125 Furniture, flooring, bedding stores; home building and repair supplies, painting supplies, farm goods, lighting supply, window treatment; nursery and garden products predominantly grown elsewhere, power equipment sales or services; large variety stores; household-type appliances, television, stereos, including repair shops and cell phone stores. P P P P    lumber yard and building materials; heating and plumbing equipment; heavy equipment 2126-
2128 Lumber yards and heavy building materials; heating and plumbing equipment retailers; for heating and plumbing contractors who install or service, use the appropriate construction category; construction equipment and vehicles; includes authorized storage (3650) P P P P   Durable consumer goods sales and service 2130 Wide range of product lines such as apparel, appliances, hardware, jewelry, etc.    computer and software 2131 Computers and prepackaged software including repair, support, and training P P P P    camera and photographic supplies; clothing, jewelry, luggage, shoes, clocks, sewing; sporting goods, toy and hobby, and musical instruments; mixed media, school and office supplies 2132-
2135 Primarily retail cameras and photographic supplies or retail with repair and film developing; clothing (including shoe repair and tailoring, sporting goods, toys, musical instruments, kitchen goods, books, magazines, music, videos, stationary, greeting cards, seasonal decorations, office and school supplies. P P P P P P   Consumer goods, other 2140 Establishments that retail merchandise (except groceries or health items) not included in preceding codes    florist, art supplies, tobacco products 2141-
2143 Florists, art supplies and art dealers, frame shops, tobacco products P P P P P    art galleries 2142b Excludes art supply sales and retail framing services C C P P P P P P P    mail order or direct selling establishment 2144 Retailing other than through locations where shoppers physically visit P P P P P    antique shop 2145 Antique shops, (excludes flea markets, thrift stores and pawn shops) P P P P P    flea markets and thrift stores 2145b Flea markets, consignment shops and thrift stores P P P P   Grocery, food, beverage, dairy 2150 Retail food and beverage merchandise from fixed point-of-sale locations   grocery store, supermarket, or bakery, convenience store, specialty food stores 2151-
2154 Included are grocery stores, convenience stores, meat, seafood and produce markets, coffee, confections, variety goods and general stores, and delicatessens. Excludes stores with fuel pumps (see 2116 for fuel sales) P P P P P   beer, wine, and liquor store 2155 P P P P P   Health and personal care 2160 Retail prescription or nonprescription drugs; retail cosmetics, perfumes, toiletries; prescription or nonprescription eyeglasses; prescription or nonprescription health and convalescent aids; medical devices, retail food supplement products such as vitamins, nutrition supplements, and body enhancing supplements P P P P P   Markets for farm produce or crafts 2199 Markets and truck gardens. Note that limited to goods produced on site in the RC district. P C C P P Finance and Insurance 2200   Bank, credit union, or savings institution 2210 Central banking functions P P P P P   Credit and finance businesses 2220    credit card and other financing 2221 Credit card, sales financing, unsecured consumer lending, real estate credit, mortgages, international trade financing P P P P P    pawn shops 2222 P P P P    short-term loans 2223 Pay-day lenders and other businesses providing loans with terms of 45 days or less P P P P    precious metal buyers 2224 Businesses providing cash for gold and other precious metals or gems (excludes retail jewelers) P P P P   Investment banking, securities, and brokerages; insurance; fund, trust, or other financial establishment 2230-
2250 Securities underwriting, brokering, exchange services, managing portfolios; Insurance underwriting, selling insurance; manage assets on behalf of shareholders or beneficiaries P P P P P Real Estate, Rental and Leasing 2300 Rent, lease or occasionally sell assets   Real estate services 2310 Sell or lease real estate such as buildings, manufactured home sites and vacant lots; includes real estate appraisers and realtor offices P P P P P   Property management services 2320 Manage real property for others P P   Rental and leasing 2330 Rent tangible goods such as consumer goods and mechanical equipment to customers; excludes establishment primarily renting equipment with operators    vehicles 2331
&
2332 Lease passenger cars, trucks, trailers, RVs, buses and aircraft; drivers not provided C P P    recreational goods rental 2333 Rent skis, canoes, bicycles, sailboats, motorcycles P P P    commercial, industrial or consumer machinery and equipment rental 2334-
2335 Rent or lease: 
a) office machinery and equipment; heavy equipment without operators used for construction, well-drilling; other machinery and equipment for uses such as manufacturing or telecommunications; operators not included (note: see 2337 for heavy equipment leasing) 
b) personal and household-type goods and a range of equipment geared toward consumers P P P P    heavy equipment rental 2337 Includes construction vehicles with gross weights exceeding 26,000 pounds and agricultural vehicles P P Business, Professional, Scientific, and Technical 2400 Perform professional, scientific, and technical services   Professional services 2410 Services provided depend on worker skills and knowledge rather than equipment    Professional offices 2411-
2414 Title abstract, lawyers, notaries, accountants, bookkeeping, payroll services, architects, engineers, surveyors, graphic design, interior design and industrial design P P P P P    consulting services (management, environmental technical) 2415 Advise and assist businesses on management, scientific, and technological issues P P P P P P    scientific research and development services 2416 Conduct research or analyze in the physical, engineering, cognitive, or life sciences in laboratories or offices. P P P P P P    Advertising, media and photography services 2417 Includes advertising, marketing and public relations agencies, photographic studios and photographic services. P P P P P    veterinary services 2418 Veterinary medicine, testing services for veterinary practitioners C P P P    other professional offices 2419,
6810,
6820 Includes advertising and media services intellectual property rights, franchising, labor, political or business organizations, and uses with similar impacts P P P P P   Administrative services 2420 Typical office establishments in any business area. Use as a default category for most office buildings (nursing staffing)    office administrative services 2421 Office administration such as billing, record keeping, personnel, organizational planning P P P P P P    facilities support services 2422 Provide operating staff for support services within a client's facilities, including janitorial, security, laundry services, etc. P P P P P P    employment agency 2423a Provide employee placement, temporary help P P P P P    hiring hall 2423b Place of assembly for the registration or assignment of employment P P    copy center, private mail center, other business support services 2424 Provide document preparation, telephone answering, telemarketing, court reporting, steno typing, FAX, internet access, small signs and banners P P P P P P    collection agency 2425 Collect payments, compile credit information, repossess tangible assets P P P P P   Travel arrangement and reservation services 2430 Promote or sell travel, includes convention and visitors' bureaus P P P P P   Investigation and security services 2440 Provide detective, guard and patrol services, picking up and delivery of money, selling of security systems, remote monitoring of security systems, locksmiths P P P P   Services to buildings and dwellings 2450 Provide pest control, janitorial services, landscaping, carpet cleaning, etc. (2451-2454) P P    packing, crating 2455 P P P P Food Services 2500 Prepare meals, snacks, and beverages   Restaurants, cafeterias, snack bars & catering 2510-
2530
&
2560 Provide food and drinks to patrons - see district specific use regulations for limitations. Includes banquet, assembly and reception halls. See district standards. P P P P P C   Mobile food services 2550 Prepare and serve meals and snacks for immediate consumption from motorized vehicles P P P P P P P   Food service contractor and vending machine operators 2570
&
2580 Provide food services at institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations based on contracts. Retail merchandise through vending machines that they service P P P P P Personal Services 2600 Category for personal service establishments not classified elsewhere such as bail bonding, wedding planning, psychic services, etc.   Personal care 2610 Hair, nail, and skin care and related personal care, barbers, beauty shops, dieting and weight loss, tanning, hair removal, hair weaving, ear piercing and similar services P P P P P   Dry cleaning and laundry 2620    laundromat and dry cleaning 2621
&
2622 Includes Laundromats, dry cleaners, diaper services as well as other commercial laundry services P P P P P    linen and uniform supply 2623 P P P P   Photofinishing 2630 Primarily engaged in developing film or making slides, etc. P P P P P   Parking lot and parking garage 2640 See district standards C C P P P P P P P P   Special Services 2650    licensed massage therapist 2651 P P P P P    tattoo parlor 2652 Tattoos by a licensed professional P P P P    adult retail establishment 2653 Stores primarily selling adult oriented products, including books, videos, magazines, toys, lingerie and other sexually-oriented goods P P P P Pet and Animal Sales or Service (except Veterinary) 2700 Retails pets and other animals (except for farming purposes) and pet supplies, grooming, training, and care taking   Pet or pet supply store 2710 Retail pets, pet foods, pet supplies P P P P   Animal and pet services and kennels 2720 Boarding, grooming, sitting, and training (except veterinary and horse boarding)    animal services 2721 grooming and training P P P P    animal boarding 2722 sitting and boarding C P P    pet cemetery 2723 C C C C C P P P Manufacturing and Wholesale Trade 3000 When captive services such as accounting are provided by a separate establishment, they are classified in the appropriate function code and not in manufacturing Foods, Textiles, and Related Products 3100 Produce food, tobacco, textiles, and leather   Food and beverages 3110 Includes bakery and candy establishments that produce for later consumption; ice manufacturing; dairies; bottling plants; and peanut and coffee roasting P P P P P   Tobacco manufacturing 3120 P P   Textiles, leather and leather substitute products 3130
&
140 Textile mills, apparel manufacturers and canvas making; dying plants and dry cleaning plants; leather and leather substitutes such as rubber footwear (excluding leather tanning) P P P P P Wood, Paper, and Printing Products 3200   Wood products 3210 Except furniture P P   Paper and printing materials 3220 Manufactures paper and offer printing-related products P P Furniture and related products 3230 Includes manufacture and repair of furniture, upholstery, mattresses, window blinds, window shades, awnings cabinets, fixtures P P P P P Chemicals, and Metals, Machinery, and Electronics Manufacturing 3300 Transform or refine chemicals or metals, and manufacture products from chemicals or metals   Petroleum products 3310 Transform crude petroleum into usable products    liquid petroleum gas storage/sales 3311 This category addresses wholesale services and does not apply to incidental sales for home use P   Chemicals, plastic and rubber products; non-metallic mineral products, primary metal manufacturing; transportation equipment manufacture 3320-
3340
&
3370 Manufacture inorganic chemicals, plastic or rubber products, adhesives, pharmaceuticals, wax products, insulation, bricks, ceramics, glass, cement, concrete, statuary, stone products, basic metal products, such as bars, rods, wires, and castings or finished products; produce equipment for transporting people and goods P P   Machinery, electrical equipment, appliance, and components manufacturing 3350
&
3360 Make machinery for particular applications, such as construction, ventilation, heating and cooling; manufacture computers, communication equipment, lighting equipment, batteries, motors, appliances, household goods and medical equipment P P P   Transportation equipment and automobiles 3370 Produce equipment for transporting people and goods. Includes tire retreading and rebuilding. Although transportation equipment is a type of machinery, assembly tends to be distinct from the production processes common in the machinery manufacturing subsector, so these establishments are classified separately. P P Miscellaneous Manufacturing 3400 Use for manufacturing establishments not classified elsewhere   Jewelry and silverware, sporting goods, toys, games and office supplies 3410-
3430 Jewelry, silverware, sporting goods, toys, musical instruments, office supplies, including inks. Excludes paper mills and businesses primarily engaged in on-premises retail sales P P P   Signs 3440 Manufacturing of signs to be erected or installed (excludes banner printing) P P P P P   Blacksmith 3450 Creation of objects from wrought iron steel, such as gates, railings, furniture, and other functional and decorative items P P P P   Wholesale Trade Establishment 3500 Normally operate from a warehouse or office, selling or arranging the purchase of goods to other businesses P P P P Warehousing and Storage Services 3600 Operate warehouse and storage facilities for general merchandise, refrigerated goods   Office and warehousing 3610 Storage of goods related to on-site office or retail use P P P P P P   Warehousing 3620 Storage of goods as the principal use; includes mini-warehouses, self-storage facilities and moving companies P P P P   Tank farm 3630 An area used for bulk storage of oil and other petrochemicals in above ground tanks   Underground Petroleum Storage 3640 An area used for bulk storage of oil and other petrochemicals in underground tanks P Transportation, Communication, Information, and Utilities 4000 Transportation Services 4100 Serve passengers and cargo   Air transportation 4110 Provide transportation for passengers or cargo using aircraft (see section 35.2-72.10 for rules related to heliports and helipads) C P P   Rail transportation 4120 Provide passenger and freight transportation and rail transportation support; use this category for establishments providing both transportation and support services, otherwise use the more specific subcategory    rail passenger transportation 4121 Passenger stations only P P P P P P    rail freight transportation 4122 Rail yards for freight systems; excludes accessory sidings allowed within the I-2 and I-3 districts    rail transportation support establishment 4123 Provide specialized services such as repair, maintenance, loading and unloading   Road, ground passenger, and transit transportation 4130 Urban transit systems, charter and school bus transportation, taxis    local transit systems-bus, special needs, sightseeing, taxi and limousine services 4133-
4134
&
4136-
4137 Single-mode local and non-local transit systems other than rail; excludes transit stops, which are allowed in all districts. Includes sightseeing, taxi and limousine services P P P P P    school and employee bus transportation 4135 Maintain and dispatch buses and other motor vehicles to transport pupils or employees P P P    towing and other road and ground services 4138 Tow vehicles P P P P   Truck and freight transportation services 4140 Provide over-the-road transportation of cargo using motor vehicles and temporary storage C C P P   Marine and water transportation 4150 Provide transportation of passengers and cargo using watercraft    marine and sightseeing transportation 4151 Provide water transportation, including scenic and sightseeing, for passengers P    Pipeline transportation 4170 Use transmission lines to transport products, such as crude oil or natural gas   Postal services 4180 Operate the national postal service, including establishments that sort, route, and deliver on a contract basis    national post office 4181 P P P P P    retail courier and package delivery 4182 Retail courier, package drop-off and mail services P P P P P P P   Courier and messenger services 4190 Provide air, surface, or combined courier delivery services of Parcels and messages (excludes retail package drop-off and local courier services) P P P P   Publishing 4210
&
4221 Issue copies of works for which they usually possess copyright, including printing plants, motion picture and audio publishing. Includes newspaper publishing, greeting card printing and lithography P P P P P   Motion pictures and sound recording 4220 Produce and distribute motion pictures and sound recordings (includes indoor movie but excludes drive-in movie theaters) P P P P P P P   Telecommunications and broadcasting 4230 Provide point-to-point communications; if multiple services are shared between the same facilities    radio and television broadcasting 4231,
4232
&
4241 Operate broadcasting studios and facilities for over the air, cable or satellite delivery of radio and television programs P P P P P P P  ;ne; wireless telecommunications transmission 4233 Operate, maintain or provide access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound or video, see section 35.2-73 for telecommunications towers C C C C C P P P P P P P P    telephone and other wired telecommunications 4234 Operate telephone networks - excludes switching stations P P P P P P P P P P P P P    Telecommunications switching stations/exchanges 4239 Telecommunications switching stations and exchanges with no on-site employees C C C C C C C C C C P C P P   Information services and data processing and management industries 4240 News syndicates and information data processing and management services    library or archive 4242 Provide library or archive services C C P P P P P P P P P P    news syndicate 4243 Supply information such as news reports, articles, pictures and features to the news media P P P P P P    data processing and management, hosting and related services 4244 Web hosting, computer data storage, optical scanning, computer input preparation, microfilm imaging P P P P P P P P Utilities and Utility Services 4300 Provide utility services such as electric power, gas, water and sewage removal. Note that City-owned utilities are not subject to zoning district use standards   Public Utilities Services, Major 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes transmission lines for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission of a regional nature and normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead transmission lines are included in this definition. C C C C C C C C C C C C P P Public Utilities Services, Minor 4315,
4329,
4339,
4349 Includes distribution or collection lines and appurtenances for water, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, natural gas or telecommunications services regulated by the State Corporation Commission that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations, and wireless communication antennas attached to existing buildings or structures. P P P P P P P P P P P P P P   Electric power 4310 Provide electric power generation, transmission, control, and distribution    power generation 4315 C C C    electric substations 4316 C C C C C C C C C C P P P P   Water treatment plants and utility facilities 4331-
4333 Water treatment plants, pumping stations and lift stations C C C C C C C C C C P P P P   Wastewater treatment plants 4348 C C   Solid waste, and related services 4340 Collect, treat, and dispose of waste materials    hazardous waste processing, storage, treatment or disposal 4341
&
4342 Operate treatment and disposal facilities for hazardous waste, combine, collect, or haul hazardous waste materials, including businesses cleaning contaminated buildings, soil or groundwater    solid waste collection, combustion, landfills or separation/sorting of recyclable materials from non-hazardous waste streams 4343-
4347 Collect or haul hazardous waste, non-hazardous waste, or recyclable materials, operate waste transfer stations; landfill, incineration or composing of non-hazardous solid waste, recycling facilities; septic tank installation and maintenance C    recycling collection centers 4349 Drop-off facilities for the collection of recycled goods P P P P P Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation 5000 Performing Arts or Supporting Establishments 5100 Produce or organize and promote live presentations, excludes nightclubs   Theater, dance or music establishment 5110
&
5160 Companies, groups, or theaters that produce theatrical presentations, dance, dinner theaters, and live musical entertainment; includes facilities for independent artists and performers P P P P P   Motion picture viewing and exhibition services 5111 Operate movie theaters (excluding drive-ins), film festival exhibitions P P P P   Promoter of sports, performing arts, similar events and management services 5140-
5150 Organize, promote, and manage performances and events; agents representing artists, athletes and entertainers P P P P P P P   Indoor auditorium or arena 5170 Indoor auditoriums, arenas, conference centers, or multipurpose facilities C C C C C C C   Outdoor auditorium/arenas 5180 Outdoor arenas and theaters C C C C C C Museums and Other Special Purpose Recreational Institutions 5200 Public and private museums, historical sites, and similar establishments C C C P P P P P P P Amusement, Sports, or Recreation Establishment 5300 Operate facilities offering activities and provide services   Amusement or theme park establishment 5310 Operate a variety of attractions such as mechanical rides, water rides, games C C C C Commercial Amusements 5320,
5380,
5390 Operate arcades and other commercial amusements as defined herein P C P P   Country Club 5340
&
6830 Operate private country clubs, with tennis courts and golf courses along with dining facilities and other recreational facilities; includes civic, social and fraternal organizations without dwellings C C C C P P P P P Fitness, recreational sports, gym, athletic club 5370 Operate fitness and recreational sports facilities or provide services for fitness or recreational sports teams, clubs, or individual activities    fitness and recreational sports center 5371 Aerobic dance or exercise center, gymnasium, physical fitness center, health and athletic club, indoor handball, racquetball, volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities conducted inside a building C C P P P P P C C    outdoor recreation 5372,
5373
&
5374 Includes golf courses, outdoor volleyball, tennis, or swimming facilities, recreational courts, recreational day camp and horseback riding. Excludes automobile, dog and horse racing facilities. May include lighted outdoor facilities. C C C C C C C P P    shooting ranges, indoor 5375 C C C C C C    shooting ranges, outdoor 5376 C Camps, Camping, and Related Establishments 5400 Operate sites to accommodate campers and their equipment, provide overnight recreational camps, may provide cabins, food services, washrooms, spaces for overnight parking or recreational vehicles C C Natural and other Recreational Parks 5500 All parks without special economic functions, other than limited concessions P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Education, Public Administration, Health Care, snd Other Institutions 6000 Note that City-owned facilities are not subject to zoning district use standards Educational Services 6100 Offer teaching and learning   Nursery or preschool 6110 See district standards P P P P P P P P P P   Grade school 6120 Comprises all public, private, and specialty schools between the preschool and university level; includes adult education services not addressed elsewhere. See district standards P P P P P P P P P P   College or university 6130 See district standards P P P P P P P P P P   Technical, trade, or other specialty school 6140
&
6568 Offer vocational and technical training as well as vocational rehabilitation services    general technical schools 6141-
6143,
6145,
6147 Offer courses in office procedures, administrative skills, and basic office skills; dance, art, drama, and music; athletic activities C C P C P P P    driving education 6144 P P P    flight training 6146 Offer aviation and flight training P Other Government Functions 6300 Other government owned establishments not classified elsewhere such as defense and national guard establishments C P P C C Public Safety 6400 Government-owned establishments providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services P P P P P P P P P P P P P Health and Human Services 6500 Provide health care, social assistance, and associated services   Ambulatory or outpatient care services 6510 Offer health care services directly to patients without providing inpatient services    clinic 6511
&
6567 Include physician offices, dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, licensed massage therapists, and veterans affairs services P P P P P P    outpatient care clinic 6512 Provide outpatient family planning services and outpatient care P P P P P P    medical or diagnostic laboratory; blood/organ bank 6513-
6514 Provide analytic or diagnostic services including medical imaging P P P P P   Nursing, supervision and other rehabilitative services , except 6520 Provide inpatient nursing and rehabilitative services and can accommodate patients for extended care, includes alcoholism or drug addiction rehabilitation, mental health Halfway Houses, group homes, and psychiatric convalescent homes see 1200 for nursing homes and long-term congregate care    halfway house 6521 Residential services for pre- or post release of convicted individuals    group home small 6522 Fewer than five (5) aged or infirm individuals or fewer than nine (9) individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities P P P P P P P P P P P    group home large 6523 Five or more aged or infirm individuals, or nine (9) or more individuals with mental, intellectual or developmental disabilities C C C C C P P P P C P    rehabilitation centers 6524 See sanitarium for definition   Hospital 6530 C C C C C C C P P   Social assistance, welfare, and charitable services 6560 Provide social assistance directly to individuals, do not offer residential or accommodation services    child and youth services 6561 Offer services such as adoption, foster care, drug prevention services P P    child and adult day care 6562 Provide day care for children and adults    home 6562a Day care for fewer than six (6) individuals in a residence P P P P P P P P P P P    small 6562b Day care for six (6) to twelve (12) individuals in a residence C C C C P P P P P P    large 6562c Provide care for more than 12 individuals C C C C P P P P P P    care services community food services 6563-
6566 Includes community food services, emergency and relief services, services for the elderly and disabled other family services; does not include on-site provision of housing P P Religious Institutions 6600 Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, convents and monasteries C C C C P P P P P P Death Care Services 6700 Funeral homes, crematories, cemeteries, undertakers   Funeral home and services 6710 Includes funeral homes combined with crematories P P P P P   Cemetery or cremation services 6720    free-standing cemetery 6722 C C C C C P P P    columbarium 6724 C C C C C C P P P Construction-Related Businesses 7000 Contractors who can build or demolish buildings, leveling, earthmoving, excavating, land drainage; should reflect the location of the establishment and not where it is performing its services. This category also includes the manufacture of industrial buildings, manufactured homes, modular homes, storage buildings and similar structures. Note that district standards may limit or preclude manufacturing, outdoor operations, outdoor storage of commercial vehicles and materials. P P P P P P Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing, and Hunting 9000 Grow crops, raise animals, harvest timber, and harvest fish and other animals, may be described as farms, greenhouses, nurseries, or hatcheries Crop Production 9100   Vegetable farming or growing 9120 Includes private fields and community gardens P P P P P P P P P P P   Commercial orchards 9130 Includes fruit and nut trees for commercial production P P P P P P P P P P   Greenhouse Production 9140    Greenhouse - no on-premises sales 9141 Commercial greenhouse production P P P P P P P P P P P    Greenhouse - sales of products grown on premises 9142 P P P P P P P    Greenhouse - sales of products and related accessory products 9143 P P P P P P Animal Production 9300 Keep, graze, breed or feed animals (see district standards) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Unclassifiable or No Function 9900 Temporary placeholder until a code can be assigned   Temporary uses 9920    tent revival meetings/transient amusements 9921 Includes temporary carnivals and circuses (see section 35.2-72.23) P P P P P P P P P P P P    temporary outdoor promotional attractions 9922 Includes car shows, boat shows and similar short-term events intended to promote commercial sales or services (see section 35.2-72.23) P P P P   Land Use Development Patterns 9950    residential cluster development 9951 See section 35.2-80 P P P P    traditional neighborhood development 9952 See section 35.2-82 C C C C C C C C C    planned unit development 9953 See section 35.2-83 C C C C large scale retail establishments 9954 See section 35.2-84 P P P P    cluster commercial development 9955 See section 35.2-85 C C C C C    flex space development 9956 See section 35.2-86 C C P P    corporate campus 9957 See section 35.2-87 C C P P Billboards 9990 Billboards and other signs advertising goods and services not available on the site where the sign is located P P P P  
Note: Conditions for uses may be established for permitted uses in the zoning district standards in Article IV and V, the specific use standards or Article VII or through specific development approvals pursuant to Article II. 
(E-mail of 5-22-17; Ord. No. O-17-091 , 10-10-17) 
APPENDIX B: - SUMMARY OF BUILDING ENVELOPE STANDARDS 
Building Envelope Standard Zoning Districts R-C R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-3 B-4 B-5 IN-1 IN-2 I-1 I-2 I-3 Maximum Height (ft.) (1) 40 40 40 40 (2) 40 (2) 40 (2) none (3) none (2)(3) none (2) none (2) none (2) none (2) none (2) Front Setback (ft.) 50 40 (4) 30 (4) 30 (4) 30 0 0 none none none none none none none Minimum Side Setback, Interior (ft.) 50 15 (4) 8 (4) 5 (4) 5 (4) (5) 0 0 (5) none none (5) none (5) none (5) none (5) none (5) none (5) Minimum Side Setback, Exterior (ft.) 50 40 30 30 30 0 10 none none none none none none none Minimum Rear Setback (ft.) 50 50 35 30 25 (5) 25 0 (5) none none (5) none (5) none (5) none (5) none (5) none (5) Maximum Coverage, Lot 10% 20% 20% 30% 30% none none none none none none none none none  
(1)  No portion of a building shall exceed 1 foot above average grade at the foundation of the building for each 2 feet from the property line. 
(2)  See Section 35.2-61-2 for additional height regulations when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3. 
(3)  Buildings may be erected to any height, provided that the height of the portion of the building in excess of twice the width of the right-of-way that it abuts may be increased by up to 10 feet for each additional foot of setback. For purposes of this provision, no right-of-way shall be considered less than 40 feet nor more than 60 feet. When a building abuts two streets, the street that permits the greatest height shall be used as a basis of measurement. 
(4)  See neighborhood norm provisions setback exceptions in section 35.2-61.3. 
(5)  See section 35.2-61.3 for additional setback regulations when abutting property zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3. 
Note: Conditions for uses may be established for permitted uses in the zoning district standards in Article IV and V, the specific use standards or Article VII or through specific development approvals pursuant to Article II. 
APPENDIX C: - SUMMARY OF LOT DIMENSION AND DENSITY STANDARDS 
Zoning 
District Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum Area 
per Unit (1) Minimum 
Lot Width (2) Minimum 
Lot Depth Maximum 
Density R-C 10 acres 5 acres 150' none R-1 15,000 sf 7,500 sf 100' none 2.9/5.8 (3) R-2 10,000 sf 5,000 sf 75' none 4.35/8.7 (3) R-3 4,000 sf 4,000 sf 60' none 5.45/10.89 (3) R-4 6,000 sf 2,000 50' none 7.26/21.78 (3)(4) B-1 6,000 sf 1,000 none none none B-3 6,000 sf none none none none B-4 none none none none none B-5 none none none none none IN-1 none none none none none IN-2 none none none none none I-1 none none none none none I-2 none none none none none I-3 none none none none none  
Notes: 
(1)  Subject to minimum lot area requirements. 
(2)  Minimum lot width is measured at the front setback line. 
(3)  The first number is the number of single-household dwelling units per acre; the second number is the total number of dwelling units allowed per acre. 
(4)  See density bonus provisions in the R-4 district provisions in section 35.2-44.4(a). 
Note: Conditions for uses may be established for permitted uses in the zoning district standards in Article IV and V, the specific use standards or Article VII or through specific development approvals pursuant to Article II. 
Chapter 36 - TAX CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This chapter contains the 1941 Tax Code of the city, as amended through 1975. 
Charter reference- Bonds, taxes, sinking funds, etc., § 44 et seq. 
Cross reference- Department of finance, § 2-324 et seq.; finance and taxation, Ch. 18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Violations. 
    Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 115) 
Secs. 36-2-36-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Taxes on trades, businesses, profession, § 48. 

Secs. 36-16-36-125.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 36-16 through 36-125.2 of Article II were repealed by O-96-319, adopted Dec. 10, 1996 and replaced by sections 36-126 through 36-126.43 and section 36-191. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-126. - Overriding conflicting ordinances. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the charter of the City of Lynchburg, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by the city council, whether or not compiled in the code of the City of Lynchburg, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.1. - Adoption of state laws and guidelines. 
(a)  As to all questions in regard to the duty and conduct of officers of the city on collecting and enforcing the taxes imposed by this chapter and in regard to questions of construction, and for definitions of terms used in this article and the rules and regulations applicable to putting the same in operation, reference is hereby made to the laws of the state for the assessment, levy and the collection of taxes for the current year, or to so much thereof as is applicable to this article and is not inconsistent with it and general ordinances of the city. For the conduct and guidance of the officers of the city and other parties affected by this article and for fixing their powers, rights, duties and obligations, the provisions of such laws, so far as applicable, are hereby adopted, without specifically herein quoted. 
(b)  For purposes of determining the proper category within which to place a business, profession or occupation in determining tax liability, the commissioner of the revenue shall utilize the current edition of the "Guidelines for Business, Professional and Occupational License Tax" as published by the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Taxation, or successor document. Those businesses, professions and occupations for which no guidance is available shall be taxed in accordance with this article unless specifically exempted from taxation by Virginia Code Section 58.1-3703(B), or successor section, or this article. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.2. - License a personal privilege. 
    Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall be deemed to confer a personal privilege to transact, carry on or conduct within the city the business, trade, profession or occupation which may be the subject of the license and shall not be exercised except by the person licensed. All licenses for which a license tax is imposed in this article shall be for the calendar year in which the same were issued, unless otherwise herein specified. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.3. - Tax levied. 
    For the purpose of doing business or operating in the city, there are hereby levied and shall be assessed and collected the annual license taxes on the persons, businesses, professions, trades and occupations set forth in this article for the license year 1997 and each and every license year thereafter until otherwise changed by city council, which license taxes shall be for the support of the city government, the payment of the city debts and interest thereon, and for other municipal purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.4. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, unless otherwise required by the context: 
(a)  Affiliated group. 
(1)  One or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other includable corporations. 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable corporations. As used in this section, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation. 
b.  More than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
(3)  When one or more includable corporations, including the common parent corporation is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this section shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
(b)  Assessment. A determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by the taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed. 
(c)  Assessor and assessing official. The City of Lynchburg's Commissioner of the Revenue. 
(d)  Base year. Except for contractors subject to the provisions of Virginia Code Section 58.1-3715, or successor section, the preceding year's gross receipts on a cash or accrual basis for either the fiscal year or the calendar year used by the business; provided, that the year and method employed shall also coincide with the year and method used for federal and state income tax purposes. 
(e)  Business. A course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (i) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or (ii) filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
(f)  Commissioner. The City of Lynchburg's Commissioner of the Revenue. 
(g)  Definite place of business. An office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
(h)  License year. The calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
(i)  Person. Includes individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations and combinations of individuals of whatever form or character, including any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof carrying on or continuing a business, profession, trade, service or occupation. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.5. - General duties of the commissioner of the revenue. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to require all persons conducting any business, employment or profession for which a license is required by this article to procure such license and pay the license tax therefore. Should any license tax not be paid, the commissioner of the revenue shall prosecute such violation. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue, in performing the duties of such office, shall have authority to require any person or entity doing business in the city to furnish information concerning subcontractors to whom any part of a contract is sublet. The information shall include, but is not limited to, a list of the name and address of each subcontractor, and the amount of each subcontract. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue is authorized to determine the construction or application of any doubtful or disputed provisions of this article. Such determination shall be subject to judicial review and the appeal process promulgated by the Virginia Department of Taxation, as provided by law. 
(d)  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation from the commissioner of the revenue. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, (ii) the commissioner of the revenue notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based, or (iii) the original facts are found to be inaccurate or misrepresented. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect, unless such person intentionally gave inaccurate or misleading information to the commissioner of the revenue. 
(e)  As one of the means of ascertaining the amount of any license tax due under this article, the commissioner of the revenue, any duly sworn deputy or attorney for the commissioner of the revenue, may propound interrogatories to an applicant for a license and use such other evidence as he may procure. Such interrogatories shall be answered under oath. It shall be unlawful for any applicant to refuse to answer such interrogatories under oath. 
(f)  The commissioner of the revenue shall impose penalties as set forth in section 36-126.9 of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.6. - License requirements; filing procedures; due dates; limitations and extensions. 
(a)  License requirements. 
(1)  Every person shall apply for a license for each business or profession when engaging in a business in the city if (i) such person maintains a definite place of business in the city; (ii) such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere, but does maintain an abode in the city, which abode, for the purposes of this article, shall be deemed a definite place of business; (iii) there is no definite place of business in this city but the person operates amusement machines or is engaged in business as an itinerant merchant, peddler, carnival, circus as specified in Virginia Code Sections 58.1-3717, 3718, or 3728, respectively, or successor sections; or is engaged in business as a contractor subject to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3715, or successor section, or public service corporation subject to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3731, or successor section. 
(2)  A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business and for each business. A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (i) each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of the city; (ii) all of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; (iii) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(3)  Any person doing business at more than one place of business shall be required to take out a separate license for each such place of business. Each such place of business shall constitute a separate and distinct place of business requiring the payment of a license tax as provided for under this article. 
(b)  Filing procedures. 
(1)  No license shall be issued by the commissioner of the revenue for the conduct of any business upon any vacant lot or in any building in the city, unless and until the applicant for the license shall present a certificate of occupancy furnished by the building inspector of the city to the effect that the proposed use of said premises is not a violation of the provisions of the city zoning ordinance. 
(2)  No license shall be issued by the commissioner of the revenue for the conduct of any business as a partnership or any business utilizing a fictitious or assumed name, unless and until the applicant for the license shall present a receipt furnished by the clerk of the circuit court certifying registration of such partnership or fictitious or assumed name. 
(3)  If the business in question is one for which a license can be granted only on the permit of a court or other officer, such license shall not be valid or effective until such certificate has been obtained and presented to the commissioner of the revenue. This requirement shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
Bondsman 
Dealers in precious metals 
Pawnbroker 
Door-to-door sales/solicitors. 
(4)  All persons liable for the payment of a license tax under the provisions of this article shall make application therefore to the commissioner of the revenue. The commissioner shall furnish the necessary forms which shall be properly and fully executed by the applicant and shall contain such information as may be required by the commissioner. In cases where the license tax is based upon gross receipts or purchases of the business or occupation to be licensed, the commissioner shall require a sworn statement from the applicant of the amount of such gross receipts or purchases during the preceding year, except in the case of a beginner as hereinafter defined. The commissioner shall assess such applicant, or the person of whom the license is required, with the license tax required by this article. 
(5)  Every person beginning a business, profession, trade or occupation is subject to a license tax under the provisions of this article and which is based in whole or in part on gross receipts or purchases, shall estimate the amount of gross receipts he will receive or the amount of purchases he will make between the date of beginning business and the end of the then current license year, and his license tax for the then current year shall be computed upon such estimate. Any person who has not been in business for one full license period when making application for a license shall be considered as a beginner and the amount of his license tax for the then current year shall be computed accordingly. Whenever a license tax is so computed upon the estimated gross receipts or estimated purchases, any erroneous estimate shall be subject to correction, and the commissioner of the revenue shall assess such person for any additional license tax found to be due after the end of that license year, and in the case of an overestimate the taxpayer shall be entitled to a credit upon his license tax payable the following year, unless the credit is attributable to gross receipts less than $10,000.00. 
(c)  Due dates. 
(1)  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business if such person was not subject to licensing in this city on or before January 1 of the license year. If such person had been issued a license for the preceding license year, the application shall be on forms prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(2)  Any person beginning a business, employment or profession after January 1, unless otherwise stated, shall first file with the commissioner of the revenue an application for a license covering such business, employment or profession and the license tax shall be paid to the billings and collections division within 30 days of beginning business or May 1, whichever is later. Any person conducting any licensable business, employment or profession on or before the first day of January of any year shall file the license application with the commissioner of the revenue on or before May 1 of such year and the license tax shall be paid to the billings and collections division on or before May 1. 
(d)  Limitations and extensions. 
(1)  The commissioner of the revenue may, for reasonable cause, grant a 30-day extension in which to file an application for a license. 
(2)  No such license shall be issued until such applicant has produced satisfactory evidence that all delinquent business license, business personal property, meals, amusement, and transient occupancy taxes owed to the city have been paid. 
(3)  A license issued under this article shall not be valid or effective until the tax required by this chapter has been paid to the billings and collections division. 
(4)  Notwithstanding Virginia Code Section 58.1-3903, or successor section, the commissioner of the revenue shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six preceding license years. 
(5)  The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3940, or successor section, two years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this section, two years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to the appeal and ruling process described in this article, or two years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3984, or successor section, or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(e)  Any person conducting a licensable business, employment or profession who does not comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor as set forth in section 36-126.9 of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-04-036, 3-23-04, eff. 1-1-05; Ord. No. O-18-004 , § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 36-126.7. - Gross receipts. 
(a)  Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of Virginia Code Section 58.1-3703, or successor section, and this article. 
(b)  Situs of gross receipts. General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this ordinance is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within this city. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Virginia Code Section 58.1-3715, or successor section. 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality. 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed. 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are directed or controlled. 
(c)  Apportionment. If the licensed activity has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of business on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to the city solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
(d)  Agreements. The commissioner of the revenue may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of Virginia concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than 100 percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the commissioner of the revenue shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.8. - Exclusions and deductions from gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the license privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
(b)  The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
(1)  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the commonwealth or any county, city or town for the Virginia Retail Sales or Use Tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
(2)  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business). 
(3)  The sale price of property sold and returned during the period covered by the return, deducting from such price the amount received on account of the sale and not refunded or allowed as credit. If the total amount received is refunded or allowed as a credit, the total sales price of the article returned may be deducted from gross receipts. If a part of the total sales price is refunded or allowed as a credit, the amount to be deducted from gross receipts is the amount refunded or allowed as a credit. 
(4)  If the sale of any property is made by exchange of property of any kind, the price allowed for the property received in exchange constitutes the amount to be deducted, provided, however, that when such property is sold, the sale price of such property shall constitute gross receipts within the meaning of this chapter. 
(5)  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
(6)  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
(7)  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchase by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, in which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
(8)  Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
(9)  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(c)  The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable: 
(1)  Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a federal or state government entity provided that such property was purchased within two years of the sale to said entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a federal or state government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a federal or state government entity in accordance with the original contract obligation. 
(2)  Any receipts attributable to a business conducted in another state or foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.9. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  Penalties. 
(1)  A penalty of ten percent of the tax shall be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due dates. A late filing penalty shall be imposed by the commissioner of the revenue if the application is late. If a late filing penalty is imposed, billings and collections shall impose a late payment penalty of ten percent if the tax is not paid within 30 days. If a late filing penalty is not imposed, billings and collections shall impose a ten percent late payment penalty if the tax is not paid by the appropriate due dates. However, both penalties may be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the commissioner of the revenue, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late filing penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any additional assessment of tax by the commissioner of the revenue is not paid within 30 days, the billings and collections division shall impose a ten percent late payment penalty. If the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer, the penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed shall be abated by the official who assessed them. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 
(2)  Acted responsibly means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, by requesting the appropriate extension. 
(3)  Events beyond the taxpayer's control include, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with sole responsibility with tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the commissioner of the revenue who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
(4)  Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. The conviction of any person or entity for a violation of any provision of this article and the imposition of a penalty therefore shall not relieve such person from liability for any tax imposed upon him by this article. 
(b)  Interest. 
(1)  Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the commissioner of the revenue is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax paid under this article from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged in paragraph (2) below. However, if such erroneous payments were in any way due to the fault or negligence of the taxpayer, no interest shall be paid on the refund of the erroneously paid taxes. 
(2)  Interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the first day of the month following the month in which taxes are required to be paid, shall be collected upon the principal and applicable penalty remaining unpaid. 
(3)  No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than 30 days from the date of the payment that created the refund or the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-04-124, 9-14-04) 
Sec. 36-126.10. - Display of license. 
(a)  Every person required to pay a license tax under the provisions of this article shall keep the license upon which such tax was paid in a convenient place and, whenever required to do so, shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement officer to inspect licenses or to any authorized representative of the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  Every person in charge of any premises where a business, occupation, profession or other activity required to be licensed under this article is conducted or practical shall permit any authorized enforcement officer to make such inspections, and the license inspector to make a physical inspection of the entire premises, for the purpose of ascertaining license tax liability, at any time during regular business operation hours. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.11. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to suspend any license issued under the provisions of this article for cause; and such suspension shall continue until the cause or causes are removed. 
(b)  Such suspension, when written notice thereof is received by the licensee or any person in charge of the place of business, shall place the licensee in the same position as if he had never obtained a license. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.12. - Transfer of license. 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be transferred, except as otherwise provided, from one person to another or from one location to another; provided, that no such transfer shall be valid unless and until notice in writing be given to the commissioner of the revenue of the proposed transfer, which notice shall contain the name, trade name, if any, and the address of the proposed transferee, the proposed new location, if any, as well as the time of the proposed transfer; and the commissioner may approve such transfer upon being satisfied of the good faith thereof; and provided, further, that no transfer of a license shall be permitted where the amount of the license tax due was computed on an estimated basis. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.13. - Recordkeeping and audits. 
(a)  Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the commissioner of the revenue to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the commissioner to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts, and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the commissioner in order to allow the commissioner to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within this jurisdiction. The commissioner shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside this jurisdiction, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the commissioner's office upon demand. 
(b)  If any licensee shall fail to maintain the records required in this section, regularly supported by customary vouchers, the commissioner of the revenue is hereby authorized and directed to estimate the taxpayer's gross receipts or purchases on the basis of the best evidence he can obtain, and the commissioner shall make an assessment on the basis of such determination and adding thereto the penalty and interest prescribed by law. 
(c)  Upon the filing of a report under this section, or in any case in which the commissioner of the revenue shall deem it advisable, the commissioner shall investigate and ascertain whether the person filing a report or return has made a correct report or return and, to that end, the commissioner may summon such person before him and require the production of any and all of his records, books and papers likely to throw any light upon the matter under investigation. The commissioner may also make, or cause to be made, such other and further investigations, examinations and audits of the records, books and papers of such person as he shall deem proper, in order to determine accurately the proper report or return to be made by the person in question. 
(d)  All invoices, records and general books of accounts referred to in this section shall be open to inspection and examination, on the premises of the business, employment or profession in question, by the commissioner of the revenue, or any other officer of the city charged in any manner with the duty of assessing or collecting license taxes. 
(e)  If, upon an investigation pursuant to this section, it shall appear that the license basis or other matters pertinent to assessment were incorrectly reported or returned, the commissioner of the revenue shall assess the person in question with the proper license tax. 
(f)  Any person who shall fail to appear before the commissioner of the revenue and produce such records, books and papers, when duly summoned, or who shall refuse to permit the commissioner to make or cause to be made such other and further investigations and audit of such books and papers, shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. Each days refusal to furnish such access or information shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  If appropriate, the penalty provisions of section 36-126.9 of this article shall apply. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.14. - Appeals and rulings. 
(a)  Any person assessed with a local license tax as the result of an audit may apply within 90 days from the date of the assessment to the commissioner of the revenue for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The commissioner of the revenue may hold a conference with the taxpayer, if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, a further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the application. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The commissioner of the revenue shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth his position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the city (e.g. the name and address to which an application should be directed). 
(b)  Provided a complete application is made within 90 days of an assessment, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the commissioner of the revenue, unless the commissioner determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of this article, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires to (i) depart quickly from the locality, (ii) remove his property therefrom, (iii) conceal himself or his property therein, or (iv) do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(c)  Any person assessed with a business license tax as a result of an audit may apply within 90 days of the determination by the commissioner of the revenue on an application pursuant to this article to the tax commissioner for a correction of such assessment. The tax commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within 90 days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the commissioner of the revenue are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-1821, or successor section, and the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-1822, or successor section. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the commissioner of the revenue may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3984, or successor section. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the tax commissioner is erroneous. Neither the tax commissioner nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(d)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under subsection 36-126.14(c) above, the commissioner of the revenue shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the commissioner of the revenue determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of this article, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as set forth in subsection 36-126.14(b) above. 
(e)  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of a local license tax to a specific situation from the commissioner of the revenue. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentations or change in the applicable law of the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is any change in the law, a court decision, or the guidelines issued by the department of taxation upon which the ruling was based (ii) the commissioner notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based, or (iii) the original facts are found to be inaccurate or misrepresented. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect, unless such person intentionally gave inaccurate or misleading information to the commissioner of the revenue. 
(f)  Every person beginning a business, profession, trade or occupation which is subject to a license tax under the provisions of this article shall be entitled to a gross receipts/purchases reconciliation by the commissioner of the revenue after the fourth year of business. If the reconciliation results in an over reporting of gross receipts/purchases for the four years of operation, the person would be entitled to a refund thereon for that portion of the license tax already paid, as to ensure that the license privilege tax is assessed only on actual gross receipt/purchases for the preceding four years. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.15. - Proration of license taxes. 
    In the event a person, firm or corporation ceases to engage in a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling within the city during a year for which a license tax based on gross receipts has already been paid, the taxpayer shall be entitled upon application to a refund for that portion of the license tax already paid, prorated on a monthly basis so as to ensure that the licensed privilege is taxed only for that fraction of the year during which it is exercised within the city. The commissioner of the revenue may elect to remit any refunds in the ensuing fiscal year and may offset against such refund any amount of past due taxes owed by the same taxpayer. In no event shall the commissioner of the revenue be required to refund any part of a flat fee or minimum flat tax. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.16. - Transitional provisions. 
    The provisions of this article relating to penalties, interest, and administrative and judicial review of an assessment shall be applicable to assessments made on and after January 1, 1997, even if for an earlier license year. The provisions relating to agreements extending the period for assessing tax shall be effective for agreements entered into on and after July 1, 1996. The provisions permitting an assessment of license taxes for up to six preceding years in certain circumstances shall not be construed to permit the assessment of taxes for a license year beginning before January 1, 1997. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.17. - Young men's christian associations. 
    In order to encourage and promote community services within the city, beginning January 1, 1992, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless otherwise changed by city council, young men's christian associations and similar religious associations, including religious mission boards and associations, orphan or other asylums, reformatories, hospitals and nunneries, conducted not for profit but exclusively as charities (which shall include hospitals operated by nonstock corporations not organized or conducted for profit but which may charge persons able to pay in whole or in part for their care and treatment) shall be exempt from the payment of business license taxes imposed by this article. Each such organization that engages in business activities that would otherwise be taxable must still file the necessary forms with the commissioner of the revenue and obtain a no fee license from the city. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.18. - Processors. 
    In order to encourage and promote the development and growth within the city of business activities that qualify as manufacturing under federal guidelines but not under state law, effective on January 1, 1992, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless otherwise changed by city council, processors are exempt from the payment of the business license tax imposed by this article. For purposes of this section processor means (i) any operation where an article, whether owned by the processor or not, is subjected to some special treatment or method, by artificial or natural means, that effectuates a change in the article's form, chemical composition, physical appearance or ingredients and which enhances the article's value and makes it more usable or marketable (ii) and which operation qualifies as manufacturing under industry group numbers 201, 202, 267, 287, 344 or 347 of the standard industrial classification manual published by the United States office of management and budget. Any person or organization that engages in the replacement or assembly of parts, the repair or rebuilding of worn items or providing repair, personal or business services is not a processor for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-97-230, 11-25-97, eff. 1-1-92) 
Sec. 36-126.19. - Technology zone. 
    Technology zone-Any qualified technology business that locates in or is already located in the technology zone shall be entitled to a five-year reimbursement of business license taxes as follows: during the first calendar year, a 75 percent reimbursement; for the second calendar year a 50 percent reimbursement; and for the third, fourth and fifth calendar years a 25 percent reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-02-054, 3-26-02; Ord. No. O-11-003, 1-11-11; Ord. No. O-14-069, § 1, 6-10-2014 ) 
DIVISION 2. - CLASSIFIED BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL LICENSES 

Sec. 36-126.20. - Generally. 
    In order to promote and encourage the development and growth of small businesses and professions within the city, effective on January 1, 2017, for the calendar year beginning January 1, 2017 and ending December 31, 2017, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless otherwise changed by city council, the following provisions shall apply to small businesses and professions. 
(1)  Any business or profession whose gross receipts, wholesale sales, purchases for the business or commission sales for the preceding calendar year are $10,000.00 or less is not subject to the business and professional licensing requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Any business or profession whose gross receipts, wholesale sales, purchases for the business or commission sales for the preceding calendar year are between $10,001.00 and $50,000.00 shall pay an annual license tax of $30.00. 
(3)  Any business or profession whose gross receipts, wholesale sales, purchases for the business or commission sales for the preceding calendar year are between $50,001.00 and $100,000.00 shall pay an annual license tax of $50.00. 
(4)  Any business or profession whose gross receipts, wholesale sales, purchases for the business or commission sales for the preceding calendar year are between $100,001.00 and $150,000.00 shall pay an annual license tax of $160.00. 
(5)  Any business or profession whose gross receipts, wholesale sales, purchases for the business or commission sales for the preceding calendar year are in excess of $150,000.00 shall obtain a business license in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-16-067, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 36-126.21. - Retail merchants-Definitions. 
(a)  Retailer or retail merchant: Any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. When a merchant conducts both a wholesale and a retail business, such merchant shall obtain a retail license on the retail portion of the business and a wholesale license on the wholesale portion of the business. 
    The sale price alone is not determinative of whether a sale is at retail or wholesale. The fact that goods, wares or merchandise are sold at wholesale prices, at cost or at less than cost does not prevent the seller from being classified as a retail merchant if the sales fall within the definition of a retail sale. 
(b)  Huckster: Any person who, as principal, agent or employee, resides within a radius of 60 miles of the city and purchases within said radius from the producer of farm products grown or produced within said radius, and who, on any public street or public place of the city, or by going from house to house on foot, or upon any animal or vehicle, sells, barters, offers for sale or barter, or carries or exposes for sale or barter such farm products to the consumer. 
(c)  Peddler: Any person, who shall carry from place to place any goods, wares and merchandise and offer to sell or barter the same, or actually sell or barter the same. All persons who do not keep a regular place of business, whether it be a house or vacant lot or elsewhere, open at all times and during regular business hours and at the same place, who shall offer for sale goods, wares and merchandise shall be deemed peddlers under this article. All persons who keep a regular place of business, open at all times and during regular business hours and at the same place, who shall, elsewhere than at such regular place of business, personally or through their agents offer for sale or sell and, at the time of such offering for sale, deliver goods, wares and merchandise shall also be deemed peddlers as above. This definition shall also include any person who sells or offers for sale prepared food at retail from a vehicle on private property of an active business enterprise with the prior written consent of such business. 
(d)  Direct seller: Any person who engages in the trade of business of selling or soliciting the sale of consumer products and maintains no public location for the conduct of such business; and who performs such activities pursuant to a written contract between such person and the person for whom the activities are performed and such contract provides that such person will not be treated as an employee with respect to such activities for federal tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.22. - Retail merchants-Rate and classifications. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business as a retailer or retail merchant, huckster, peddler, or direct seller as defined in section 36-126.21, shall pay an annual license tax of $0.20 per each $100.00 of gross receipts from such business during the preceding year when such gross receipts exceed $150,000.00. 
(b)  Retailer or retail merchant generally includes, but is not limited to, the following occupations, businesses or trades: 
Antique show 
Automobile 
Craft show 
Flea market 
Gasoline and petroleum product 
Merchandise through vending machines 
Prepared food 
Publisher directory 
Restaurant 
Short term rental 
All other retail sales 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-16-067, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 36-126.23. - Flea markets and craft shows. 
(a)  Flea market or craft show shall include any show consisting of any group of persons or merchants selling goods, wares and merchandise such as hobby crafts, antiques, art work, jewelry or second-hand articles, or any combination of these or similar items. 
(b)  No individual participating in a flea market or craft show as a retail merchant shall be liable for any license taxation on his gross receipts generated at such show under this chapter if the promoter, manager or organizer obtains a license and pays the license tax as provided in this section, and if the merchant reports to such promoter, manager or organizer the merchant's total gross receipts from such show. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to relieve any promoter, manager or organizer of a flea market or craft show of the obligation to pay any other license taxes that may be imposed by this chapter. 
(d)  The license taxes imposed by this section shall not apply to any show or sale, if the only sales thereunder are made directly by a nonprofit organization. 
(e)  Each person organizing, operating, promoting or managing a flea market or craft show shall keep accurate and legible records, in English, setting forth the amount of the total gross receipts from all sales of goods or merchandise at the flea market or craft show. Representatives of the commissioner of the revenue's office shall be allowed to examine such records upon request to determine the amount of the license taxes due under this section. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.24. - Producers. 
    Any person who, as a principal or employee, is actually engaged in the business of growing or producing wood, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature and farm products grown or produced by him, and who has not purchased said articles which he offers for sale to the consumer or licensed dealer. No license tax shall be levied on any producer, provided such products are grown or produced by the person offering such products for sale. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.25. - Wholesale merchants-Definitions. 
(a)  Wholesaler or wholesale merchant shall mean any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial, and government and industrial users which because of the quantity, price or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(b)  Wholesale peddler shall mean any person, firm or corporation, who or which sells or offers to sell goods, wares and merchandise to licensed dealers, other than at a definite place of business operated by the seller, and at the time of such sale or exposure for sale delivers, or offers to deliver the goods, wares and merchandise to the buyer. For the purposes of this section any delivery made on the day of sale shall be construed as a delivery at the time of sale. 
(c)  Purchases shall mean the cost of goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall include the cost of manufacture of such goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale as merchandise. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.26. - Wholesale merchants-Rate. 
    Every person engaged in the business of a wholesale merchant or wholesale peddler shall pay for the privilege of conducting such business in the city an annual license tax of $20.00 plus $0.28 for each $100.00 of gross purchases for the business during the preceding year when the gross purchases of such business exceeds $150,000.00. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-16-067, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 36-126.27. - Financial, real estate and professional services-Definitions. 
(a)  Financial services: The buying, selling, handling, managing, investing and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities and other investments and shall include the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this article. 
(b)  Broker: An agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis. 
(c)  Commodity: Staples such as wool, cotton, etc., which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
(d)  Dealer: Any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
(e)  Security: Shall have same meaning as in the Securities Act (Title 13.1-501 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. 
(f)  Real estate services: Rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker providing a real estate service, unless such service is specifically provided for under another section of this article. 
(g)  Professional services: Services performed by architects, attorneys at law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the Virginia Department of Taxation may list in the business, professional, occupational license (BPOL) guidelines promulgated pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3701, or successor section. The department shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.28. - Financial, real estate and professional services-Rate and classifications. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of financial, real estate or professional services shall pay an annual license tax of $0.58 for each $100.00 of gross receipts from such business during the preceding year when such gross receipts exceed $150,000.00. 
(b)  Financial, real estate and professional services generally include, but is not limited to, the following businesses and services: 
Accountant 
Architect 
Attorney 
Broker 
Chiropractor 
CPA 
Dealer in installment paper 
Dentist 
Doctor 
Engineer 
Medical services 
Mental health therapist 
Mortgage company 
Optometrist 
Physical therapist 
Professional consultant 
Psychological 
Real estate agent 
Real estate appraiser 
Respiratory therapist 
Small loan 
Veterinarian 
All other financial, real estate and professional services 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-16-067, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 36-126.29. - Contractors-Definitions. 
(a)  Contractor shall mean any person, firm or corporation who accepts or offers to accept orders or contracts for: 
(1)  Any work on or in any building or structure, requiring the use of paint, stone, brick, mortar, wood, cement, structural iron or steel, sheet iron, galvanized iron, metallic piping, tin, lead, or other metal or any other building material. 
(2)  Any paving, curbing or other work on sidewalks, streets, alleys, or highways, or public or private property, using asphalt, brick, stone, cement, concrete, wood or any composition. 
(3)  Any excavations of earth, rock, or other material for foundation or any other purpose or for cutting, trimming or maintaining rights-of-way. 
(4)  Any sewer constructions of stone, brick, terra cotta or other material. 
(5)  Any work on or in any building or premises involving the erecting, installing, altering, repairing, servicing, or maintaining electric wiring, devices or appliances permanently connected to such wiring, or the erecting, repairing or maintaining of lines for the transmission or distribution of electric light and power. 
(6)  Engaging in the business of plumbing and steam fitting. 
(b)  Persons contracting for their own account for sale shall be included in the contracting category for business license tax purposes and this category shall include speculative builders. All of the cost of erecting speculative buildings, exclusive of the acquisition cost of the land, shall be considered as a part of the orders or contracts accepted by the taxpayer in computing the taxpayer's license tax. 
(c)  A contractor whose principal office or branch office is outside the city and who accepts a contract or contracts to be performed in the city, when the amount of business done by any such contractor under such contract or contracts exceeds the sum of $25,000.00 in any year, shall be treated in the same manner as a new business, and shall be required to file an estimate of the amount of gross receipts he will receive from such contract or contracts during each year in which he is doing business in the city, which estimates shall be subject to correction and adjustment at the end of each year by the commissioner of the revenue in the same manner as adjustments are made for new businesses. 
(d)  Every contractor who proposes to do work in the city, for which a permit must be obtained from the proper building official of the city, shall, upon making application for such permit, furnish that official and the commissioner of the revenue, a list of all of his subcontractors, and, in the event any or all of such subcontractors have not been awarded at that time, he shall furnish such list in writing to said official immediately upon the awarding of such subcontracts, and shall not allow the work of any subcontract to proceed until the subcontractor has obtained the necessary city licenses for the then current year. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-05-010, 1-11-05) 
Sec. 36-126.30. - Contractors-Rate. 
    Every person engaging or conducting business as a contractor, and persons constructing for their own account for sale shall pay an annual license tax of $0.16 for every $100.00 of gross receipts for such business during the preceding year when such gross receipts exceed $150,000.00. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-16-067, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 36-126.31. - Repair, personal, business and other services-Definitions. 
(a)  Services shall mean things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares or merchandise. 
(1)  Repair service is the repairing, cleaning or servicing some article or item of personal property for compensation, unless such service is specifically provided for under another section of this article or exempted from local taxation by Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, or successor title. 
(2)  Personal service is any service rendered for compensation either upon or for persons, animals or personal effects, unless such service is specifically provided for under another section of this article or exempted by Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, or successor title. 
(3)  Business service is any service rendered for compensation to any business, trade, occupation or governmental agency, unless such service is specifically provided for under another section of this article or exempted by Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, or successor title. 
(b)  Commission merchant shall mean any person engaging in the business of selling merchandise on commission by sample, circular, or catalog for a regularly established retailer, who has no stock or inventory under his control other than floor samples held for demonstration or sale and owned by the principal retailer. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.32. - Repair, personal, business and other services-Rate and classifications. 
(a)  Every person engaging in a repair, personal, business service or any other service, including commission merchants, not specifically listed in this section shall pay an annual license tax of $0.36 for each $100.00 of gross receipts from such business during the preceding year when such gross receipts exceed $150,000.00. 
(b)  Repair, personal, business, and other services generally include but are not limited to the following services: 
Adult care 
Advertising agency 
Amusement machines 
Animal grooming 
Appraiser 
Auctioneer 
Audio visual production 
Auto detailing 
Auto rental 
Auto repair 
Barber 
Beauty school 
Beauty shop 
Billboard 
Bondsman 
Booking agent 
Bookkeeper 
Bowling alley 
Broker (other than real estate or financial) 
Business service 
Business school 
Calibrating service 
Car wash 
Cemetery miscellaneous service 
Child care attendant/school 
Cleaning service 
Cleaning and pressing 
Coin laundry 
Collection agent 
Commercial artist 
Commercial recreation center 
Computer programming 
Consultant 
Cosmetic business 
Counseling 
Court reporter 
Cover charge 
Dance school 
Data service 
Delivery service 
Desk top publishing 
Detective 
Diet school 
Disc jockey 
Discount club 
Driving school 
Duplicating 
Electrologist 
Employment agency 
Engraving 
Entertainment 
Exercise establishment 
Florist service 
Framing 
Golf course 
Graphics 
Healthcare service 
Homecare service 
Hospitals 
Hotel 
Housing inspector 
Identification service 
Installation service 
Insurance adjuster 
Interior decorator 
Investigator 
Janitorial service 
Karate school 
Kennels 
Laboratory 
Landscaping 
Laundry 
Lawn care 
Leasing 
Leasing cars 
Limousine service 
Linen supply 
Loan broker 
Lodging house 
Mail service 
Manicurist 
Massage therapist 
Mediator 
Miniature golf 
Miscellaneous service 
Mobile cleaning service 
Movie theaters 
Music instructor 
Nursing/retirement home 
Orthopedic lab 
Parking lot 
Party management 
Pawnbroker 
Payroll service 
Pest control 
Photographer 
Pool management 
Pool and billiards 
Promoter 
Property management 
Publisher 
Referral service 
Rental service 
Repair service 
Research service 
Secretarial service 
Security service 
Sign painter 
Sitter service 
Skating rink 
Small animal hospital 
Storage 
Tailor/seamstress 
Tanning salon 
Tax service 
Taxicab 
Teacher/instructor 
Telemarketing 
Telephone answering service 
Temporary help 
Tennis court 
Therapeutic massage 
Tour and guide service 
Towing 
Training service 
Translator 
Transfer and hauling 
Travel agency 
Tree surgeon/removal 
Tutoring service 
Undertaker 
U V coating 
Vehicle rental 
Video recording 
Word processing 
Writing/typing service 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-16-067, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 36-126.33. - Bail bondsmen. 
(a)  Except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and terms, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the following meanings: 
(1)  Bail bond; bond shall include every recognizance or acknowledgement of indebtedness conditioned upon the appearance of any person charged with violation of law before any court or judicial officer having criminal jurisdiction. 
(2)  Bondsman shall mean every person who, for compensation, enters into any bond or recognizance as surety. 
(3)  Collateral shall include any money, note, stock, bond, real or personal property, whether tangible or intangible, used or put as security or indemnity for entering into any bail bond. 
(4)  Principal shall mean the person charged with violation of law and whose appearance is required in any bail bond. 
(5)  Surety shall mean every person, firm or corporation, other than a corporation licensed to do business as a bonding company, who for compensation, enters into any recognizance or bond other than as a principal. 
(b)  No bondsman shall enter into any such bond if the aggregate or penalty of such bond, and other bonds, whether entered into this city or some other jurisdiction, on which he has not released from liability is in excess of the unencumbered true market value of his real estate. 
(c)  Each bondsman entering into bonds in the City of Lynchburg, if so directed by the judge of the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg or the judge of the circuit court of any other county or city in which he is licensed, shall place a deed of trust on the real estate that he is using for the limit of his expected bond indebtedness to secure the Commonwealth of Virginia and shall name the commonwealth's attorney of the City of Lynchburg as trustee under the deed of trust. In addition thereto, such bondsman shall furnish the clerk of the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg an acceptable appraisal and title of certificate of the real estate subject to any such deed of trust. Each bondsman entering into bonds in the city shall also file with the clerk of the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg not later than the fifth day of each month a list of all outstanding bonds, whether entered into in this city or some other jurisdiction, on which the bondsman was obligated as of the last day of the preceding month together with the amount of the penalty of each such bond and the unencumbered true market value of the bondsman's real estate. 
(d)  Every bondsman shall keep a book or other record of all bail bonds executed by him, in which he shall be accurately and fairly written, in the English language, the name of the principal, the court and the time in which the principal is to appear, the amount of compensation paid or to be paid, the amount, kind and brief description of any collateral received therefore and the person from whom received. Such book and record shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the judges of the Lynchburg Circuit Court, the Lynchburg Chief of Police or any police officer of the city and the commonwealth's attorney or any of the other assistant commonwealth's attorneys. 
(e)  Any bondsman violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall forfeit his license issued under this chapter. 
(f)  If any bondsman licensed hereunder fails or refuses to pay any forfeiture after notice and demand by the judge of the court having jurisdiction, he shall forfeit his license and shall be suspended from any further bonds in the city until the forfeiture is paid or it is adjudicated that he is not liable thereon. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL LICENSES 

Sec. 36-126.34. - Savings and loan associations. 
    Every savings and loan association or company having its principal office in the city shall pay for the privilege of doing business within the city an annual license tax of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.35. - Amusement machines. 
(a)  Amusement operator shall mean any person leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated amusement machine or device operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle in the city; provided, however, that the term amusement operator shall not include a person owning less than three coin machines and operating such machines on property owned or leased by such person. 
(b)  Any amusement operator, as defined herein, shall pay for the privilege of conducting such business within the city an annual license tax of $200.00, not prorated, for the operation of ten or more coin-operated amusement machines. For the operation of less than ten amusement machines, the operator shall pay an annual license tax of $199.00, not prorated. In addition to this tax, such amusement operator shall pay a tax on the gross receipts actually received by such operator from coin machines or devices operated within the city. The gross receipts tax paid by amusement operators shall be $0.36 for each $100.00 of gross receipts from the preceding year when such gross receipts exceed $100,000.00. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.36. - Itinerant vendors. 
(a)  Itinerant vendors shall mean any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in, do or transact any temporary or transient business in the city in one or more places, and who for the purpose of carrying on such business shall hire, lease, use or occupy any building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, car, boat or public room or any part thereof, including rooms in hotels, lodging houses, or houses of private entertainment, or in any street, alley, or other public place in the city, for a period of less than one year. 
(b)  Any itinerant vendor doing business in the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of $500.00, not prorated. The license shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable nor shall there be any abatement in any instance of the tax upon such license by reason of the fact that such person or persons so licensed shall exercise such license for any period of time less than that for which it was granted. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-07-156, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 36-126-37. - Circuses, menageries, and freak shows. 
(a)  No circus, menagerie, trained animal or wild west show, or other like performance, shall be exhibited within the city until a license has been first obtained therefore, for which privilege a license tax shall be charged as hereinafter provided, and no rebate shall be allowed for rainy days. 
(b)  On every circus, show or menagerie, trained animal or wild west show, a license tax shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  On such shows traveling on railroads requiring transportation of: 
a.  One to ten cars inclusive per day - $110.00. 
b.  Eleven to 20 cars inclusive per day - $165.00. 
c.  Twenty-one to 30 cars inclusive per day - $220.00. 
d.  Over 30 cars inclusive per day - $275.00. 
(2)  On such shows traveling overland by automobile or other conveyance, the tax for each day's performance or exhibition shall be based upon the automobile or conveyance capacity as follows: 
a.  One to ten loads inclusive per day - $55.00. 
b.  Eleven to 30 loads inclusive per day - $110.00. 
c.  Thirty-one to 50 loads inclusive per day - $165.00. 
d.  Over 50 loads inclusive per day - $220.00. 
(3)  The above licenses include parades where circus performances are given in the city. 
(4)  On each parade in the streets of this city of a circus, menagerie, trained animal or wild west show, the performances of which are given outside of the city limits, a license tax of $55.00 shall be charged. 
(c)  Every person conducting within the city a freak show or exhibition of wax figures, or display of like character, or photographic displays of criminals, etc., shall pay for the privilege a license tax of $110.00 per week, not prorated. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.38. - Public utilities; light, heat and power companies. 
    Every person furnishing heat, light or power within the city, whether by means of electricity or gas, shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts accruing from such business in the city for the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.39. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Every person who shall be engaged in the business of selling mixed alcoholic beverages in a restaurant shall, in addition to any other license required by this chapter, obtain a license to sell mixed alcoholic beverages and shall pay therefore the license tax hereinafter provided. 
(1)  For persons operating restaurants, including restaurants located on premises and operated by hotels or motels. 
a.  For each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for 50 to 100 persons, per annum - $200.00. 
b.  For each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 100 but not more than 150 persons, per annum - $350.00. 
c.  For each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 150 persons, per annum - $500.00. 
(2)  For a private, non-profit club operating a restaurant located on the premises of such club, per annum - $350.00. 
(b)  Every person who shall engage in the business of manufacturing, bottling, wholesaling or retailing alcoholic beverages shall obtain a license therefore and shall pay therefore the license tax hereinafter provided. 
(1)  For each distiller's license, per annum; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any distiller manufacturing not more than 5,000 gallons of alcohol or spirits or both during any license year - $1,000.00. 
(2)  For each winery license if to manufacture not in excess of 5,000 gallons of wine during the license year, per annum - $110.00. 
(3)  If to manufacture more than 5,000 gallons of wine during the license year, per annum - $550.00. 
(4)  For each brewery license, per annum - $550.00. 
(5)  For each bottler's license, per annum - $500.00. 
(6)  For each wholesale beer license, per annum - $250.00. 
(7)  For each wholesale wine distributor's license, per annum - $50.00. 
(8)  For each wholesale druggist's license, per annum - $10.00. 
(9)  For each retail on-premises wine license for a hotel, restaurant or club, per annum - $35.00. 
(10)  For each retail off-premises wine license, per annum - $35.00. 
(11)  For each retail beer license, per annum - $105.00. 
(c)  No license shall be issued under this section to any person unless such person shall hold or secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license required by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, which state license shall be exhibited to the commissioner of the revenue, and all dining rooms, restaurants, lunchrooms and clubrooms, wherein the beverages herein defined are sold for consumption on the premises, shall at all times be open to inspection by the state police and the police authorities of the city. Provided, further, that any storeroom or other building from which deliveries are made either at wholesale or retail by bottlers, wholesalers or retailers shall at all times be open to the inspection of the state police and the police authorities of the city. Any violation of the terms of this provision shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation of the license issued in accordance with this section. 
(d)  All licenses provided herein may be prorated, but no license shall be prorated for less than three months. All such licenses shall be issued on the basis of the license year and any license taken out after the beginning of a quarter shall be paid for on the basis of a full quarter. 
(e)  All licenses granted or issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall expire the 31st day of December next following the date from which they were granted or issued. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-18-004 , § 1, 1-9-18) 
Sec. 36-126.40. - Telegraph companies. 
    Every person engaging in the telegraph business in the city shall pay for the privilege of doing business in the city, but not including any business done to or from points within the state, and not including any business done for the government of the United States or the state, their officers or agents, an annual license tax of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts accruing from such business in the city for the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.41. - Telephone companies. 
    Every person engaging in the telephone business in the city shall pay for the privilege of doing business in the city, but not including any business done to or from points within the state, and not including any business done for the government of the United States or the state, their officers or agents, an annual license tax of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts accruing from such business in the city for the preceding year. This annual license tax shall be payable in two installments: one-half on or before July 31 based on such gross receipts from January 1 through June 30, inclusive, and one-half on or before January 31 based on such gross receipts from July 1st through December 31, inclusive. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.42. - Fortune-telling, astrology, palmistry, etc. 
    Every person engaging within the city in fortune-telling, soothsaying, palmistry, astrology, spiritualism, psychological readings, clairvoyance, horoscope, phrenology or a like calling or business, whether a direct charge is made therefore or not, and whether or not medicine or medicine remedies or other merchandise or services are dispensed or sold or prescribed at the same time in the same place, or another place, shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of $1,000.00, not prorated. The license provided for herein shall not be transferable. Any person engaging in such calling or business without first obtaining the license required herein shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Sec. 36-126.43. - Mail order warehouse distribution center. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in the business of a mail order warehouse distribution center in the city shall pay an annual license tax based upon the following when gross receipts exceed $150,000.00: 
(1)  For the first $20,000,000.00 of gross receipts in such business during the preceding year, the sum of $0.20 for each $100.00 of such gross receipts. 
(2)  For the next $20,000,000.00 of gross receipts in such business during the preceding year, the sum of $0.04 for each $100.00 of such gross receipts. 
(3)  For all gross receipts in excess of $40,000,000.00 in such business during the preceding year, no annual license tax shall be assessed. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-16-067, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
DIVISION 4. - MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles licensing and registration generally, § 25-79, et seq. 

Sec. 36-127. - Definitions. 
    The words and phrases used in this division indicating kinds or types of vehicles shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as are set out in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, and acts amendatory thereto. 
    The term "resident of the city," as used herein, shall be construed to embrace any person having a place of abode in the city, irrespective of any intention on the part of any person to return to or to establish a residence outside the city at some future time. 
    The term "resident of the city" shall also be construed as embracing any corporation or firm having an office or place of business in the city. 
    Where any license fee set forth in this division is based on the "weight" of the vehicle, the manufacturer's shipping weight shall be used in determining the same. As used in this article, the term "gross weight" means the aggregate weight of a vehicle or combination of vehicles and its load. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 83; Ord. of 11-12-57; Ord. of 12-22-64; Ord. of 11-10-70; Ord. No. O-84-014, § 1, 1-24-84; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06) 
Sec. 36-128. - Required. 
(a)  Every person having a place of residence in the city shall pay an annual license fee on every motor vehicle, with an active state registration, owned by such person in the city; and every person having a place of business in the city shall pay an annual license fee on every motor vehicle, with an active state registration, owned by such person in the city in or in conjunction with such business; and every person not having a place of residence or business within the city, but who habitually operates a motor vehicle in the city in furtherance of some business or occupation carried on within the city, shall pay an annual license fee on every motor vehicle so used, at the rates hereinafter set forth; and such person shall pay an annual license fee for each of such vehicles within 30 days of purchasing a state license plate for such vehicle, or within 30 days of becoming a resident of the city or within 30 days of beginning to operate a motor vehicle or vehicle on the streets of the city. 
(b)  Any person residing temporarily or permanently within the city who shall operate therein a motor vehicle bearing license plates issued by a jurisdiction other than the state, shall pay an annual license fee for such motor vehicle at such time as, under the laws of the state, a state license plate is required for such motor vehicle. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 84; Ord. of 11-12-57; Ord. of 12-22-64; Ord. of 11-8-66; Ord. of 7-9-68; Ord. of 1-28-69; Ord. No. O-85-248, § 1, 10-8-85; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-05) 
Cross reference- Payment of personal property tax, § 36-132. 
Sec. 36-129. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No license fee shall be required for any motor vehicle used by a vehicle dealer or vehicle manufacturer when such vehicle is being used exclusively for sales purposes; nor for any motor vehicle on which similar fees have been paid to a county, city or town of which the owner of such vehicle was a resident; nor for any motor vehicle belonging to any person who is not a resident of the city when such vehicle is used exclusively for pleasure or personal transportation and not for hire; nor shall any license fee be required for any vehicle which the city is prohibited from the imposition of a license fee by the laws of the state, and especially as so limited by Section 46.2-755 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 46.2-752 of the Code of Virginia the following vehicles are exempt from the payment of a license fee: 
(1)  Motor vehicles that are owned by volunteer rescue squads that operate within the city and which are used for emergency calls. 
(2)  One motor vehicle owned and used personally by any active member of a volunteer rescue squad that operates within the city. On or before June 1 of each year any member of a volunteer rescue squad who is a city resident and who desires a license fee to be waived shall furnish the city collector's office with a certificate signed by the chief or head of the rescue squad verifying that the volunteer is an active member of the rescue squad who regularly responds to emergency calls or regularly performs other duties for the rescue squad. No refunds shall be made for license fees paid by the members of a volunteer rescue squad. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 84; Ord. of 11-12-57; Ord. of 12-22-64; Ord. of 11-8-66; Ord. of 7-9-68; Ord. of 1-28-69; Ord. No. O-95-069, 3-28-95; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06) 
Sec. 36-130. - Amount of license fees. 
    Effective March 1, 2005, the annual license fee hereby imposed on motor vehicles shall be in addition to any other property tax on motor vehicles and shall be as follows: 
(a)  Passenger vehicles: The annual license fee to be paid for motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers designed and used for the transportation of passengers shall be as follows: 
(1)  Twenty-nine dollars and fifty cents for a private motor vehicle other than a motorcycle with a normal seating capacity of not more than ten persons, and weighing less than 4,000 pounds, or $34.50 if the vehicle weights more than 4,000 pounds. 
(2)  Twenty-nine dollars and fifty cents for a school bus owned and operated by a private school or private bus owned and operated by a charitable organization in connection with its work. 
(3)  Twenty-nine dollars and fifty cents for a noncollapsible trailer or semitrailer designed for use as living quarters for human beings. 
(4)  Twenty-nine dollars and fifty cents for a taxicab and other vehicles kept for rent or for hire operated with a chauffeur for the transportation of passengers and weighing less than 4,000 pounds, or $34.50 cents if the vehicle weighs more than 4,000 pounds. This subsection shall not apply to vehicles used as common carriers nor shall it apply to ambulances operating under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under chapter 5 of this Code. 
(5)  Twenty-one dollars for a motorcycle. 
(6)  Twenty-nine dollars and fifty cents for a bus used exclusively for transportation to and from Sunday School or church for the purpose of divine worship. 
The manufacturer's shipping weight or scale weight shall be used for computing all taxes required by this section to be based upon the weight of the vehicle. 
(b)  Vehicles other than passenger vehicles: The annual license fee to be paid for all motor vehicles not designed and used for the transportation of passengers shall be an amount to be determined by the gross weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles of which it is a part, when loaded to the maximum capacity for which it is registered and licensed, by the state pursuant to applicable provision of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, according to the schedule herein set forth; provided, however, that the fee for the license fee for said motor vehicles shall not exceed $287.30. For each 1,000 pounds of gross weight, or major fraction thereof, for which any such vehicle is registered by the state, there shall be paid to the city motor vehicle license officer the fee indicated in the following schedule immediately opposite the weight group into which such vehicle, or any combination of vehicles of which it is a part, falls when loaded to the maximum capacity for which it is registered and licensed; provided that in no case shall the license fee be less than $34.50 nor more than $287.30. 
SCHEDULE 
Gross weight group 
(pounds) License fee per thousand pounds of gross weight 10,000 and less $ 3.45 10,001-11,000 3.45 11,001-12,000 3.45 12,001-13,000 3.45 13,001-14,000 3.45 14,001-15,000 3.45 15,001-16,000 3.60 16,001-17,000 4.00 17,001-18,000 4.40 18,001-19,000 4.80 19,001-20,000 5.20 20,001-21,000 5.60 21,001-22,000 6.00 22,001-23,000 6.40 23,001-24,000 6.80 24,001-25,000 6.90 25,001-26,000 6.95 26,001-27,000 8.25 27,001-28,000 8.30 28,001-29,000 8.35 29,001-34,000 8.45 Over 34,000 maximum fee 8.45  
(c)  Collapsible trailers, trailers and semitrailers not designated and used for transportation of passengers: The license fees for collapsible trailers, trailers and semitrailers not designed and used for the transportation of passengers shall be as follows: 
Registered Gross Weight Fee 1-1,500 lbs. $ 8.00 1,501-4000 lbs. 18.50 4,001 lbs. and above 23.00  
(d)  Vehicles transporting well-drilling machinery: The annual license fee to be paid for any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer upon which well-drilling machinery is attached and which is permanently used solely for transporting such machinery shall be $15.00. 
(e)  When fees due and payable: License fees for all vehicles shall be due and payable on the fifth day of June in each year. All license fees levied by this section shall be paid with the first installment of personal property taxes. 
(f)  Proration: The annual license fees paid on a motor vehicle that acquires a situs within the city after January 1 of a tax year shall be prorated by paying the following percentages of the annual fee: 
Period Percentage January 1-February 28 100% March 1-March 31 92% April 1-April 30 84% May 1-May 31 76% June 1-June 30 68% July 1-July 31 60% August 1-August 31 52% September 1-September 30 44% October 1-October 31 36% November 1-November 30 28% December 1-December 31 20%  
(g)  Conflict with state law: Nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing a license fee on any such vehicle in excess of the amount authorized to be imposed by the laws of the state. 
(h)  The commissioner of revenue will use the file by exception method for each fiduciary mentioned in this section, as per Section 58.1-3518.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(i)  All city taxes for each year or fiscal year on tangible personal property assessed under this section shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of section 36-171. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 84; Ord. of 11-12-57; Ord. of 12-22-64; Ord. of 11-8-66; Ord. of 7-9-68; Ord. of 1-28-69; Ord. of 12-23-75; Ord. of 3-1-79; Ord. No. O-88-105, § 1,5-24-88, eff. 7-1-88; Ord. No. O-88-305, § 1,11-22-88; Ord. No. O-89-112, § 1, 5-23-89, eff. 7-1-89; Ord. No. O-96-198, 6-25-96; Ord. No. O-04-062, 6-8-04, eff. 7-1-04; Ord. No. O-05-022, 2-8-05, eff. 1-1-06; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06; Ord. No. O-06-121, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 36-131. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-05-091, adopted July 12, 2005, eff. Jan. 1, 2006, repealed § 36-131. 
Sec. 36-132. - Personal property tax and parking ticket prerequisite. 
(a)  No motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer shall be licensed by the city unless and until the applicant for such license shall have produced satisfactory evidence to the city motor vehicle license officer of the following: (i) that all personal property taxes upon the motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer to be licensed have been paid which have been properly assessed or are assessable against the applicant by the city; (ii) that any delinquent personal property taxes assessed or assessable by the city on any other motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer previously or currently owned by the applicant have been paid; and, the personal property taxes assessed or assessable by the city on any tangible personal property used or usable as a dwelling titled by the department of motor vehicles and owned by the applicant have been paid. 
(b)  No motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer shall be licensed by the city unless all fines owed to the city by the owner of the vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer for violation of the city's ordinances governing parking of vehicles have been paid. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to vehicles owned by firms or companies in the business of leasing motor vehicles. 
(Tax Code 1941, §§ 84, 86.1; Ord. of 9-9-75; Ord. of 3-1-79; Ord. No. O-94-041, 2-22-94; Ord. No. O-02-041, 3-12-02, Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06) 
Sec. 36-133. - Transfers. 
(a)  Any person who has paid a license fee required by this division and who sells or transfers a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer, currently licensed in the city, may have the current city license fee assigned to another vehicle of like design and weight titled in such owner's name according to the provisions of state law, without the payment of any additional license fee. In the event such other vehicle shall be of greater weight or of larger capacity than the one for which the license was originally issued and paid, such person shall pay an amount equal to the difference between the license paid and the one required to be paid for such other vehicle. 
(b)  Upon the death of the owner of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, the city license fee paid for said vehicle shall continue in force as a valid license until the end of the year for which the license is paid, or until the ownership of the vehicle is transferred before the end of the license year by the executor or administrator of the estate of the deceased owner or by a legatee or distributee of the estate. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 85; Ord. of 11-10-70; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06) 
Sec. 36-134. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-05-091, adopted July 12, 2005, eff. Jan. 1, 2006, repealed § 36-134. 
Sec. 36-135. - Refunds. 
(a)  Any person who has paid a current license fee who moves to another state and takes their vehicle with them or who disposes of the vehicle for which the license fee was paid and does not purchase another vehicle, may, upon furnishing to the city motor vehicle license officer proof by affidavit or otherwise, satisfactory to such officer, request a refund of the unused portion of the city license fee paid. Upon certification by the license officer that the vehicle has been moved to another state, or the vehicle for which the license fee was paid has been sold and properly transferred according to the provisions of state law, the director of the finance department shall refund to the applicant the following percentages of the total cost of the license fee paid. 
Period Percentage January 1-February 28 100% March 1-March 31 92% April 1-April 30 84% May 1-May 31 76% June 1-June 30 68% July 1-July 31 60% August 1-August 31 52% September 1-September 30 44% October 1-October 31 36% November 1-November 30 28% December 1-December 31 20%  
    Any person desiring a refund must apply for such refund prior to April 30 of the succeeding tax year. All refunds shall be paid out of current revenues and charged against current motor vehicle license funds. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section, no other refund shall be made. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 85; Ord. of 11-10-70; Ord. of 2-14-78; Ord. No. O-96-198, 6-25-96; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06) 
Sec. 36-136. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-05-091, adopted July 12, 2005, eff. Jan. 1, 2006, repealed § 36-136. 
Sec. 36-136.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-05-091, adopted July 12, 2005, eff. Jan. 1, 2006, repealed § 36-136.1. 
Sec. 36-137. - Penalties. 
    Any person who operates, parks or who allows the parking of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer on any public street or public right-of-way, or on any privately owned street, mall or parking area that is open to the public or utilized for public use within the Lynchburg City Limits without the payment of the required license fee shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and a violation may not be discharged by payment of the fine and no portion of the fine may be suspended or discharged except upon presentation of satisfactory evidence that the required license fee has been paid. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 86; Ord. of 10-9-56; Ord. No. O-84-014, § 1, 1-24-84; Ord. No. O-90-236, 7-10-90; Ord. No. O-91-068, 4-9-91; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06) 
Secs. 36-138-36-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXES ON REAL PROPERTY AND TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 36-149. - Tax rates-Tangible personal property in general; exempt household property. 
(a)  Effective on and after July 1, 2004, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2004 and ending June 30, 2005, and also for each and every fiscal year thereafter beginning July 1 and ending June 30, of each such year, unless otherwise changed by council, on each $100.00 of the assessed value of the following-named personal property, there shall be a tax of $3.80 for the purpose of establishing and maintaining the public schools of the city and for the purpose of providing the interest on loans negotiated and bonds issued and to be issued by the city for school purposes, and for general governmental purposes, to wit: vehicles of all kinds, books, pictures, mechanics' tools, machinery and the market value of all other tangible personal property not specifically enumerated including the property separately classified by Sections 58.1-3503, 58.1-3506 and 58.1-3521 of the Code of Virginia, 1950 as amended; except and provided that household goods and personal effects owned and used by an individual or by a family or household incident to maintaining an abode which are defined as separate items of taxation and classified by Section 58.1-3504 and 58.1-3505 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, are exempt from the tax imposed by this section, effective for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1973 and ending June 30, 1974 and for each fiscal year thereafter. 
(b)  The commissioner of revenue will use the file by exception method for each fiduciary mentioned in this section as per Section 58.1-3518.1, Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(c)  All city taxes for each year or fiscal year on tangible personal property assessed under this section shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of section 36-171. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 113.17; Ord. of 9-9-75; Ord. No. O-90-136, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-04-062, 6-8-04, eff. 7-1-04; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06) 
Sec. 36-149.1. - Personal property tax on motor vehicles, trailers and boats. 
(a)  Tax liability. There shall be a personal property tax at the rate established in section 36-149 on motor vehicles, trailers and boats (taxable property) which have a situs within the city on January 1 of each year and which acquire a situs within the city on or after January 2, 1985, and all years thereafter. When taxable property acquires a situs within the city on or after January 2, the personal property tax for that year shall be prorated on a monthly basis. When taxable property with a situs in the city is transferred to a new owner, personal property tax will be assessed to the new owner prorated on a monthly basis for the portion of the tax year during which the new owner owns the taxable property. For purposes of proration, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of less than one-half of a month shall not be counted. All taxable property shall be assessed as of January 1 of each year or, if it acquires situs or has its title transferred after January 1, as of the first day of the month in which the taxable property acquires situs within the city or has its title transferred. 
(b)  Refunds. When any taxable property loses its situs within the city or its title is transferred, the taxpayer shall be relieved from personal property tax and receive a refund for personal property tax already paid, prorated on a monthly basis, upon application to the commissioner of the revenue; provided, that application is made within three years from the last day of the tax year during which the taxable personal property lost situs or had its title transferred. No refund of less than $5.00 shall be issued to a taxpayer, unless specifically requested by the taxpayer. No refund shall be made if the taxable property acquires a situs within the commonwealth in a non pro-rating locality. When any taxable property loses its situs within the city and acquires a situs within another state the taxpayer shall not be entitled to a refund except upon a showing of sufficient evidence that the taxpayer has been assessed and has paid taxes on such taxable property for the remainder of the tax year to such state. 
(c)  Filing dates. Taxable property which acquires a situs within the city or which has its title transferred after January 1 of a tax year shall be filed within 30 days of the date on which situs is acquired or title is transferred. 
(d)  Payment dates. Taxes on all taxable property with a situs within the city on January 1 of each year shall be paid in two installments of June 5 and December 5 of such tax year. Taxes on all taxable property which acquires a situs within the city or has its title transferred after January 1 of a tax year for the preparation of personal property tax bills for the tax year shall be paid in two installments of June 5 and December 5 of the tax year. Taxes on all taxable property which acquires a situs within the city or has its title transferred after May 1 shall be paid within 14 days from the date of assessment. 
(e)  Late payment penalty. Any person who fails to pay any personal property taxes on or before the installment due dates as provided above shall incur a penalty of ten percent of the total amount of the tax levied, including any amount to be paid by the commonwealth, which penalty shall become a part of the taxes due. 
(f)  Exemption when taxes paid elsewhere in commonwealth. An exemption from this tax and penalties arising therefrom shall be granted for any tax year or portion thereof during which the property was legally assessed by another jurisdiction in the commonwealth, and such tax on the assessed property was paid. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall also apply to all motor vehicles, trailers and boats used in a trade or business which acquire a situs within the city during a tax year. 
(Ord. No. O-84-277, § 1, 11-27-84, eff. 1-1-85; Ord. No. O-91-242, 10-8-91; Ord. No. O-93-299, 11-9-93; Ord. No. O-01-205, 11-27-01; Ord. No. O-02-042, 3-12-02; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06; Ord. No. O-05-150, 11-22-05, eff. 1-1-05; Ord. No. O-06-121, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 36-149.2. - Implementation of the Personal Property Tax Relief Act of 1998. 
(a)  The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the implementation of the changes to the Personal Property Tax Relief Act affected by legislation adopted during the 2004 special session I and the 2005 regular session of the General Assembly of Virginia. 
(1)  Terms used in this ordinance that have defined meanings set forth in Personal Property Tax Relief Act shall have the same meanings as set forth in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3523, as amended. 
(2)  To the extent that the provisions of this ordinance conflict with any prior ordinance or provision of the Lynchburg City Code, this ordinance shall control. 
(b)  Method of computing and reflecting tax relief. 
(1)  For tax years commencing in 2006, the City of Lynchburg adopts the provisions of item 503.E of the 2005 appropriations act, providing for the computation of tax relief as a specific dollar amount to be offset against the total taxes that would otherwise be due but for personal property tax relief and the reporting of such specific dollar relief on the tax bill. 
(2)  The city council shall, by resolution, set the percentage of tax relief at such a level that it is anticipated fully to exhaust Personal Property Tax Relief Act relief funds provided to the City of Lynchburg by the commonwealth. 
(3)  Personal property tax bills shall set forth on their face the specific dollar amount of relief credited with respect to each qualifying vehicle, together with an explanation of the general manner in which relief is allocated. 
(c)  Allocation of personal property tax relief shall be provided in accordance with the general provisions of this section, as implemented by the specific provisions of the City of Lynchburg Annual Budget relating to Personal Property Tax Relief Act relief. 
(1)  Relief shall be allocated in such a manner as to eliminate personal property taxation of each qualifying vehicle with an assessed value of $1,000.00 or less. 
(2)  Relief with respect to qualifying vehicles with assessed values of more than $1,000.00 shall be provided at a percentage, annually fixed and applied to the first $20,000.00 in value of each such qualifying vehicle that is estimated to fully use all available state personal property tax relief funding. The percentage shall be established annually. 
(d)  Pursuant to authority conferred in item 503.D of the 2005 appropriations act, unless the assessment is determined to be of no fault of the taxpayer, the City of Lynchburg City Collector is authorized to issue a supplemental personal property tax bill, in the amount of 100 percent of tax due without regard to any former entitlement to state personal property tax relief, plus applicable penalties and interest, to any taxpayer whose taxes with respect to a qualifying vehicle for tax year 2005 or any prior tax year remain unpaid on September 1, 2006, or such date as state funds for reimbursement of the state share of such bill have become unavailable, whichever earlier occurs. 
(1)  If the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer, the supplemental personal property tax bill shall not be imposed, or if imposed shall be abated by the official who imposed them. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 
a.  Acted responsibly means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing/payment obligations and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure. 
b.  Events beyond the taxpayer's control include, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with sole responsibility with tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the commissioner of the revenue who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer when he provided the erroneous information. 
(e)  Penalty and interest with respect to bills issued pursuant to this section shall be computed on the entire amount of tax owed. Interest shall be computed at the rate provided in chapter 36, article IV, section 36-164 of the Code of the City of Lynchburg from the original due date of the tax. 
(Ord. No. O-05-150, 11-22-05, eff. 1-1-06) 
Sec. 36-149.3. - Exemption for Lynchburg Life Saving and First Aid Crew, Inc. 
(a)  The motor vehicles of volunteer members of the Lynchburg Life Saving and First Aid Crew, Inc. as set forth below are declared to be a separate class of property and shall constitute a classification for local taxation separate from other classifications of tangible personal property. 
(b)  The motor vehicle must be owned by the volunteer member or leased by the volunteer member and the volunteer member must be obligated by the terms of the lease to pay tangible personal property tax on the motor vehicle and said vehicle is regularly used by said volunteer member to respond to calls of the Lynchburg Life Saving and First Aid Crew, Inc. 
(c)  The minimum eligibility and participation requirements and the form of the certification required by this section shall be approved by the city council. 
(d)  The volunteer shall furnish the commissioner of the revenue with a certification by the chief of the volunteer group by April 1 of each year that the volunteer is a member of the volunteer crew who regularly responds to calls or regularly performs other duties, and the motor vehicle owned or leased by the volunteer member shall be identified. The commissioner of revenue shall be authorized, in his discretion, and for good cause shown and without fault on the part of the volunteer, to accept a certification after the April 1 deadline. 
(e)  Each household shall be allowed only one special classification under this section. 
(f)  A replacement vehicle may be certified and classified pursuant to this section when the vehicle certified at the immediately prior certification date is transferred during the tax year. 
(g)  No tax shall be levied upon the aforesaid classification of personal property. 
(Ord. No. O-98-201, 9-8-98, eff. 1-1-98; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06; Ord. No. O-05-150, 11-22-05, eff. 1-1-06) 
Sec. 36-150. - Same-Personal property of persons, firms or corporations. 
    Effective on and after July 1, 2004, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2004, and ending June 30, 2005, and also for each and every fiscal year thereafter beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of each year, unless otherwise changed by council, all tangible personal property employed in a trade or business shall pay a tax of $3.80 on each $100.00 of all personal property in the city; and should such person decline to give the commissioner of the revenue a list within the time specified by law, or within 30 days of the necessary blank forms having been mailed or delivered to such person, the commissioner shall at once proceed to assess the property as he deems fair and just. 
    Every taxpayer owning any of the property mentioned in this section, on January 1 of any year, shall file a return thereof with the commissioner of the revenue on the form so prescribed. Such return shall be filed on or before February 15 of each year. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 114.17; Ord. of 6-27-72; Ord. No. O-90-135, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-04-062, 6-8-04, eff. 7-1-04; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06) 
Sec. 36-151. - Same-Machinery used in certain manufacturing and mining businesses. 
    Effective on and after July 1, 1972, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1972, and ending June 30, 1973, and also for each and every fiscal year thereafter beginning July first and ending June thirtieth of each such year, unless otherwise changed by council, on each $100.00 of the assessed value of all machinery and tools, except machinery and equipment used by farm wineries as defined by Section 4-2(10A) of the Code of Virginia, used in the manufacturing, mining, processing or reprocessing, radio or television broadcasting, dairy, dry cleaning or laundry business, pursuant to Section 58.1-3507 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, there shall be a tax of $3.00 for the purpose of establishing and maintaining the public schools of the city and for the purpose of providing the interest and sinking fund on loans negotiated and bonds issued by the city for school purposes, and for general governmental purposes. 
    Every taxpayer owning any of the property mentioned in this section, on January first of any year, shall file a return thereof with the commissioner of the revenue on the form so prescribed. Such return shall be filed on or before February fifteenth of each year. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 116.17; Ord. of 6-27-72; Ord. No. O-85-010, 1-22-85, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-87-140, § 1, 7-14-87; Ord. No. O-95-232, 8-8-95; Ord. No. O-02-054, 3-26-02; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06; Ord. No. O-10-149, 12-14-10; Ord. No. O-11-003, 1-11-11; Ord. No. O-16-085 , § 1, 6-28-16) 
Sec. 36-151.1. - Tax rates-Machinery and tools used in certain food processing businesses. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by Section 58.1-3508.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, effective on and after July 1, 1997, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1997 and ending June 30, 1998, and for every fiscal year thereafter unless otherwise changed by council, on each $100.00 of the assessed value of all machinery and tools used by a food processing plant that is located in a designated enterprise zone there shall be a tax of $3.00 for the purpose of establishing and maintaining the public schools of the city and for the purpose of providing the interest and sinking fund of loans negotiated and bonds issued by the city for school purposes, and for general governmental purposes. Provided, however, that each food processor located in an enterprise zone shall receive the following tax credits for each product line and/or manufacturing or warehouse expansion constructed within the first eight years of its operation: for the first five tax years there shall be a 100 percent tax credit and for tax years six through ten there shall be a 50 percent tax credit. Thereafter, the tax shall be at the rate provided for in this section. 
(Ord. No. O-96-273, 10-8-96) 
Sec. 36-152. - Same-Real estate. 
    Effective on and after July 1, 2012, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2012, and ending June 30, 2013, and for each and every fiscal year thereafter beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of each such year, unless otherwise changed by council, on each $100.00 of the assessed value of real estate in this city and the improvements thereon there shall be a tax of $1.11 for the purpose of establishing and maintaining the public schools of the city, and for the purpose of providing the interest and sinking fund on loans negotiated and bonds issued or to be issued by the city for school purposes, and for general governmental purposes. Provided, however, that effective on and after July 1, 2004, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2004, and ending June 30, 2005, and for each and every fiscal year thereafter beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of each such year, unless otherwise changed by council, for each $100.00 of the assessed value of real estate and tangible personal property of public service corporations other than railway companies not equalized by the state corporation commission pursuant to Section 58.1-2604 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, there shall be a tax of $3.80. Provided, however, that effective on and after July 1, 2007, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2007, and ending June 30, 2008, and for each and every fiscal year thereafter beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of each such year, unless otherwise changed by council, for each $100.00 of assessed value of real estate and tangible personal property of public service corporations other than aircraft, automobiles, and trucks of all such corporations and rolling stock of railway companies, there shall be a tax of $1.11. 
(Ord. No. O-95-177, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-96-140, 5-28-96; Ord. No. O-04-062, 6-8-04, eff. 7-1-04; Ord. No. O-07-054, 5-8-07, eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. O-12-076, 4-24-12, eff. 7-1-12) 
Sec. 36-153. - Same-Commonwealth-owned real estate. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon all real estate owned by the Commonwealth of Virginia located within the corporate limits of the city a service charge in lieu of real estate taxes. 
(b)  The rate per $100.00 of assessed value for such service charge shall be fixed annually by the city director of fiscal management within 31 days after the beginning of the fiscal year for which it is assessed, pursuant to the provisions of Section 58-16.2 of the Code of Virginia (1950) as amended. 
(c)  Such charge shall be due and collectible, including penalties and interest for late payments, if any, as real estate taxes assessed and collected under section 36-171. 
(d)  The charge assessed under this section shall be assessed for the fiscal year commencing July 1, 1978, and annually thereafter until changed by council. 
(e)  Pursuant to this section, the director of fiscal management reported to council on August 8, 1978, the following schedule of service charges on tax exempt property for fiscal year 1978-1979: 
(1)  For properties receiving police, fire and refuse collection services, a rate of $0.29 per $100.00 of assessed value for property located in the old city and $0.25 per $100.00 of assessed value for property in the annexed area. 
(2)  For those properties classified as faculty and staff housing, a rate of $0.725 per $100.00 for property in the old city and $0.625 per $100.00 in the annexed area. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 117.18; Ord. of 2-28-78) 
Sec. 36-154. - Certified pollution control equipment and facilities. 
(a)  Effective on and after July 1, 1995, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1995 and ending June 30, 1996, and for each fiscal year thereafter, unless otherwise changed by city council, certified pollution control equipment and facilities as defined herein, are hereby declared to be a separate class of property and shall be taxed at 85 percent of its assessed value. 
(b)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Certified pollution control equipment and facilities" shall mean any property, including real or personal property, equipment, facilities or devices used primarily for the purpose of abating or preventing pollution of the atmosphere or waters of the commonwealth which the state certifying authority having jurisdiction with respect to such property has certified to the department of taxation as having been constructed, reconstructed, erected or acquired in conformity with the state program or requirements for abatement or control of water or atmospheric pollution or contamination. 
(2)  "State certifying authority" shall mean the state water control board for water pollution, and the state air pollution control board for air pollution, and shall include any interstate agency authorized to act in place of a certifying authority of the commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. O-95-177, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 36-154.1. - Certified solar equipment, facilities or devices and certified recycling equipment, facilities or devices. 
(a)  Effective on and after July 1, 1995, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1995 and ending June 30, 1996, and for each fiscal year thereafter, unless otherwise changed by city council, certified solar equipment, facilities or devices and certified recycling equipment, facilities or devices, as defined herein, are hereby declared to be a separate class of property and shall be taxed at 85 percent of its assessed value. 
(b)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Certified recycling equipment, facilities or devices" means machinery and equipment which is certified by the department of waste management as integral to the recycling process and for use primarily for the purpose of abating or preventing pollution of the atmosphere or waters of the commonwealth and used in manufacturing facilities or plant units which manufacture, process, compound, or produce for sale recyclable items of tangible personal property at fixed locations in the commonwealth. 
(2)  "Certified solar equipment, facilities or devices" means any property, equipment, facilities or devices certified by the city's inspections division to be designed and used primarily for the purpose of providing for the collection and use of incident solar energy for water heating, space heating or cooling, or other application which would otherwise require a conventional source of energy such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity. 
(3)  "Local certifying authority" means the city's inspections division. The state board of housing and community development shall promulgate regulations setting forth criteria for certifiable solar energy equipment. The department of waste management shall promulgate regulations establishing criteria for recycling equipment, facilities or devices. 
(c)  Any person residing in the city may proceed to have solar energy equipment, facilities or devices certified as exempt, wholly or partially from taxation by applying to the city's inspections division. If, after examination of such equipment, facility or device, the inspections division determines that the unit primarily performs any of the functions set forth in subsection (b) and conforms to the requirements set by the regulations of the state board of housing and community development, the inspections division shall approve and certify such application. The inspections division shall forthwith transmit to the commissioner of the revenue those applications properly approved and certified by the inspections division as meeting all of the requirements qualifying such equipment, facility or device for exemption from taxation. Any person aggrieved by a decision by the inspections division may appeal such decision to the local board of building code appeals, which may affirm or reverse such decision. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the certificate from the inspections division or the state department of waste management, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed to determine the value of such qualifying solar energy equipment, facilities or devices or certified recycling equipment, facilities or devices. The exemption provided by this section shall be effective beginning in the next succeeding tax year and shall be permitted for a term of not less than five years. 
(e)  It shall presumed for the purpose of the administration of this section, and for no other purposes, that the value of such qualifying solar energy equipment, facilities and devices is not less than the normal cost of purchasing and installing such equipment, facilities and devices. 
(Ord. No. O-95-177, 6-13-95) 
Secs. 36-155-36-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 36-164. - Penalties; fines; assessment where persons fail to give assessing officer required information. 
    If any person, firm or corporation shall continue the business, employment or profession after the expiration of a license previously issued, without obtaining a new license, such person, firm or corporation shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the license tax which was due and payable, plus interest at the rate of ten percent per annum, as provided in section 36-126.9, in addition to the license tax imposed by law, and such penalty and interest shall be assessed and paid along with the license tax and shall become a part of the license tax; but such penalty shall in no case be less than $1.00. If such failure to obtain a new license be continued for a longer period than one month, such person, firm or corporation shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor for each separate offense committed after such expiration of such month, and the taxes, penalty and interest provided in the preceding part of this section shall also be assessed against such person, firm or corporation and collection thereof enforced in the manner provided by law for the enforcement of other taxes. In such case, if such person, firm or corporation shall, on demand, fail or refuse to file with the assessing officer the information necessary to enable him to assess a license tax according to the basis provided by law, such assessing officer shall assess such license tax upon the best information he can obtain, adding thereto the penalty and interest prescribed by law. 
    If any person, firm or corporation shall, in violation of law, commence to prosecute any business, employment or profession without a license, such person, firm or corporation shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor for each separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any such person, firm or corporation from the payment of the license tax prescribed by law. In addition to the license tax imposed by law, such person, firm or corporation shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the license tax which was due and payable, plus interest at the rate of ten percent per annum, as provided in section 36-126.9, and such penalty and interest shall be assessed and paid along with the license tax and shall become a part of the license tax; but such penalty shall in no case be less than $1.00. The collection of such taxes, the penalties and interest shall be enforced in the manner provided by law for the enforcement and collection of other taxes. In such case, if such person, firm or corporation shall, on demand, fail or refuse to file with the assessing officer the information necessary to enable him to assess a license tax according to the basis provided by law, such assessing officer shall assess such license tax upon the best information he can obtain, adding thereto the penalty and interest prescribed by law. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 118; Ord. of 12-11-56; Ord. No. O-81-017, § 2, 1-27-81; Ord. No. O-01-205, 11-2701) 
Sec. 36-165. - Duties of commissioner of the revenue in general. 
    It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to keep a book in which he shall classify all the branches of businesses and occupations upon which a license tax is imposed by this Code, and show the amount of assessment on each license, the name of the person against whom assessed and the period for which said license is issued. At the end of each month he shall deliver to the city auditor a report showing the entries in his books during the preceding month, properly classified. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 119; Ord. of 1-8-52) 
Sec. 36-166. - Penalty for failure to make returns to commissioner. 
    Whenever any person who is required by the provisions of this Code to file any application, return or report of his activities, sales, commissions, fees, receipts or other things to the commissioner of the revenue at certain specified times, shall fail to do so, he shall be fined ten percent of the tax assessable on such application, return or report or $10.00, whichever is greater. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 120; Ord. No. O-87-278, § 1, 12-8-87) 
Sec. 36-167. - Reports to city attorney of failure to make return or pay license tax. 
    It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue and the collector of the city taxes promptly to report to the city attorney every case of default by any person in making returns or paying license taxes under this Code. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 121) 
Sec. 36-168. - Reports to commissioner of the revenue by persons leasing property for use for sale of oil products. 
(a)  Every person who lets or sublets any property in the city to any other person to be used for the sale of oil products, or which permits any property owned or leased by him to be used for such purpose by any other person, other than his employee, shall report to the commissioner of the revenue on January 1 of each license year the name of the person to whom such property has been let, sublet or permitted to be used. Such information shall be reported to the commissioner at any other time upon the written request of the commissioner. 
(b)  If, for any reason, such lease, sublease or permission is terminated during any license year, and a new lease, sublease or permission is granted to a different person for such purpose, the name of such different person shall be immediately reported to the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 122) 
Sec. 36-169. - Assessment of vehicles, machinery, tools, and other tangible personal property used or held in connection with any mining, manufacturing, or other business, trade, occupation or profession. 
(a)  In assessing the value of automotive vehicles, the commissioner of the revenue shall use the values listed in some recognized publication dealing with the market value of such automotive vehicles as of January 1 of the current year. 
(b)  In assessing the value of machinery, tools, and other tangible personal property (except automotive vehicles which are to be assessed as set out in paragraph (a) above) used or held in connection with any mining, manufacturing, or other business, trade, occupation or profession, the commissioner of the revenue shall be, and he is, hereby authorized and directed to require each person making a return on such machinery, tools, or other tangible personal property to make return under oath of the original book cost (before depreciation) of all such machinery, tools, and other tangible personal property listed on the person's books on the first day of January of each year in which the assessment is made, as well as the original book cost (before depreciation) of all machinery, tools, and other tangible personal property used or held in connection with any such mining, manufacturing, or other business, trade, occupation or profession, but not listed on the person's books on the aforesaid date by reason of having been fully depreciated; such information to be used as a basis of assessment, which shall be at the fair market value of such machinery, tools, and other tangible personal property. In the event original book cost figures are not available, the person making such return shall make a bona fide effort to estimate the same; provided, however, that in any case in which the commissioner of the revenue has reason to believe that any return made on any such machinery, tools, and other tangible personal property by any person is inadequate, the said commissioner of the revenue shall, in addition to such other powers as he may have, be authorized to examine, or cause to be examined, any and all books and records of the person making such return, and may also require the attendance at his office of the person making such return and examine such person under oath concerning the same. 
(c)  Definition: The term "original book cost" whenever used in this section shall be construed to mean the invoice price at the time of purchase, plus all freight and handling charges, plus all installation costs. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 123; Ord. of 12-12-49) 
Sec. 36-170. - Collection of taxes where taxpayer is moving or contemplating moving from city. 
    Should it come to the knowledge of the collector of city taxes that any person owing taxes or levies to the city is moving, or contemplates moving from the city prior to the time that said penalty may be added by the council, the collector shall have the right to collect the taxes by distress, garnishment or otherwise at any time after the tax bills shall come into his hands. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 124) 
Sec. 36-171. - When tax installments due; penalty; partial payments. 
(a)  Effective on and after July 1, 1974, one-fourth of the city tax assessed on real estate for each fiscal year shall be paid to the city collector between November 1 and November 15, inclusive, of the fiscal year for which the tax is assessed, one-fourth shall be paid to the city collector between January 1 and January 15, inclusive, of the fiscal year for which the tax is assessed, one-fourth shall be paid to the city collector between March 1 and March 15, inclusive, of the fiscal year for which the tax is assessed, and the remaining one-fourth paid to the city collector between May 1 and May 15, inclusive, of the fiscal year for which said tax is assessed. 
(b)  If any installment of taxes due on any particular piece of property shall not be paid as and when due as above set forth, said installment shall at once become due and collectible with ten percent penalty thereon. 
(c)  All city taxes for each year or fiscal year on tangible personal property, assessed under section 36-149 of this Code, and all city taxes for each year or fiscal year on machinery and tools, assessed under section 36-151 of this Code, shall be paid to the city collector in two installments on June 5 and December 5, inclusive, of the year or fiscal year for which the tax is assessed. 
(d)  If any city taxes due on any tangible personal property for any year or fiscal year assessed under section 36-149 of this Code, or on machinery and tools, assessed under section 36-151 of this Code, shall not be paid as and when as above provided, then the same shall have added thereto the penalty of ten percent on the total amount of taxes levied, including any amount to be paid by the commonwealth. 
(e)  Interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the first day of the month following the month in which taxes on real estate, tangible personal property and machinery and tools are required to be paid shall be collected upon the principal and applicable penalty then remaining unpaid. Effective on and after July 1, 1995, interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the first day of the month following the month in which taxes are required to be paid, shall be collected upon the principal and applicable penalty remaining unpaid. No penalty for the failure to pay a tax or installment shall exceed ten percent of the tax past due, or in the case of tangible personal property ten percent of the tax levied, including any amount paid by the commonwealth, or the sum of $10.00, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of tax levied. 
(f)  Effective on and after July 1, 1995, whenever the city utilizes the services of an attorney or collection agency to collect delinquent taxes on subjects other than real estate, reasonable attorney's fees or collection agency's fees shall be added to the amount of the delinquent tax bill. The attorney's fees or collection agency's fees shall not exceed 20 percent of the delinquent tax bill upon nonpayment. Attorney's fees shall be added only if such delinquency is collected by action at law or suit in equity. No tax assessment or tax bill shall be deemed delinquent and subject to the collection procedures prescribed herein during the pendency of any administrative appeal under Section 58.1-3980 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, so long as the appeal is filed within 90 days of the date of the assessment, and for 30 days after the date of the final determination of the appeal. 
(g)  The city shall collect an administrative fee from each person who owes delinquent taxes or other delinquent charges to cover the administrative costs associated with the city's collection of delinquent taxes and other charges. Such administrative fee shall be in addition to all penalties and interest, and shall be $30.00 for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to 30 or more days after notice of delinquent taxes or charges pursuant to § 58.1-3919 of the Code of Virginia but prior to the taking of any judgment with respect to such delinquent taxes or charges, and $35.00 for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to judgment. If the collection activity is to collect on a nuisance abatement lien, the fee for administrative costs shall be $150.00 or 25 percent of the cost, whichever is less; however, in no event shall the fee be less than $25.00. The city shall also collect from each person who owes delinquent taxes and other delinquent charges reasonable attorney's fees or collections agency fee's actually contracted for. The attorney's or collection agency's fees shall not exceed 20 percent of the taxes or other charges so collected. No tax assessment or tax bill shall be deemed delinquent and subject to the collection procedures prescribed herein during the pendency of any administrative appeal under Section 58.1-3980 of the Code of Virginia, so long as the appeal is filed within 90 days of the date of the assessment, and for 30 days after the date of the final determination of the appeal, provided that nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to preclude the assessment or refund, following the final determination of such appeal, of such interest as otherwise may be provided by general law as to that portion of the tax bill that has remained unpaid or was overpaid during the pendency of such appeal and is determined in such appeal to be properly due and owing. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 125; Ord. of 12-28-71; Ord. of 6-27-72; Ord. of 9-25-73; Ord. of 6-10-75; Ord. of 6-12-79; Ord. No. O-94-302, 11-22-94; Ord. No. O-01-205, 11-27-01; Ord. No. O-02-042, 3-12-02; Ord. No. O-04-091, 7-13-04; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06; Ord. No. O-06-121, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 36-172. - Powers to be exercised in collection of taxes. 
    On and after the date at which any penalty is added to any tax or installment of taxes under any provisions of this Code, the collector of taxes is authorized and empowered to collect all taxes or levies due the city, with said penalties, by distress, garnishment, renting or action, or any other power now possessed or that may hereafter be given to any person charged with the collection of state taxes after the penalty for nonpayment of state taxes has been added. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 126) 
Sec. 36-173. - Special or omitted assessments. 
    Whenever any special or omitted assessments, including sidewalk and sewer assessments, and dues for sewer connections, or street paving come into the hands of the collector for collection, they shall be payable on demand, and on all amounts remaining unpaid for a period of 30 days after demand, a penalty of five percent shall be added. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 127) 
Sec. 36-174. - Duties and powers of collector. 
    In the discharge of his duties under this Code, the collector shall be governed and controlled, and his powers and obligations shall be fixed, by the provisions of chapter VIII of the Charter. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 128) 
Sec. 36-175. - Exemption of real estate taxes on property of certain elderly or permanently and totally disabled persons. 
(a)  Exemption of taxation of real estate and mobile homes as defined herein below is hereby provided for qualified property owners who are not less than 65 years of age or who are permanently and totally disabled and who are eligible therefor, pursuant to the provisions of Section 58.1-3210 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(b)  The exemption shall be administered by the city manager or his authorized delegates. Applications for real estate tax relief for the elderly or the permanently and totally disabled shall be filed with the commissioner of the revenue. Immediately upon approval of the application, it shall be forwarded to the department of finance for processing. The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations, including the requirement of answers under oath, as would be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption. 
(c)  Exemptions shall be granted to persons subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Effective July 1, 2012, the person claiming the exemption must on June 30 immediately preceding the taxable year, have held title to the property for which the exemption is claimed. 
(2)  The head of the household occupying the dwelling and owning title, or partial title thereto, is 65 years or older or permanently and totally disabled on June 30 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year. Such dwelling must be occupied as the sole dwelling of the person or persons claiming exemptions. 
(3)  The gross combined income of the owner during the year immediately preceding the taxable year, from all sources, shall be determined by the commissioner of the revenue to be an amount not to exceed $32,500.00. Gross combined income shall include all income from all sources of the owner, spouse and of the owner's relatives living in the dwelling for which exemption is claimed except that the first $4,000.00 of income of each relative, other than the spouse, of the owner, or owners, who is living in the dwelling, shall not be included in such total. 
(4)  The net combined financial worth of the owner as of June 30 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year shall be determined by the commissioner of the revenue to be an amount not to exceed $60,000.00. Net combined financial worth shall include the value of all assets, including equitable interest, of the owner and spouse of any owner, excluding the fair market value of the dwelling and the land, not exceeding one acre upon which it is situated and for which exemption is claimed, and excluding household furnishings, including furniture, household appliances and other items typically used in a home. The fair market value shall be determined by the city assessor. 
(5)  For the purposes of this section, the term "permanently and totally disabled" shall mean unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life. 
(6)  Applicants who are both 65 years or older and permanently and totally disabled shall be entitled to only one exemption. 
(7)  For the purposes of this section, a mobile home means an industrialized building unit constructed on a chassis for towing to the point of use and designed to be used without a permanent foundation for continuous year-round occupancy as a dwelling; or two or more such units separately towable, but designed to be joined together at the point of use to form a single dwelling, and which is designed for removal to and installation or erection on other sites. 
(d)  Annually, and not later than August 1 of the taxable year, the person or persons claiming such an exemption must file a real estate affidavit with the commissioner of the revenue; provided, however, that in the case of filing hardship, as defined by the director of finance, or first-time applicants, such applications may be filed by November 15 of such year. Such applicants will qualify for benefits insofar as funds are then available for the tax relief program within the budget appropriation for this purpose. Such affidavit shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the city manager, the location, assessed value of the property, and the names of the related persons occupying the dwelling for which exemption is claimed, their gross combined incomes and net financial worth. If such person is under 65 years of age such form shall have attached thereto a certification by the Social Security Administration, the Veterans Administration, or the Railroad Retirement Board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two medical doctors licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled, as defined in subsection (c)(5). The affidavit of at least one of such doctors shall be based on a physical examination of such person by such doctor. The affidavit of one of such doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the Civil Service Commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability as defined in subsection (c)(5). 
    If, after an audit and investigation, the commissioner of the revenue determines that the person or persons are qualified for exemption, he shall so certify the same, and immediately forward the application form to the department of finance. The director of finance shall determine the percentage of exemption allowable, which exemption shall be deducted from the applicant's real estate tax liability. Such exemption shall be applicable only to the tax year following application therefor. Any real estate tax liability reduced by virtue of an exemption pursuant to this section shall be paid as and when due as provided by section 36-171 of this Code. If any installment of taxes due on such property shall not be paid as and when due pursuant to said section 36-171, said installment shall at once become due and collectible with ten percent penalty computed upon the amount of adjusted taxes so due and payable. Such exemption shall remain effective for all purposes other than the amount of penalty so imposed. Interest shall be collected, as provided by section 36-171 of this Code, on taxes not paid as and when due. 
(e)  Amount of exemption. The director of finance shall determine the tax exemption in accordance with a schedule to be approved by the city council. 
(f)  Changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of property or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which the affidavit mentioned in paragraph (d) of this section is filed and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and/or conditions provided shall nullify any relief of the tax liability for the current taxable year and the tax year immediately following. 
(g)  Any person or persons falsely claiming an exemption shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be punished as provided in section 36-1. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 129; City Code 1990; Ord. No. O-96-248, 9-10-96, eff. 1-1-97; Ord. No. O-01-132, 7-10-01, eff. 1-1-02; Ord. No. O-02-004, 1-15-02; Ord. No. O-05-027, 2-22-05, eff. 7-1-05; Ord. No. O-12-079, 5-22-12) 
Sec. 36-176. - Refunds of local levies erroneously paid. (edited text eff. 1-1-06) 
(a)  Any local levies or classes of levies within the meaning of Title 58.1, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, erroneously paid shall be refunded to the taxpayer as hereinafter provided. If the commissioner of the revenue is satisfied that he has erroneously assessed any applicant with any local levies as provided in Sections 58.1-3981, Code of Virginia, as amended, he shall certify to the city collector the amount erroneously assessed. If the levies have not been paid, the applicant shall be exonerated from payment of so much thereof as is erroneous, and if such levies have been paid, the city collector or his successor in office shall refund to the applicant the amount erroneously paid, together with any penalties and interest paid thereon; provided, however, that no such refund, including penalties and interest, shall exceed the sum of $1,000.00. 
(b)  Erroneously paid taxes refunded under the provisions of this section shall be repaid with interest at the same rate imposed by the city for delinquent taxes; provided, however, if such erroneous payments were in any way due to the fault or negligence of the taxpayer no interest shall be paid on the refund of the erroneously paid taxes. Such interest shall run from the date such taxes were required to be paid or were paid, whichever is later. 
(c)  When the commissioner of the revenue who made the assessment has been succeeded by another person, such person shall have the same authority as the commissioner making the original erroneous assessment, provided he makes diligent investigation to determine that the original assessment was erroneously made and certifies thereto to the city collector and to the city council. 
(d)  No refund shall be made in any case when application therefor was made more than three years after the last day of the tax year for which such taxes were assessed. 
(Tax Code 1941, §128.1; Ord. of 11-14-78; Ord. of 3-13-79; Ord. No. O-89-049, §1, 2-28-89; Ord. No. O-05-091, 7-12-05, eff. 1-1-06) 
Sec. 36-177. - Exemption of real estate taxes for certain rehabilitated or renovated residential and commercial and industrial real estate. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this subsection unless another meaning shall clearly appear from the text: 
(1)  Substantially rehabilitated or renovated residential real estate: Real estate upon which there is an existing residential structure, which is no less than 50 years of age, and which has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 40 percent. An addition to an existing residential structure shall not qualify as substantial rehabilitation or replacement unless there is also simultaneous rehabilitation or renovation of the existing structure. In order for an addition to an existing structure to qualify as substantial rehabilitation or renovation, the addition must be for improvements to the living areas of the structure, such as bathrooms, kitchens, bedrooms and similar facilities not to exceed 15 percent of the original above-grade living area at the time of application. Additions for such things as garages, swimming pools, patios and similar facilities that are not used as living areas for the structure shall not be eligible for a tax exemption. Additions greater than 15 percent will be prorated to only allow 15 percent of the addition to be exempted. 
(2)  Substantially rehabilitated or renovated multifamily (five units or more), commercial, or industrial real estate: Any real estate upon which there is an existing multifamily, commercial, or industrial structure which is no less than 25 years of age, and which has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 60 percent. An addition to an existing multi-family, commercial, or industrial structure shall not qualify as substantial rehabilitation or replacement unless there is also simultaneous rehabilitation or renovation of the existing structure. In order for an addition to an existing structure to qualify as substantial rehabilitation or renovation, the addition must be for improvements to the existing areas of the structure not to exceed 15 percent of the original gross leasable square footage at the time of application. Additions greater than 15 percent will be prorated to only allow 15 percent of the addition to be exempted. 
(3)  Base value: The assessed value of any structure covered by this section prior to the commencement of rehabilitation or renovation work, as determined by the city assessor upon receipt of an eligible application for rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption and after a physical inspection of the property by an appraiser from the city assessor's office. 
(4)  Rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption: An amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the substantial rehabilitation or renovation of a structure as determined by the city assessor and this amount only should be applicable to subsequent tax exemption. 
(5)  Taxable year: For the purpose of this section, the fiscal year from July 1 through June 30 for which such real estate tax is imposed for the exemption claimed. 
(6)  Taxes: Represents real estate taxes for this section. 
(7)  Owner: The person or entity in whose name the structure is titled or a leasee who is legally obligated to pay real estate taxes assessed against the structure. 
(b)  Rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemptions. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this section to authorize a rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption for substantially rehabilitated or renovated residential, multifamily, commercial, or industrial real estate located anywhere within the City of Lynchburg. 
(1)  For each residential property that qualifies, the rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption shall be effective for a period of ten years commencing on July 1 for any completed approved rehabilitation/renovation during the preceding fiscal year. 
(2)  For each commercial or industrial property that qualifies, the rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption shall be effective for a period of ten years commencing on July 1 for any work completed during the preceding fiscal year. 
(3)  For each multifamily property that qualifies, the rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption shall be effective for a period of eight years commencing on July 1 for any completed approved rehabilitation/renovation during the preceding fiscal year. 
(c)  Graduated real estate tax exemptions. The rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption for the last three years for residential, multifamily, commercial, or industrial structures will be reduced by 25 percent each year commencing on July 1 so that the final year of the exemption is only 25 percent of the initial exemption. 
(d)  Usual and customary methods of assessing. In determining the base value and the increased value resulting from substantial rehabilitation or renovation of residential, multifamily, commercial, or industrial real estate, the city assessor shall employ usual and customary methods of assessing real estate. 
(e)  Eligibility requirements. 
(1)  An application to qualify a structure as a substantially rehabilitated or renovated residential, multifamily, commercial, or industrial structure must be filed with the city assessor's office before work is started. Applications may be obtained from the city assessor's office. 
(2)  Upon receipt of an application for rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption, two appraisers from the city assessor's office shall make a physical inspection of the structure and determine the assessed base value of the structure. If work has been started prior to the first inspection; the base value will include any work started and will reflect the market value of the structure as of the date of the first inspection. 
(3)  The application to qualify shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of filing. No extensions of this time period will be granted. 
(4)  Upon completion of the rehabilitation or renovation, the owner of the property shall notify the city assessor, and two appraisers from the city assessor's office shall physically inspect the property and perform an after rehabilitation or renovation appraisal to determine if it then qualifies for the rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption. 
(5)  Upon determination that the property has been substantially rehabilitated or renovated pursuant to the terms of this section, the rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption shall become effective for a period as provided in paragraph (b) hereof. 
(6)  Prior to a determination that the property has been substantially rehabilitated or renovated the owner of the property shall continue to be subject to taxation upon the full value of the property, as otherwise authorized by this Code. 
(7)  No improvements made upon vacant land nor total replacement of residential, multifamily, commercial or industrial structures shall be eligible for rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption as provided by this section. Tax exemptions for improvements for the replacement or repair of damaged or destroyed structures within the city's redevelopment or conservation areas or rehabilitation districts or for designated multifamily, commercial, or industrial new construction are regulated by section 36-177.1 of the City Code. 
(8)  No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired and the city assessor has verified that the rehabilitation or renovation indicated on the application has been completed. 
(9)  Multifamily commercial structures after rehabilitation or renovation is completed shall remain as such or may be used as single-family, condominium residences for the remainder of the exemption period. 
(10)  There shall be a non-refundable fee of $125.00 for processing each residential application and $250.00 for processing each multi-family, commercial, or industrial application under this section. 
(11)  The property must at all times be in compliance with all Lynchburg City Codes including, without limitation, the building code, the rental housing code, the zoning ordinance and all other codes that relate to real estate within the City of Lynchburg. Failure to correct the violation within the required time, as provided by the building inspector, will void the remainder of the exemption. If a structure is damaged or destroyed and found to be uninhabitable, the exemption will be terminated. 
(12)  No exemption shall be granted if access to the entire property is denied to the city assessor's office or the inspections division. 
(13)  All taxes must be paid and current to be eligible for an exemption. If the city assessor is notified by the billing and collections department that the property is more than 30 days delinquent on taxes, then the remainder of the exemption will be void. 
(14)  Only one rehabilitation or renovation exemption may be active for a parcel at any given time. 
(15)  Nothing in this section shall supersede any other city, state, or federal code. 
(f)  Exemption to run with the land. The rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption shall run with the land, and the owner of such property during the two-year construction period and/or each of the years of exemption shall be entitled to the amount of partial exemption. 
(Ord. No. O-82-252, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-84-274, § 1, 11-27-84, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-88-277, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. O-93-331, 12-14-93; Ord. No. O-03-040, 2-25-03, eff. 4-1-03; Ord. No. O-08-075, 5-27-08; Ord. No. O-17-070 , § 1, 8-8-17, eff. 1-1-18) 
Sec. 36-177.1. - Exemption of real estate taxes for the renovation or replacement of damaged or destroyed structures. 
(a)  Damaged properties. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this section to authorize an exemption from real property taxes of real property for the replacement or renovation of residential, multi-family, commercial, or industrial structures that are damaged by a natural disaster, an act of God, or by other means in which the property owner or tenant is not found to have caused the damage through negligence or by willful action. 
(1)  For each residential, commercial, or industrial property that qualifies, the amount of the exemption from real property taxation shall be 50 percent of the assessed value of the replaced portion and the real estate tax exemption shall be effective for a period of ten years commencing on July 1 for any work completed during the preceding fiscal year. Further, the exemption shall be graduated 25 percent for each of the final three years as outlined in section 36-177(c). 
(2)  For each multi-family property that qualifies, the amount of the exemption from real property taxation shall be 50 percent of the assessed value of the replaced portion and the real estate tax exemption shall be effective for a period of eight years commencing on July 1 for any work completed during the preceding fiscal year. Further, the exemption shall be graduated 25 percent for each of the final three years as outlined in section 36-177(c). 
(3)  For renovated or replacement residential, multi-family, commercial, or industrial structure, the assessed fair market value of the renovated or replacement structure must be equal to at least 100 percent of the assessed fair market value of the structure prior to the damage or destruction. 
(b)  Revitalization zone exception. Existing residential, multifamily, commercial, or industrial requiring demolition due to functional obsolescence and/or providing minimal contributing value as renovated to be determined by the city assessor is allowed within the city's revitalization zone as specified by city council by ordinance. 
(c)  The exemption shall not apply when an existing structure is demolished or razed by a property owner or as a result of the property owner's neglect and a replacement structure is constructed, unless the assessed value of the existing structure that is demolished or razed is less than $10,000.00 or as provided for by section 36-177.1(b). The exemption shall not apply when the structure to be demolished or razed is a Virginia Registered Landmark, or is determined by the city's historic preservation commission to contribute to the significance of a registered historic district. 
(d)  Application fees will be in accordance with section 36-177(e)(9). 
(e)  A certificate of occupancy on the completed structure must be issued by the city inspections division before any exemption will be authorized. 
(f)  Application fees and other requirements will be in accordance with section 36-177(e)(8) through (15). 
(g)  The rehabilitated or renovated real estate tax exemption shall run with the land, and the owner of such property during the two-year construction period and/or each of the years of exemption shall be entitled to the amount of partial exemption. 
(Ord. No. O-17-070 , § 1, 8-8-17, eff. 1-1-18) 
Sec. 36-177.2. - Partial exemption for structures in redevelopment or conservation areas or rehabilitation districts or arts and cultural districts. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this section to authorize a partial exemption from real property taxes for new structures that are constructed within the city's designated redevelopment or conservation areas, or rehabilitation districts, or arts and cultural districts. 
(b)  For definitions of the terms used in this section, see section 36-177, subsections (a)1-7, (b)1-3, (c), (d), (e)1-15, (f) of the City Code. 
(c)  The partial exemption from real property taxes provided by this section shall be for new structures located in a redevelopment or conservation area, or rehabilitation district, or arts and cultural district; as delineated on the city's map for in-fill areas. 
(d)  The partial exemption from real property taxes provided by this section shall be for an amount of 50 percent of the cost of such construction, as determined by the city assessor. The exemption will commence upon July 1st of the year following completion of the new construction and shall run with the real estate for a period of ten years for residential improvements, eight years for multi-family improvements, and ten years for commercial or industrial improvements. 
(e)  The 50 percent exemption for new improvements (residential, multi-family, commercial and industrial) shall be reduced by 25 percent per year over the last three years of the exemption period. 
(f)  The city assessor will provide written notification to the property owner of the amount of the assessment of the property that will be exempt from real property taxation and the period of such exemption. The exempt amount shall not be reduced by the city assessor during the period of the exemption, unless the city assessor by written notice advised the property owner at the initial time of approval of the exemption that the exempt amount may be decreased during the period of such exemption. In no event, however, shall such partial exemption result in totally exempting the value of the structure. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to permit the city assessor to list upon the land book any reduced value due to the exemption provided by this section. 
(h)  There is hereby assessed a fee of $125.00 for residential properties, and $250.00 for commercial, industrial, and/or apartment properties of five units or more, for processing an application requesting the exemption provided by this section. No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired and the city assessor has verified that the new structures have been completed. 
(i)  Where the construction of a new structure is achieved through demolition and replacement of an existing structure, the exemption provided in section shall not apply when any structure that is demolished is a registered Virginia landmark or is determined by the Virginia Department of Historic Resources to contribute to the significance of a registered historic district. 
(Ord. No. O-18-005 , § 1, 1-9-18) 
Secs. 36-178-36-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-187. - Telephone consumer taxes. 
(a)  The following words and phrases when used in this section shall for the purposes of this section have the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Persons: Individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations and combinations of individuals of whatever form and charter. 
(2)  Telephone services: Local telephone service furnished in the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)  Purchaser: Every person who purchases telephone service. 
(4)  Seller: Every person whether a public service corporation or the municipality of the city, or not, who sells or furnishes telephone service. 
(b)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon each and every purchaser of telephone service a consumer tax in the amount of seven percent on local telephone service; provided, however, on bills rendered on and after November 1, 1977, a four percent tax rate shall apply to charges for services or equipment furnished to business customers by telephone companies subject to public utility regulation during any period in which such services or equipment are in competition with services or equipment furnished by or available from persons not subject to public utility regulation. 
(c)  The tax imposed on a consumer of mobile local telecommunication service shall be as follows: 
(i)  For the fiscal year 1995-96 the tax shall be imposed at a rate equal to ten percent of the monthly gross charge to a consumer of mobile local telecommunication and shall not be applicable to any amount so charged in excess of $100.00 per month for each mobile service consumer. 
(ii)  For the fiscal year 1996-97 the tax shall be imposed at a rate equal to ten percent of the monthly gross charge to a consumer of mobile local telecommunication and shall not be applicable to any amount so charged in excess of $50.00 per month for each mobile service consumer. 
(iii)  Beginning July 1, 1997, the tax shall be imposed at a rate equal to ten percent of the monthly gross charge to a consumer of mobile local telecommunication and shall not be applicable to any amount so charged in excess of $30.00 per month for each mobile service consumer. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax-collecting medium or agency for the city to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price charged therefor and the taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported and remitted by each seller to the commissioner of the revenue on or before the fifteenth day of the second calendar month thereafter, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay the tax. 
(e)  The required reports shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. All remittances received hereunder by the commissioner of the revenue shall be promptly turned over by him to the collector of city taxes. The tax levied or imposed under this section with respect to the purchase of any telephone utility service shall be applicable to charges first appearing on bills rendered August 1, 1971 and thereafter. 
(f)  Each and every seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the city, which records shall show the price charges against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof, and the date of payment thereof, and the amount of tax imposed hereunder. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times. The duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(g)  The United States of America, the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this section with respect to the purchase of telephone services used by such governmental agencies. 
(h)  The tax hereby imposed and levied on purchasers with respect to local exchange telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local exchange telephone service except local messages which are paid for by inserting coins in coin operated telephones. 
(i)  In all cases where the seller collects the price for telephone services periodically, the tax hereby imposed and levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period; provided, that the amount of the tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(j)  Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax hereby imposed or levied and any seller violating the provisions hereof, and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions hereof, shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(k)  The collector of city taxes shall be charged with the power and the duty of collecting the taxes levied and imposed hereunder, and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(l)  If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to remit to the city the tax required to be collected under this section within the time and in the amount specified in this section, there shall be added to such tax a penalty in the amount of ten percent, with a minimum penalty of $2.00. In addition, interest at the rate of ten percent per annum shall be computed and collected upon the taxes and penalty beginning 30 days from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 130; Ord. of 11-8-55; Ord. of 12-18-62; Ord. of 6-29-71; Ord. of 11-26-74; Ord. of 9-27-77; Ord. No. O-83-038, § 1, 3-8-83; Ord. No. O-83-247, § 1, 10-25-83; Ord. No. O-85-029, § 1, 2-12-85, eff. 7-1-85; Ord. No. O-85-145, § 1, 6-11-85, eff. 7-1-85; Ord. No. O-87-215, § 1, 9-8-87, eff. 1-1-88; Ord. No. O-87-231, § 1, 10-13-87; Ord. No. O-89-006, § 1, 1-10-89, eff. 7-1-89; Ord. No. O-93-281, 10-12-93, eff. 1-1-94; Ord. No. O-95-122, 5-23-95, eff. 7-1-95; Ord. No. O-95-177, 6-13-95; Ord. No. O-96-035, 2-13-96, eff. 7-1-96; Ord. No. O-00-218, 10-17-00) 
Charter reference- Utility taxes, § 48-a. 
Cross reference- License tax on telephone companies, § 36-81. 
Sec. 36-187.1. - Electric and natural gas consumers tax. 
    Notwithstanding any other ordinance or other enactment heretofore adopted and currently in force in the city, the following is hereby adopted and ordained to be effective as set forth hereinbelow: 
(a)  Definitions. 
    CCF: means the volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of 100 cubic feet. 
    Commercial consumer: means a consumer of natural gas or electric utility service provided to property used primarily for commercial purposes as classified by the utility service provider. 
    Consumer: means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permitees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas services in the city. 
    Electric utility: means a public utility authorized to furnish electric service to consumers in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Gas utility: means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered: means 1,000 watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Virginia Code § 56-594 (or any succeeding section of the state code), it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
    Person: means any individual, partnership, corporation, company or any other entity. 
    Pipeline distribution company: means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat, light or power. 
    Residential consumer: means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
    Service provider: means a person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer. 
    Used primarily: relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
    Utility service: means the provision of electricity or natural gas for consumption by consumers. 
(b)  Electric utility consumer tax. In accordance with Virginia Code § 58.1-3814 (or any succeeding section of the state code), effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax, on a "per meter" basis, on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: such tax shall be the greater of (a) the rate of $0.00460 for the first 1,000 kWh or fraction thereof delivered monthly to such consumer by a service provider, and $0.00260 for each kWh over the first 1,000 kWh delivered monthly to such consumer by a service provider; or (b) seven percent of the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider. 
(2)  Non-residential consumers: such tax on non-residential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of non-residential consumers as set forth below: 
(i)  Commercial consumers: such tax shall be the greater of $0.00480 for the first 1,000 kWh or fraction thereof delivered monthly to such consumer by a service provider and $0.00292 for each kWh over the first 1,000 kWh delivered monthly to such consumer by a service provider; or (b) seven percent of the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider. 
(ii)  Industrial consumers: such tax on industrial consumers as defined in Divisions B and D, and Major Group 46 and Industry Number 4922 of Major Group 49 of Division E of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual of the U. S. Office of Management and Budget shall be the greater of $0.00375 for the first 1000 kWh or fraction thereof delivered monthly to such consumer by a service provider; and $0.00260 for each kWh over the first 1,000 kWh delivered monthly to such consumer by a service provider; or (b) seven percent of the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider. 
(iii)  All other classes of non-residential customers: such tax shall be the greater of $0.00480 for the first 1,000 kWh or fraction thereof delivered monthly to such consumer by a service provider and $0.00292 for each kWh over the first 1,000 kWh delivered monthly to such consumer by a service provider; or (b) seven percent of the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this ordinance to monthly kWh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(c)  Local natural gas utility consumer tax. In accordance with Virginia Code §58.1-3814 (or any succeeding section of the state code), there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax, on a "per meter" basis, on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in Virginia Code § 58.1-3814 J., as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be $0.86 per month plus at the rate of $0.05088 on each CCF or fraction thereof delivered monthly to residential consumers. 
(2)  Non-residential consumers: such tax on non-residential consumers shall be at the rates per month shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes as set forth below: 
(i)  Commercial consumers: such tax on commercial consumers of natural gas shall be $1.63 per month plus at the rate of $0.02689 on each CCF or fraction thereof delivered monthly to commercial consumers. 
(ii)  Industrial consumers: industrial consumers are defined in Divisions B and D, and Major Group 46 and Industry Number 4922 of Major Group 49 of Division E of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual of the U. S. Office of Management and Budget and such tax on industrial consumers of natural gas shall be $1.63 per month plus at the rate of $0.00256 on each CCF or fraction thereof delivered monthly to commercial consumers. 
(iii)  All other classes of non-residential customers: such tax shall be $1.63 per month plus at the rate of $0.02689 on each CCF or fraction thereof delivered monthly to such customers. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this ordinance to monthly CCF delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(d)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Virginia Code § 58.1-3814, paragraphs H. and I., and Virginia Code § 58.1-2901 (or any succeeding sections of the state code). If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to the city. 
It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax-collecting medium or agency for the city to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price charged therefor and the taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported and remitted by each seller to the commissioner of the revenue on or before the fifteenth day of the second calendar month thereafter, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay his tax. 
The required reports shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. All remittances received hereunder by the commissioner of the revenue shall be promptly turned over by him to the collector of city taxes. 
Each and every seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the city, which records shall show the price charges against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof, and the date of payment thereof, and the amount of tax imposed hereunder. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times. The duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust as a fiduciary for and on behalf of the city by such provider until remitted to the city. 
If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to remit to the city the tax required to be collected under this section within the time and in the amount specified in this section, there shall be added to such tax a penalty in the amount of ten percent, with a minimum penalty of $2.00. In addition, interest at the rate of ten percent per annum shall be computed and collected upon the taxes and penalty beginning 30 days from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(e)  Exemptions. The United States of America, the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this section with respect to the purchase of utility services used by such governmental agencies. 
(f)  Maximum Tax Allowable. Effective on and after July 1, 1995, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1995, and ending June 30, 1996, and for each fiscal year thereafter, unless otherwise changed by city council, the utility taxes paid by a purchaser on each utility service purchased from each industrial point of service shall be capped at and shall not exceed the sum of $130,000.00 per fiscal year. 
(g)  Penalties. Any consumer of electricity or natural gas failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied under this ordinance, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this ordinance shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by law be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this ordinance. 
Any person who willfully fails to bill, collect, remit or truthfully account for and pay over to the city the consumer utility tax as provided in this section, or who willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax, or the billing, collection or remittance thereof, shall, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, be liable to the city for a penalty in an amount equal to such tax. 
The term "person" as used in this section specifically includes any officer, agent and employee of any person as defined in this section who is under a duty to perform on behalf of that person the act in respect of which the violation occurs and who (i) had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt as set forth herein and (ii) had authority to prevent such failure or attempt. 
A criminal conviction pursuant to this section shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-00-218, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 36-188. - Sales tax. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed, a general retail sales tax at the rate of one percent to provide revenue for the general fund. The rate of the tax shall be added to the rate of the state retail sales tax imposed by Chapter 8.1 of the Code of Virginia (or Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act) and shall be subject to all the provisions of said chapter, and all amendments thereof, and the rules and regulations published with respect thereto, except that the applicable brackets of prices shall be as prescribed in Sections 58-441.50 and 58-441.51 of the Code of Virginia for the combined tax, and except that no discount under Section 58-441.25 of the Code of Virginia shall be allowed on the tax levied by this section. 
    Provided, however, that for any business firm which is designated as a "qualified business firm" prior to July 1, 1995 pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 22, Title 59.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, (the Urban Enterprise Zone Act), shall be entitled to a refund of the local retail sales tax paid within the Lynchburg city limits for a period of five years from the date it commences operation. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 135; Ord. of 4-26-66; Ord. No. O-84-171, § 1, 11-13-84, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-95-232, 8-8-95) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy sales tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605. 
Sec. 36-189. - Recordation tax. 
    Pursuant to Section 58.1-814, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, in addition to the recordation tax imposed by the Commonwealth of Virginia, there is hereby imposed a city recordation tax in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state recordation tax collectible for the state on the first recordation of each taxable instrument in this city; provided, however, where a deed or other instrument conveys, covers or relates to property located partially in this city and also to property located partially in another city or county or in other counties or cities, the tax imposed under the authority of this section shall be computed only with respect to the property located in this city. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 136; Ord. of 6-1-78; Ord. No. O-04-080, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 36-189.1. - Probate tax. 
    Pursuant to Section 58.1-1718 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, there is hereby imposed a city tax on the probate of every will or grant of administration in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state tax imposed for the probate of a will or grant of administration. Such tax shall be collected by the clerk of the Lynchburg Circuit Court and shall be transmitted to the city on a monthly basis. 
(Ord. No O-92-189, 6-9-92) 
Sec. 36-189.2. - Fee for recording a list of heirs or affidavit. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 58.1-1718 of the Code of Virginia, the city hereby charges a $25.00 fee for the recordation of a list of heirs pursuant to Section 64.1-134 of the Code of Virginia or an affidavit pursuant to Section 64.1-135 of the Code of Virginia, as provided in Section 58.1-1717.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord No. O-11-024, 3-8-11, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 36-190. - E-911 tax. 
(a)  The council of the City of Lynchburg finds: 
(1)  That an E-911 system, as defined in subsection (b)(1) of this section will be installed in the City of Lynchburg; 
(2)  That the Bell Atlantic Telephone Company of Virginia has central office equipment which will permit such system to be established; and 
(3)  That it is necessary to levy a tax on purchases of local telephone service to pay the capital and installation costs and the recurring operation, maintenance repair, system upgrade costs and personnel salaries of the E-911 system. 
(b)  The following words and phrases when used in this section shall for the purposes of this section have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  E-911 system. An E-911 system means a telephone service which utilizes a computerized system to automatically route emergency telephone calls placed by dialing the digits "911" to the proper public safety answering point serving the jurisdiction from which the emergency telephone call was placed. An E-911 system includes selective routing of telephone calls, automatic telephone number identification and automatic location identification performed by computers and other ancillary control center communications equipment. 
(2)  Public safety answering point. The term public safety answering point means a communications facility operated on a 24-hour basis which first receives E-911 calls from persons in an E-911 service area and which may, as appropriate, directly dispatch public safety service or extend, transfer or relay E-911 calls to appropriate public safety agencies. 
(3)  Public safety agency. The term public safety agency means a functional division of a public agency which provides fire-fighting, police, medical or other emergency services or a private entity which provides such services on a voluntary basis. 
(4)  City. The term city shall mean the City of Lynchburg. 
(c)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon every purchaser of local telephone service a tax in the amount of $2.00 per month. This tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller of local telephone service for the use of the city to pay the capital and installation costs and the recurring maintenance, repair, and system upgrade costs, and personnel salaries or portion of salaries attributable to the operation and maintenance of the city's E-911 system. The amount of this tax may be modified by future action of the Lynchburg City Council to accurately reflect changes in the monthly recurring charges of the E-911 system. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the city to add the amount of the tax imposed under subsections (c) and (d) of this section to all periodic bills it renders to nonexempt purchasers of local telephone service. The seller shall accept remittances of tax from purchasers at the time it collects the charges for local telephone service and shall report and pay over all tax collected in any calendar month to the collector of city taxes on or before the last day of the first calendar month thereafter. The seller shall also notify the collector of city taxes at this time of the name and address of all purchasers who refuse to pay the tax imposed by this section. The reports required pursuant to this section shall be in a form acceptable to the collector of city taxes. 
(e)  Each and every seller shall keep records showing all purchases of local telephone services in the city. These records must show the dates of bills for local telephone service and the amount of tax appearing on each bill. These records shall be kept at the seller's offices for a period of three years for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times during normal business hours. The duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make copies thereof. 
(f)  The United States of America, the State of Virginia and the political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions and authorities of the United States and Virginia are hereby exempted from payment of the tax imposed and levied by this section. 
(g)  This tax shall not apply to any local telephone service where a periodic bill is not rendered. 
(h)  Any purchaser who willfully fails, refuses or neglects to pay the tax hereby imposed and levied and any seller, or any officer, agent or employee thereof, who with full knowledge willfully refuses to perform the duties imposed on it by subsection (e) with the intent of preventing the collection of this tax shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal or neglect and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(i)  Whenever the tax levied by this section is collected by the seller acting as a tax collecting medium or agency for the city and remitted by the seller to the city in accordance with subsection (e), such seller shall be allowed, as compensation for the collection and remittance of this tax, three percent of the amount collected. The seller shall deduct this compensation from the remittances made to the collector of city taxes in accordance with subsection (e). 
(j)  Subsection (c) shall be effective on all bills for telephone service rendered on and after September 1, 1996. 
(Ord. No. O-85-116, § 1, 6-11-85; Ord. No. O-85-166, § 1, 8-13-85; Ord. No. O-88-226, § 1, 8-9-88; Ord. No. O-90-094, 3-27-90, eff. 12-1-89; Ord. No. O-91-112, 6-11-91, eff. 12-1-90; Ord. No. O-94-170, 6-28-94; Ord. No. O-96-091, 4-23-96, eff. 7-1-96) 
Sec. 36-191. - Bank franchise tax. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings ascribed to them by this subsection: 
    Bank shall be as defined in Section 58-485.01 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
    Net capital shall mean a bank's net capital computed pursuant to Section 58-485.07 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(b)  Imposition of bank franchise tax. Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.01 of Title 58 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, there is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of the City of Lynchburg a tax on net capital equalling 80 percentum of the state rate of franchise tax set forth in Section 58-485.06 of the Code of Virginia. 
    In the event that any bank located within the boundaries of the city is not the principal office but is a branch extension or affiliate of the principal office, the tax upon such branch shall be apportioned as provided by Section 58-485.012 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  Filing of return and payment of tax. On or after the first day of January of each year, but not later than March 1 of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within this city shall prepare and file with the commissioner of revenue a return as provided by Section 58-485.013 of the Code of Virginia in duplicate which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to Chapter 10.01 of Title 58 of the Code of Virginia. The commissioner of revenue shall certify a copy of such filing of the bank's return and schedule and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. 
    In the event that the principal office of a bank is located outside the boundaries of this city and such bank has branch offices located within this city, in addition to the filing requirements set forth herein, any bank conducting such branch business shall file with the commissioner of revenue a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by Sections 58-485.012, 58-485.013 and 58-485.014 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Each bank, on or before the first day of June of each year, shall pay into the collector's office of this city all taxes imposed pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Penalty upon bank for failure to comply with section. Any bank which shall fail or neglect to comply with any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, which fine shall be recovered upon motion after five days' notice in the circuit court of the City of Lynchburg. The motion shall be in the name of the commonwealth and shall be presented by the commonwealth's attorney for the City of Lynchburg. 
(Ord. No. O-96-319, 12-10-96, eff. 1-1-97) 
Secs. 36-192-36-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CIGARETTE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Taxes on tobacco products, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1000 et seq. 

Sec. 36-195. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall, for the purposes of this division, have the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer. Every person, jobber, wholesale dealer or other person who supplies a seller with cigarettes. 
    Package. Every package, box, can or other container of any cigarettes, irrespective of the material from which such container is made, and in which retail sales of such cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made. 
    Purchaser. Every person to whom title to any cigarette is transferred by a seller within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Sale. Every act or transaction, irrespective of the method or means employed, including the use of vending machines, and other mechanical devices whereby title to any cigarettes shall be transferred from the seller, as herein defined, to any person within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Seller. Every person who transfers title to any cigarettes, or in whose place of business title to any cigarettes is transferred, within the corporate limits of the city, for any purpose other than resale. 
    Stamp. A small gummed piece of paper or decalcomania to be sold by the city collector and to be affixed to every package of cigarettes sold at retail in the city, and also any insignia or symbols printed by a meter machine upon any such package under the authorization of the city collector. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(1)) 
Sec. 36-196. - Rate and amount of tax. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed by the city, upon each and every sale of cigarettes, on and after July 1, 2003, a tax equivalent to 171/2 mils per cigarette with a minimum tax of $0.35 per pack on all cigarettes sold within the city, the amount of said tax to be paid by the seller, if not previously paid, in the manner and at the hereinafter provided. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(2); Ord. No. O-84-117, § 1, 5-22-84; Ord. No. O-88-105, § 1, 5-24-88, eff. 7-1-88; Ord. No. O-89-112, § 1, 5-23-89, eff. 7-1-89; Ord. No. O-03-099, 5-13-03, eff. 7-1-03) 
Sec. 36-197. - How tax paid. 
    The tax imposed by this division shall be paid by affixing or causing to be affixed a stamp or stamps, of the proper denominational or face value, to each and every package of cigarettes sold within the city, in the manner and at the time or times hereinafter provided. Every dealer and every seller in the city shall have the right to buy such stamps from the city collector and to affix the same to packages of cigarettes as provided in this division. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(3)) 
Sec. 36-198. - Reports. 
    All reports and remittances due under the provisions of this division covering purchases by retailers during the preceding calendar months, shall be filed and paid on or before August 20, 1971. The final report to be filed with the city collector by August 20, 1971 should include an inventory of the amount of cigarettes on hand August 1, 1971. A credit for these will be allowed in order to avoid duplication of the tax. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(3)) 
Sec. 36-199. - Stamps, machine imprint required. 
(a)  Every local dealer or seller in cigarettes is hereby required, and it shall be his duty, to purchase such stamps at the office of the city collector as shall be necessary to pay the tax levied and imposed by this division, and to affix or cause to be affixed, a stamp or stamps of the monetary value prescribed by this section to each package of cigarettes prior to offering such package of cigarettes for sale to a purchaser; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall preclude any dealer or seller from using a stamp meter machine in lieu of gummed stamps to effectuate the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Stamps, or the printed markings of a meter machine, shall be placed upon each package of cigarettes in such manner as to be readily visible to purchaser. 
(c)  Every seller is hereby required to examine each package of cigarettes prior to exposing the same for sale, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such package has the proper stamps affixed thereto or imprinted thereon as provided by this division. 
(d)  Should a seller have in his possession any unstamped or improperly stamped cigarettes, or should a seller obtain or acquire possession from any person of any unstamped or improperly stamped cigarettes, such seller shall forthwith, before selling, offering or exposing such cigarettes for sale in the city, purchase and affix or cause to be affixed to such packages of cigarettes the proper stamps, or the markings of a meter machine, covering the tax imposed by this division. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(4)) 
Sec. 36-200. - Preparation of stamps. 
    For the purpose of making stamps available for use, the city collector shall prescribe, prepare and sell, stamps of such denominations and in such quantities as may be necessary for the payment of the taxes imposed by this division. In the sale of such stamps, the city collector shall allow a discount of eight percent of the denominational or face value thereof to cover the costs which will be incurred in affixing the stamps to the packages of cigarettes. In the event the printing by an authorized meter machine is used in lieu of gummed stamps, there shall be allowed a discount of ten percent of the denominational or face value of the imprints of said stamps so printed by said meter machine to cover the costs incurred in printing such imprints. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(5)) 
Sec. 36-201. - Design of stamps. 
    The city collector may, from time to time, and as often as he may deem advisable, provide for the issuance and exclusive use of stamps of a new design, and forbid the use of stamps of any other design. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(6)) 
Sec. 36-202. - Meter machines. 
    The city collector is authorized to permit the payment in advance of the tax levied and imposed by this division by the method of placing imprints of stamps upon original packages by the use of meter machines in lieu of the method of paying such tax by the purchase and affixing of gummed stamps, and to prescribe and enforce the necessary regulations setting forth the method to be employed and the conditions to be observed in the use of such meter machines. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(7)) 
Sec. 36-203. - Refunds. 
(a)  Should any person, after acquiring from the city collector any stamps herein provided for, cease to be engaged in a business necessitating the use thereof, or should any such stamps become mutilated and unfit for use other than by cancellation as herein provided, such person shall be entitled to a refund of the denominational or face amount of any such stamps so acquired and not used by him, less eight of the denominational or face amount thereof, upon presenting said stamps to the city collector and furnishing him with an affidavit showing to his satisfaction that said stamps were acquired by such person and have not in any manner been used, and the reason for requesting said refund provided the refund is requested within three years from the date such stamps were purchased. 
(b)  In the case of any authorized meter machine, should any imprints of such machine theretofore paid for not be used, such person shall, upon furnishing the city collector with a similar affidavit, be entitled to a refund of the denominational or face amount thereof less ten percent of the denominational or face value of said imprints of said machine not so used provided the refund is requested within three years from the date such stamps were purchased. 
(c)  In the case of stale dated cigarettes, a count of pre-stamped packages that have not been sold and have been removed from the market, upon furnishing the city collector with a sworn affidavit of the manufacturer, a refund will be made less ten percent of the denominational or face value of said stamps or the original cost to the manufacturer provided the refund is requested within three years from the date such stamps were purchased. 
    (Tax Code 1941, § 133(8); Ord. No. O-01-131, 7-10-01; Ord. No. O-05-121, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 36-204. - Seizure, sale of untaxed cigarettes. 
    Whenever the city collector shall discover any cigarettes which are subject to the tax imposed by this division and upon which the tax has not been affixed or evidence of such tax shown thereon by the printed markings of an authorized meter machine, the city collector is hereby authorized and empowered to forthwith seize and take possession of such cigarettes, which shall thereupon be deemed to be forfeited to the city, and he may, within a reasonable time thereafter, after written notice posted at the front door of the courthouse of said city at least five days before the date of sale, or published in some newspaper having general circulation in the city at least five days before the date of sale, sell such forfeited cigarettes at the time and place designated in such notice, and from the proceeds of such sale shall collect the tax due thereon, together with a penalty of 50 percent thereof, and the costs incurred in such proceedings, and pay the balance, if any, of such proceeds to the person in whose possession such forfeited cigarettes were found. Provided, however, that such seizure and sale shall not be deemed to relieve any person from any fine provided herein for the violation of the provisions of this division. All moneys collected under the provisions of this division shall be paid to the city collector and treated as other taxes collected under this division. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(9)) 
Sec. 36-205. - Illegal acts. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for any person: 
(a)  To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this division or any part thereof; for any dealer or seller, with intent to violate any provision of this division, to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed upon him under the provisions of this division or to fail to refuse to obey any lawful order which the city collector may issue under this division; or 
(b)  To falsely or fraudulently make, forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp or the printed markings of any meter machine, or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp or printed markings of a meter machine, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps or printed markings of a meter machine; or 
(c)  To sell any cigarettes upon which the tax imposed by this division has not been paid and upon which evidence of payment thereof is not shown on each package of cigarettes; or 
(d)  To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which cigarettes, for which the tax imposed has been theretofore paid, have been removed; or 
(e)  To remove from any package any stamp or the printed markings of a meter machine with intent to use or cause the same to be used after the same have already been used, or to buy, sell, or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps or printed markings of a meter machine to any person, or to reuse any stamp or printed markings of a meter machine which had theretofore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed by this division, or, except as to the city collector, to sell, or offer to sell, any stamp or printed markings of a meter machine provided for herein. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(10)) 
Sec. 36-206. - Presumption of violation. 
    In the event any package of cigarettes is found in the possession of a seller without the proper stamps being affixed thereto or without authorized printed markings of a meter machine thereon, and the seller shall be unable to submit evidence establishing that he received such package within the immediately preceding 48 hours, and that he has not offered the same for sale, the presumption shall be that such package is being kept by such seller in violation of the provisions of this division, and shall subject him to the penalties hereinafter provided. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(11)) 
Sec. 36-207. - Keeping, maintenance of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every local dealer and seller, and he is hereby so required, to maintain and keep, for a period of two years, such record of cigarettes sold and delivered by him as may be required by the city collector and to make all such records available for examination by said city collector, or his duly authorized agent, upon demand, at any and all reasonable times. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(12)) 
Sec. 36-208. - Rules, regulations. 
(a)  The city collector is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the method and means to be used in the cancellation of the aforesaid stamps, and to any and all other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
(b)  He is hereby further authorized and empowered to examine books, records, invoices, papers, and any and all cigarettes in and upon any premises where the same are placed, stored, sold, offered for sale or displayed for sale by a seller. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(13)) 
Sec. 36-209. - Tax additional. 
    The tax levied and imposed by this division shall be in addition to all other taxes of every kind levied and imposed by any other ordinance or law. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(14)) 
Sec. 36-210. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, and such conviction and payment of fine shall not relieve any such person from the payment of any tax imposed by this division. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 133(15)) 
Secs. 36-211-36-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRANSIENT LODGING TAX 

Sec. 36-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall, for the purposes of this division, have the following respective meanings except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Collector: The city collector and any of his duly authorized agents. 
    Director: The director of finance and any of his duly authorized agents. 
    Hotel: Any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, rooming house or other lodging place within the city offering lodging for compensation to any transient. 
    Lodging: Space or room furnished any transient. 
    Transient: Any person who, for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days, either at his own expense, or at the expense of another, obtains lodging at any hotel. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 91; Ord. of 7-1-78; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1,5-26-81) 
Sec. 36-222. - Violations. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. Each violation or failure shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this division. In addition to the other penalties provided herein, if any hotel shall fail to collect or remit the transit lodging tax as required in this division, the city shall have the right to petition the judge of the circuit court for a court order directing that the offending hotel be closed until such time as it demonstrates its willingness to comply with the provisions of this division. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 100; Ord. of 7-1-78; Ord. No. O-91-077, 4-23-91) 
Sec. 36-223. - Levied. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city on each transient a tax equivalent to six and one-half percent of the total amount paid for lodging and $1.00 per room per night, excluding any other taxes levied thereon, by or for any transient to any hotel. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 92; Ord. of 7-1-78; Ord. of 7-1-79; Ord. No. O-81-102, § 1, 5-26-81; Ord. No. O-89-112, § 1, 5-23-89, eff. 7-1-89; Ord. No. O-90-134, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-00-105, 5/23/00, eff. 7/7/00; Ord. No. O-17-052 , § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 36-224. - Exemptions. 
    No tax shall be payable under this division in any of the following instances: 
(a)  On charges for lodging paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for the aged. 
(b)  On charges made for providing space for a mobile home in a duly authorized mobile home park. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 99; Ord. of 7-1-78) 
Sec. 36-225. - Collection generally. 
    The tax imposed and levied by this division shall be collected from the transient by the person providing such lodging at the time and in the manner provided in this division. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 92; 7-1-78) 
Sec. 36-226. - Collection procedure. 
(a)  Every person receiving any payment for lodging with respect to which a tax is levied under this division shall collect the amount of such tax so imposed from the transient on whom such tax is levied or from the person paying for such lodging at the time payment for such lodging is made. The taxes required to be collected under this section shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this division. 
(b)  For the purpose of compensating a person, as herein defined, for accounting for and remitting the tax levied by this division, such person shall be allowed three percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction in submitting his return and paying the amount due by him; provided the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 93; Ord. of 7-1-78; Ord. of 8-14-79, § 1(94)) 
Sec. 36-227. - Reports, remittance of tax collected. 
    The person collecting any tax as provided in this division shall make out a record thereof upon such forms and setting forth such information as the director may prescribe and require, showing the amount of lodging charges collected and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver such reports to the collector with a remittance of such tax. Such report and remittance shall be made on or before the twentieth day of each month for taxes collected the preceding month. All payments of monies shall be to the collector of the city. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 94; Ord. of 7-1-78; Ord. of 8-17-79, § 1(94)) 
Sec. 36-228. - Interest, penalties. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to remit to the city collector the tax required to be collected and paid under this division within the time and in the amount specified in this division there shall be added to such tax by the collector a penalty in the amount of ten percent thereof, and interest thereon at the rate of ten percent per annum which shall be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the date such taxes are due and payable. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 95; Ord. of 7-1-78; Ord. No. O-82-261, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. O-95-099, 4-25-95) 
Sec. 36-229. - Failure or refusal to collect and report tax. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this division and to make within the time provided in this article the reports and remittances required in this division the director shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the director shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax, and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person such tax, penalty and interest as provided for in this division, and shall notify such person by registered mail sent to his last known place of address of the amount of such tax, interest and penalty, and the total thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of the mailing of such notice. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 96; Ord. of 7-1-78) 
Sec. 36-230. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this division to keep and to preserve for a period of two years such suitable records as may be necessary to determine and show accurately the amount of such tax as he may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the city. The director may inspect such records at all reasonable times. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 97, Ord. of 7-1-78) 
Sec. 36-231. - Procedure upon cessation of business. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this division shall cease to operate or dispose of his business, he shall notify the collector of such fact and any tax payable under this division to the city shall become immediately due and payable on the date such person shall cease to operate or dispose of his business and such person having made a report through such date for the collection of such taxes thereafter. Otherwise such person shall be liable for such taxes through the succeeding collection date. 
(Tax Code 1941, § 98; Ord. of 7-1-78) 
Secs. 36-232-36-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PREPARED FOOD TAX 

Secs. 36-241-36-253. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 36-241 thru 36-254, were repealed by Ord. No. O-00-138, adopted June 27, 2000, effective July 1, 2000, and were replaced by sections 36-254 thru 36-254.10. 
Sec. 36-254. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have, for the purposes of this ordinance, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cater: The furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
    Collector: The city's billings and collections division. 
    Commissioner: The commissioner of revenue and any duly designated deputies, assistants, or other employees. 
    Food. All food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Food establishment. Any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the city, including but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
    Meal. Meal shall mean any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
(Ord. No. O-00-138, 6-27-00, eff. 7-1-00) 
Sec. 36-254.1. - Levied. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city on each person a tax at the rate of six and one-half percent on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. 
(Ord. No. O-00-138, 6-27-00, eff. 7-1-00; Ord. No. O-04-062, 6-8-04, eff. 7-1-04) 
Sec. 36.254.2. - Collection of tax by seller. 
    Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this ordinance from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made; provided, however, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the department for the visually handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. All tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. 
(Ord. No. O-00-138, 6-27-00, eff. 7-1-00) 
Sec. 36-254.3. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this ordinance shall not be levied on factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature served for on or off-premises consumption. 
(b)  The tax imposed under this ordinance shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Factory - prepackaged donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and other items of essentially the same nature, except when sold as part of a meal. 
(2)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on premises consumption (e.g. a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
(3)  Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers, except when sold as part of a meal. 
(4)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children. 
(5)  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. §2012, as amended, and federal regulations adopted pursuant to that act, except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, nonfactory sealed beverages and ice cream. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (d)(3), (4) and (5) hereinbelow. 
(c)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(d)  The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees, when the food and beverages are sold in a dinning hall or cafeteria or included as part of a student's tuition or as part of an employee's pay. 
(3)  Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States. 
(4)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof and the spouses and children of such persons. Food items that are sold to members of the general public in a cafeteria are subject to the prepared food tax. 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private non-profit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)  Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, not exceeding three times per calendar year, by a non-profit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for non-profit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(7)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(8)  Churches that serve meals for their members as a regular part of their religious observances. 
(9)  Age-restricted apartment complexes or residences with restaurants, not open to the public, where meals are served and fees are charged for such food and beverages and are included in rental fees. 
(10)  No blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the department for the blind and vision impaired and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect and remit meals taxes. 
(11)  That portion of the amount paid by the purchaser as a discretionary gratuity in addition to the sales price of the meal or that portion of the amount paid by the purchaser as a mandatory gratuity or service charge added by the restaurant in addition to the sales price of the meal, but only to the extent that such mandatory gratuity or service charge does not exceed 20 percent of the sales price. 
(e)  Meals sold or purchased under nonprofit nutrition programs for the elderly qualifying under 42 U.S.C. Section 3030(e) thru (g), as amended, as administered by the Office of Aging of the Commonwealth of Virginia, shall not be considered as sales of food under this division. 
(Ord. No. O-00-138, 6-27-00, eff. 7-1-00; Ord. No. O-10-067, 5-25-10) 
Sec. 36-254.4. - Gratuities and service charges. 
    Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this ordinance, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided in the latter ease, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
    An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, as a part of the selling price of the food and beverages and is subject to the tax imposed by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-00-138, 6-27-00, eff. 7-1-00) 
Sec. 36-254.5. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person required by this ordinance to pay to the city the taxes imposed by this ordinance to make a report thereof setting forth such information as the commissioner may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this ordinance, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this ordinance. Such report and remittance shall be made as required by the commissioner, which shall be at least once in every 30-day period. The records required by this section shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years. The commissioner or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-00-138, 6-27-00, eff. 7-1-00) 
Sec. 36-254.6. - Penalties, interest on delinquent taxes. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to remit to the city the tax required to be collected and paid by him under the provisions of this division within the time and in the amount required, there shall be added to such tax a penalty in the amount of ten percent thereof, and interest thereon at the rate of ten percent per annum which shall be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the date such taxes are due and payable. 
(Ord. No. O-00-138, 6-27-00, eff. 7-1-00) 
Sec. 36-254.7. - Compensation. 
    For the purpose of compensating a person for accounting for and remitting the tax levied by the provisions of this division, such person shall be allowed three percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction in submitting his return and paying the amount due by him; provided the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. O-00-138, 6-27-00, eff. 7-1-00) 
Sec. 36-254.8. - Enforcement. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this division and to make within the time required the reports and remittances required by this division, the commissioner shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person such tax and penalty and interest provided by this division, and shall notify such person by regular mail sent to his last known place of address of the amount of such tax and penalty and interest, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. The commissioner shall have the power to examine such records for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-00-138, 6-27-00, eff. 7-1-00) 
Sec. 36-254.9. - Penalty for violation of ordinance. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Virginia Code § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this ordinance, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this ordinance. 
(d)  In addition to the other penalties provided herein, if any food establishment or caterer shall fail to collect or remit the prepared food tax as required in this division, the city shall have the right to petition the judge of the circuit court for a court order directing that the offending food establishment or caterer be closed until such time as it demonstrates its willingness to comply with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-00-138, 6-27-00, eff. 7-1-00) 
Sec. 36-254.10. - Rules, regulations. 
    The commissioner shall have the authority to promulgate appropriate rules and regulations for the administration of the provisions of this division, which rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-00-138, 6-27-00, eff. 7-1-00) 
Secs. 36-255-36-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AMUSEMENT TAX 

Sec. 36-261. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases when used in this division, shall, for the purposes of this division have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a definite meaning: 
    Amusement tax or admission charge: The charge made for admission to any amusement or entertainment, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, including a charge made for season tickets, whether obtained by contributions or subscription, a cover charge or a charge made for the use of seats or tables, reserved or otherwise, and similar accommodations in the city. When a person is admitted free and a service charge is made, the service charge shall be considered as a charge for admission. 
    Director: The director of the department of finance and any of his duly authorized representatives. 
    Place of amusement or entertainment: Any place in the city wherein or whereat any of the following, or amusements or entertainments similar to the following, are located, conducted, performed, exhibited and operated: circuses; carnivals; menageries; amusement parks; moving picture shows; fairs; shows and exhibitions of all kinds; dances sponsored by or held by organizations on a regular or recurring basis at the organization's facilities; baseball, football wrestling, boxing and sports of all kinds; public swimming pools; concerts, theatrical, vaudeville, dramatic, operatic and musical performances and performances similar thereto; bowling alleys; roller rinks; public golf courses; miniature golf; such attractions as merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels; roller coasters, leap-the-dips and the like, and all other similar amusements, performances and exhibitions not specifically named herein; and any roof garden, cabaret or other similar place furnishing a public performance for profit, which shall include any room in any hotel, restaurant, hall or other public place where music and dancing privileges or any other entertainment is offered the patron in connection with serving or selling of food, refreshments or merchandise. 
    A performance or event shall be regarded as being furnished for profit for purposes of this division even though the charge made for admission, refreshment, service or merchandise is not increased by reason of the furnishing of such performance. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90) 
Sec. 36-262. - Levied; amount. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied a tax of seven percent of the amount paid for admission to any place of amusement or entertainment, to be paid by every person who pays an admission charge to such place. 
(b)  There is hereby imposed and levied a tax of seven percent of all amounts paid for service at any place of amusement or entertainment at which no admission charge is made. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-04-062, 6-8-04, eff. 7-1-04) 
Sec. 36-263. - Collection. 
    Every person receiving any payment for admission to any place of amusement or entertainment or for refreshments, service or merchandise on which a tax is levied under this division shall collect the amount of such tax imposed by this division from the person making the payment, at the time of the payment of such admission or purchase. If tickets or cards of admission are issued, the tax shall be collected at the time of the issuance of such tickets or cards. The taxes required to be collected hereunder shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect the same until remitted as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90) 
Sec. 36-264. - Reports and remittances generally. 
    The person collecting any tax imposed by this division shall make out a report, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the director may prescribe or require, showing the amount of admission charges collected, exclusive of the federal tax thereon, and the tax from the admissions or purchases for which he is liable, and shall sign and deliver to the city collector's office with remittance of such tax on or before the twentieth day of the calendar month following the month being reported. If the remittance received is by check or money order, the same shall be made payable to the city. 
    Every person liable for the collection and payment of the tax imposed by this division shall provide the director with a written list of the amusements and entertainments it plans to hold for the upcoming year no later than January 15 of each year. Persons operating temporary or transient events or events that are not scheduled in advance shall provide the director with written notice of such events at least 48 hours before such event is scheduled to occur. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90) 
Sec. 36-265. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this division to keep and preserve for a period of three years, such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax he may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the city. 
    The director may inspect such records at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90) 
Sec. 36-266. - Reports, remittances and deposits by temporary or transitory places of amusement or entertainment. 
(a)  Whenever any place of amusement or entertainment of a temporary or transitory nature makes an admission charge which is subject to the tax levied by this division, or does not make such an admission charge but does sell refreshments, services or merchandise which is subject to the tax levied by this division, the director may require the report and remittance of such tax to be made on the day following its collection, or on the day following the conclusion of a series of performances or exhibitions, or at such other reasonable time or times as he shall determine, and the failure to comply with any such requirement of the director as to the report and remittance of the tax so required shall be a violation of this division. 
(b)  Before any temporary or transient place of amusement or entertainment mentioned in subsection (a) above shall begin operation, and before any license shall be issued therefor, if a license is required, the person operating the same shall deposit with the director a sum of money, to be estimated by the director, sufficient to cover the tax required to be collected by such person under the provisions of this division, as security for the collection of such tax and payment thereof to the city. At the conclusion of such temporary or transient operation in the city, such person shall file with the director the report required by this division and pay the tax collected to the city. Upon such report being filed and payment being made, the director shall refund in accordance with the city's normal payment processing schedule the deposit made under this section. Should any person fail to file such report and pay such tax collected within five days from the termination of the operation of such amusement or entertainment, the director may thereupon assess such person with such tax at the amount of such deposit and the director shall retain such deposit as payment of the tax collected by and due the city by such person. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90) 
Sec. 36-267. - Duty of collector going out or disposing of business. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this division shall quit business or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable to the city under this division shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90) 
Sec. 36-268. - Penalty and interest for late remittance. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to remit to the director the tax required to be collected and paid under this division, within the time and in the amount specified in this division, there shall be added thereto a penalty of ten percent of the amount thereof, and interest thereon at the rate of ten percent per annum which shall be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the date such taxes are due and payable. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-95-099, 4-25-95) 
Sec. 36-269. - Procedure in case of failure to collect, report and remit. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed by this division or to make, within the prescribed time, any report and remittance required by this division, the director shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the director shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalties provided for by this division and shall notify such person by registered mail of the total amount of such tax and interest and penalties; and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90) 
Sec. 36-270. - Exceptions. 
    No tax shall be payable under this division for admission to the following amusements or entertainments: 
(a)  Athletic events held by a college or university for teams or athletes that regularly participate in such college's or university's athletic programs and dances held by a college or university. 
(b)  Athletic events that are held at a municipal facility or any amusement or entertainment event that is sponsored by the city. 
(c)  Dances or any athletic or cultural event conducted by an elementary or secondary school, public or private. Fundraising activities such as carnivals and other amusement or entertainment events shall be subject to the tax provided for in section 36-262 of this division. 
(d)  Any athletic event that is held as part of the Virginia High School League All-Star Games. 
(e)  Amateur participants in sports tournaments. For purposes of this exemption a sports tournament shall be defined as a series of sports or athletic contests taking place during a limited period of time rather than throughout a regular season, where all the participants or teams are amateur, includes teams or participants from outside the region 2000 area and which has been sanctioned by an appropriate sanctioning body. Examples of sports tournaments include but shall not be limited to, bowling tournaments, miniature golf tournaments, softball tournaments, basketball tournaments, skating tournaments and similar sport activities. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-96-140, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 36-271. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor and each violation or failure shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction for such violation shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax, interest and penalties as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90) 
Sec. 36-272. - Rules, regulations. 
    The director shall have the authority to promulgate appropriate rules and regulations for the administration of the provisions of this division, which rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90) 
Sec. 36-273. - Advertising restricted. 
    A person operating a place of amusement or entertainment shall not advertise in any manner directly or indirectly that he will absorb or pay all or any part of the tax levied by the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-90-130, 5-15-90, eff. 7-1-90) 
Chapter 36.1 - TECHNOLOGY ZONE 

Sec. 36.1-1. - Purpose. 
    The Lynchburg City Council finds that the designation of the entire city as a technology zone, as authorized by Section 58.1-3850 of the Code of Virginia, will enable the city to provide incentives to qualified technology businesses that locate in or are already located within the city limits. City council believes that providing incentives to qualified technology businesses will benefit the citizens of Lynchburg by creating high-wage jobs and expanding the city's tax base through maintaining, growing and attracting high-technology businesses and industries. 
(Ord. of 01-11-11, O-11-003) 
Sec. 36.1-2. - Administration. 
    The department of economic development shall oversee the administration of the technology zone and this chapter. A business firm seeking to become qualified as a technology business must make application to the city's department of economic development for certification as a qualified technology business and to qualify for incentives. The department of economic development shall determine if an applicant is a qualified technology business. 
(Ord. of 01-11-11, O-11-003) 
Sec. 36.1-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following phrases shall have the following meanings, unless clearly indicated to the contrary: 
    Technology business. The term technology business means a business which derives its gross receipts from the design, development, manufacture or other creation, for lease, sale or license of technology based products, processes or related services. Technology based products, processes or related services are defined as engaging in the activity of automation, biotechnology, biomedical research, electronics, computer hardware, computer software, defense, energy, environmental, manufacturing equipment, advanced materials, medical applications, pharmaceuticals, photonics, electronic based subassemblies and components, testing and measurements, telecommunications, systems integration, multimedia, e-commerce, internet services, transportation, architecture and engineering or similar activities. An electronic equipment facility that is primarily occupied, or intended to be occupied, by electronic and computer equipment that provides electronic data switching, transmission, or telecommunication functions between computers, both inside and outside the facility shall not qualify as a technology business. The use of computers, telecommunications services, or a web page or internet site shall not, in itself, be sufficient to qualify as a qualified technology business. 
    Qualified technology business. The term qualified technology business shall mean a business that: 
(a)  Makes a minimum net new capital investment of $100,000.00. 
(b)  Within one year of the new capital investment, hires five net new full-time employees. 
(1)  A full-time employee is a person who is listed on the qualified technology business's payroll within the technology zone and is required to report to work in the technology zone. 
(2)  A full-time employee's wages must be equal to or greater than twice the federal minimum wage rate. 
(3)  A full-time employee must be provided with health benefits. 
(Ord. of 01-11-11, O-11-003) 
Sec. 36.1-4. - Boundaries. 
    The technology zone shall include all the land and buildings lying within the Lynchburg city limits. 
(Ord. of 01-11-11, O-11-003) 
Sec. 36.1-5. - Businesses located in both an enterprise zone and a technology zone. 
    Some businesses may be located in one of the city's enterprise zones and the technology zone. A qualified business that is located in both an enterprise zone and the technology zone can utilize either enterprise zone incentives or technology zone incentives, but not both. 
(Ord. of 01-11-11, O-11-003) 
Secs. 36.1-6-36.1-9. - Reserved. 
Chapter 37 - TAXICABS, RENTAL CARS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate the use of vehicles for hire, § 38(26). 
Cross reference- Buses, Ch. 12; police, Ch. 31; license taxes, § 36-16 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 37-1-37-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- License fee for advertising on taxicabs, § 36-44; for taxicabs, § 36-100. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 37-16. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Driver: The person in control of or driving a taxicab. 
    Manifest: A daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by such driver, showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the amount of fare of each trip. 
    Owner: The purchaser of any vehicle under reserved title contracts as well as the actual owner. 
    Taxicab: A motor vehicle or motorcar operated for hire as part of a taxicab business, in charge of a chauffeur or driver, for the transportation of passengers, which does not operate over a fixed or definite route. 
    Taxicab business: A business providing taxicab service and which operates five or more motor vehicles or motorcars in doing so. 
    Taximeter: A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-1; Ord. No. O-96-136, 5-14-96; Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-17. - Authority of city manager generally. 
    The inspection of taxicabs, the sealing of taximeters and other activities related to the regulation of taxicabs, consistent with this article, shall be under the control and jurisdiction of the city manager. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-2; Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-18. - Appointment of taxicab inspector. 
    The city manager may designate a person from the personnel of the department of police to act as taxicab inspector as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-3) 
Sec. 37-19. - Compliance with article generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or cause to be driven on the streets of the city any taxicab without complying with the conditions, regulations and restrictions set out in this article. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-27) 
Sec. 37-20. - Compliance with article prerequisite to advertisement as taxicab operator. 
    No person shall use the term taxi or taxicab in advertising, nor shall any person hold himself out to the public as a taxi or taxicab owner, or represent himself to be such by means of advertisement, sign, trade name, or otherwise, unless such person shall have previously thereto complied with the regulations and requirements of this article. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-28) 
Sec. 37-21. - Application of traffic, etc., laws of city and state. 
    All the traffic and other laws of the city and the state applicable thereto shall apply to owners and drivers of taxicabs. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-29) 
Sec. 37-22. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article for which no other penalty is provided shall be deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor, in addition to the revocation or suspension of such person's registration by the city manager or the chief of police, as provided in this article. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-30; Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-23. - Receipt and discharge of passengers on sidewalk. 
    Drivers shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway, but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the street and there receive or discharge passengers; provided, that upon one-way streets, passengers may be discharged at either the right-hand or left-hand sidewalk or side of the street in the absence of a sidewalk. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-10) 
Sec. 37-24. - Additional passengers. 
    No driver shall permit any person other than the person first employing the taxicab to occupy or ride in a taxicab, unless the person first employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of an additional passenger. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-11) 
Sec. 37-25. - Restriction on number of passengers. 
    No driver shall permit more than five persons, other than the driver, to be carried in a taxicab. A child in arms shall not be counted as an additional person. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-12) 
Sec. 37-26. - Drivers bearing evidence of intoxicating beverages. 
    No owner of a taxicab shall permit any driver to work if he reports for duty with any evidence of intoxicating beverages upon his person or upon his breath. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-14) 
Sec. 37-27. - Equipment and condition of vehicles. 
    Every taxicab operated within the city must meet all the requirements of the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city and the laws of the state as to lights, brakes, horn and inspection, and must be kept in a good, clean, neat and safe condition and appearance. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-15) 
Sec. 37-28. - Type of vehicle required. 
    Taxicabs operated within the city shall be of a closed or sedan type with at least four doors and of not less than five passenger capacity, including the driver. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-16; Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-29. - Disposition of money or property left in cab. 
    The driver in charge of any taxicab operated within the city shall carefully preserve any money or other property left in such vehicle by any passenger and such money or other property shall be promptly deposited with the owner of the vehicle, who shall deliver a receipt for the same. The owner shall promptly notify the passenger, if known, of the money or property found and return the same upon request. In the event such passenger is unknown, the owner shall file in writing a report to the chief of police and shall keep the money or property at some convenient place within the city where the same may be called for by the owner. When such money or other property shall have been identified and ownership established, the same shall be delivered to the owner. Any property, money or other thing which shall not have been called for within 60 days shall be disposed of according to law. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-17) 
Sec. 37-30. - Establishment and use of open stands on streets. 
(a)  The city manager may establish open stands in such places upon the streets of the city as he deems necessary for the use of taxicabs operated in the city. Such stands shall not be created without taking into consideration the need for such stands by the taxicab owners and the convenience of the general public. The city manager shall prescribe the number of taxicabs that shall occupy such open stands and shall not create an open stand in front of any place of business where the abutting property owner objects to same or where such stand would tend to create a traffic hazard. 
(b)  Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first-come-first-serve basis. The driver shall pull onto the open stand from the rear and shall advance forward as the taxicab ahead pulls off. Drivers shall stay within five feet of their taxicabs in such stands and shall not engage in loud or boisterous talk while occupying an open stand. Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding a taxicab of his choice that is parked at any such open stand. No vehicle, other than taxicabs, shall at any time occupy a space in a taxicab stand. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-18) 
Sec. 37-31. - Drivers' manifests. 
(a)  Every taxicab driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which is recorded all trips made each day, showing the time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare. All such completed manifests shall be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his hours of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be of a character approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Every taxicab owner or operator shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least one year and such manifests shall be subject to inspection by the city manager and by personnel of the division of police. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-19; Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-32. - Records as to receipts, expenses, etc. 
    Every taxicab owner or operator shall keep accurate records of receipts and operating expenses, capital expenditures and such other operating information as may be required by the city manager. Every such owner or operator shall maintain the records containing such information and other data required by this section at a place readily accessible for examination by the city manager, or his designated representative. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-20; Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-96-136, adopted May 14, 1996, repealed § 37-33. 
Sec. 37-34. - Accident reports. 
    All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person or in damage to any vehicle or to any property shall be reported within 24 hours from the date of occurrence to the police division on a form of report to be furnished or approved by the chief of police. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-22) 
Sec. 37-35. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city manager may from time to time make such additional rules and regulations not in conflict with the provisions of this article as he may deem proper to regulate the operation of taxicabs within the city. The city manager shall give written notice of such additional rules and regulations to all registered owners or operators and such additional rules and regulations shall become effective at the time specified in such notice. Failure to comply with any such additional rules and regulations shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of the registration held by the person who fails, or whose employees willfully or continuously fail, to comply with the same. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-24; Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-36. - Police to watch taxicab owners, operators and drivers; report, etc., of violations. 
    The members of the police department shall watch and observe the conduct of taxicab owners, operators and drivers operating under this article. Upon discovering a violation of the provisions of this article, a member of the police department shall report such violation to the city manager who will order or take appropriate action. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-25; Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, adopted May 10, 2016, changed the title of § 37-36 from "Police to watch certificate holders and drivers; report, etc., of violations" to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 37-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-05-103, adopted Aug. 9, 2005, repealed § 37-37. 
Secs. 37-38-37-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OVERALL TAXICAB SERVICE 

Sec. 37-44. - Refusal to accept calls or passengers; failure or refusal to give overall service. 
    The owner or operator of a taxicab who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere within the city or refuse to accept a passenger for delivery to any place within the city or within one mile of the city when such owner or operator has available a taxicab or who shall fail or refuse to give overall service shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and the registration granted to such owner or operator shall be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the city manager subject to the provisions of sections 37-74 through 37-77, unless driver can articulate a reasonable concern for his/her personal safety or unless repeated incidences of a taxi having been previously called to that address which calls turned out to be false calls for a fare. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-31; Ord. No. O-05-103, 8-9-05; Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-44.1. - Violation by passengers; misdemeanor, objection. 
    Any passengers in a taxicab who fail to act in an orderly manner so as to permit the safe operation of the taxicab by the driver, or who fail to obey the directions of the driver or person in charge of the taxicab, to act in an orderly manner, shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Furthermore, such persons may be ejected from any taxicab by the driver or person in charge of the taxicab, or by any police officer or other conservator of the peace; and in case such persons ejected have paid their fares, they shall not be in entitled to the return of any part of the same. For the refusal of any passenger to abide by the direction of the driver or person in charge of the taxicab, and his consequent ejection from such taxicab, neither the driver, owner, manager or company operating or owning the taxicab shall be liable for damages in any court. 
(Ord. No. O-96-136, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 37-45. - Refusal to respond to telephone call or to transport passenger. 
    No driver shall refuse to respond to any telephone call or refuse to transport an orderly passenger to any place within the city or within one mile of the limits thereof, provided he is not otherwise engaged. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-13) 
Sec. 37-46. - Answering calls. 
    Taxicab owners or operators shall answer all calls received by them for service inside the city as soon as they can do so and, if such service cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective passenger how long it will be before service can be given. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-34; Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-47. - Solicitation of passengers; cruising. 
    Taxicabs shall not be permitted to stand or cruise, seeking employment, nor shall any person solicit, by word, signal or otherwise, patronage for such vehicles on any street or public property, other than at taxicab stands so designated or assigned for the purpose. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-9) 
Secs. 37-48-37-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAXICAB REGISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-16-049, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 10, 2016, amended Div. 3 in its entirety by repealing repealing certain sections and renumbering others to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 37-54-37-77, pertained to certificates of public convenience and necessity, and derived from Tax Code 1959, §§ 31-4-31-6, 31-8, 31-36-54; Ord. No. O-84-141, § 1, adopted Jun 12, 1984, eff. July 1, 1984; Ord. No. O-88-062, § 1, adopted Mar. 22, 1988, eff. July 1, 1988; and Ord. No. O-96-136, adopted May 14, 1996. 

Sec. 37-54. - Required. 
    No person shall operate or cause to be operated any taxicab upon the streets of the city without first having registered the vehicle with the police department. 
( Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-55. - Required information. 
    An application for registration shall be filed with the chief of police and shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant and shall state that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(b)  The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business. 
(c)  If the applicant is a corporation, the officers, directors and principal stockholders of the corporation. 
(d)  The vehicle identification number (VIN), year, make and model for each vehicle that will be used in the taxicab business. 
(e)  The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the taxicab business with which the vehicle or vehicles will be associated. 
(f)  Such further information required by the chief of police and which may be relevant and pertinent to the matter of the issuance of the registration. 
( Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-56. - License for operation of business. 
    The owner of a taxicab business shall procure from the commissioner of the revenue a business license as required under the applicable section of the tax code of the city. 
( Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-57. - Insurance or bond-required. 
    No registration shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall submit satisfactory evidence to the chief of police that he has filed with the state corporation commission such insurance policy, letter of credit or bond covering such liability or property damage as may be required by state law. 
( Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-58. - Same-No liability on city. 
    Nothing contained in this ordinance shall have the effect of fixing any liability on the city by reason of the maintenance and operation of any taxicab. 
( Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-59. - No vested rights granted by this article. 
    No person operating a taxicab business under the provisions of this article shall acquire any vested rights in the streets of the city or any vested rights to use the same. 
( Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-60. - Revocation and suspension-Causes for action. 
(a)  A registration may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police for the following causes: 
(1)  Failure to operate the registered taxicab or taxicabs in such manner as to serve the public adequately. 
(2)  Failure to maintain such taxicabs in good order and repair. 
(3)  Failure to keep in force the bond or insurance as required under section 37-57. 
(4)  Repeated and persistent violation of traffic and safety ordinances by drivers. 
(5)  Willful or continued failure to comply with the provisions of this article or willful or continued failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city or laws of the state or federal governments, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the suitability of the taxicab owner or operator to offer public transportation. 
(6)  Failure to comply with any rule or regulation promulgated by the city manager under the provisions of section 37-35. 
( Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-61. - Same-Notice and hearing. 
    Prior to suspension or revocation of a taxicab registration the owner or operator involved shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
( Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-62. - Same-Right of appeal. 
    In the event of suspension or revocation of a registration by the chief of police, the owner or operator shall have the right of appeal to the city manager. 
( Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Secs. 37-63-37-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGISTRATION OF DRIVERS 

Sec. 37-84. - Required. 
    Every driver shall be registered by the chief of police before driving any taxicab upon the streets of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 31-55) 
Sec. 37-85. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall, for a first violation, be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor; for each second or subsequent conviction under this division, committed within 12 months from the date of a prior conviction hereunder, any such person shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 31-61) 
Sec. 37-86. - Fee. 
    A fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the city for processing and investigating the applicant, which fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(Code 1959, § 31-55; Ord. No. O-90-093, 3-27-90, eff. 7-1-90; Ord. No. O-95-206, 7-11-95, eff. 9-1-95) 
Sec. 37-87. - Term; renewal. 
    Original registration of a driver shall expire one year from date of issue, unless sooner revoked. All such registrations shall be renewed annually on or before the driver's date of birth each year. Such renewal registration shall continue for one year following, unless sooner revoked. 
(Code 1959, § 31-55; Ord. No. O-91-050, 3-26-91) 
Sec. 37-88. - Application. 
    Application for original and renewal registration shall be made to the chief of police on forms prescribed by the city manager for that purpose. The fee for such registration shall accompany each application for registration. It shall be unlawful for any applicant to willfully omit any information called for on such application form or to give any false information thereon. 
(Code 1959, § 31-56) 
Sec. 37-89. - Fingerprinting of applicants. 
    The chief of police shall cause each applicant for registration to be fingerprinted for the purpose of clearing convictions, if any. 
(Code 1959, § 31-59) 
Sec. 37-90. - Mandatory denial. 
    No applicant for original or renewal registration required by this division shall be registered by the chief of police if such applicant: 
(a)  Does not have in force a valid license issued by the department of motor vehicles of the state; or, 
(b)  Has, within the past three years prior to the date of application, been convicted of a felony or petit larceny under the laws of the United States or any state; or, 
(c)  Has, within three years prior to the date of application, been convicted of driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicants or any narcotic drug under the laws of any state or municipality; or, 
(d)  Has, within one year prior to the date of application, been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of the Code of Virginia, Title 4, relating to the transportation or sale of alcoholic beverages, or has, within one year prior to the date of the application, been convicted of a violation of any state law or municipal ordinance relating to the sale, transportation, possession or distribution of intoxicating liquors or relating to the sale, transportation, possession or distribution of any other controlled substance; or 
(e)  Has, within one year prior to the date of application, been convicted of using or allowing the use of a vehicle to aid or promote prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse, or of violating any of the provisions of the Code of Virginia, Section 18.2-349, or any amendment thereof. 
(f)  Has, any pending charges for any of the criminal offenses identified in paragraphs (b), (c), (d), or (e) of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 31-57; Ord. No. O-91-050, 3-26-91; Ord. No. O-96-136, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 37-91. - Authority to deny; appeal from denial. 
    The chief of police, except in cases where denial of registration is mandatory, after due hearing and upon not less than days' notice in writing to the applicant, such notice to be sent by registered mail to the address given by the applicant in his application or by personal service upon the applicant, either of which shall constitute sufficient form of notice, may deny registration to any applicant, for good cause shown, including the conviction of the applicant for the violation of any of the provisions of this division or of any state law or municipal ordinance. Except in cases where denial of registration is mandatory, the applicant shall have the right, within 20 days from the day registration is denied, to appeal to the judge of the municipal court from the decision of the chief of police denying registration. The decision of the judge of the municipal court after hearing relevant evidence shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 31-58) 
Sec. 37-92. - Registration cards. 
    Every taxicab driver registered by the chief of police under the provisions of this division shall be furnished with a card signed by the chief of police certifying to his registration, which card shall contain a photograph of the taxicab driver made by the police division. Such card shall be conspicuously displayed in a manner directed by the chief of police in the taxicab at all times that the same is in charge of such driver. No driver shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city until he shall have secured a registration card from the chief of police. 
(Code 1959, § 31-60) 
Sec. 37-93. - Revocation or suspension-Mandatory revocation generally. 
    The chief of police shall forthwith revoke and seize the registration of any taxicab driver upon ascertaining that such driver: 
(a)  Has, within the preceding three years, been convicted of a felony or petit larceny under the laws of the United States or any state; or, 
(b)  Has, within the preceding three years, been convicted of driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicants or any narcotic drug under the laws of any state or municipality; or, 
(c)  Has, within the preceding year, been convicted of any of the provisions of Code of Virginia, Title 4, relating to the transportation or sale of alcoholic beverages, or has been convicted of violating any state law or municipal ordinance relating to the sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors or relating to the sale, transportation, possession or distribution of any other controlled substance; or, 
(d)  Has, within the preceding year, been convicted of using or allowing the use of a vehicle to aid or promote prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse, or of violating any of the provisions of Code of Virginia, Section 18.2-349; or, 
(e)  Has, within the preceding year, been convicted of two offenses of reckless driving under the laws of any state or municipality; or, 
(f)  Has, within the preceding year, been convicted of one offense of reckless driving and two offenses of exceeding the speed limit under the laws of any state or municipality; or, 
(g)  Has, within the preceding year, been convicted of three offenses of exceeding the speed limit under the laws of any state or municipality. 
(h)  Does not have in force a valid operators license issued by the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles. 
    When any taxicab driver is charged with any criminal offense that would result in the mandatory revocation of the driver's registration, if convicted, the chief of police shall suspend the driver's registration until such time as the criminal charges have been resolved. 
(Ord. No. O-96-136, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 37-94. - Same-Authority of chief of police; notice; appeal from action by chief of police. 
    The chief of police, except in cases where revocation is mandatory under section 37-93, after due hearing and upon not less than five days' notice in writing to the taxicab driver, such notice to be sent by registered mail to the address given by the taxicab driver when applying for registration, or by personal service upon the taxicab driver, either of which shall constitute sufficient form of notice, may suspend or revoke the registration of any taxicab driver for good cause shown, including the conviction of the taxicab driver for the violation of any of the provisions of this division or any state law or municipal ordinance. Except in cases where revocation is mandatory under section 37-93, any taxicab driver shall have the right of appeal to the judge of the municipal court within 20 days from the date of suspension or revocation. The decision of the judge of the municipal court after due hearing of relevant evidence shall be final. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-63) 
Sec. 37-95. - Same-Term. 
    In the event of revocation or suspension of registration of a driver, other than mandatory revocation, such suspension or revocation shall be for a period fixed by the chief of police or the judge of the municipal court upon appeal, but not exceeding one year. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-64) 
Sec. 37-96. - Same-Registration after mandatory revocation. 
    In the event of mandatory revocation, registration shall not again be granted until such time as registration could be granted under the provisions of section 37-90. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-65) 
Sec. 37-97. - Same-Surrender and restoration of registration card. 
    In the event of any revocation or suspension of registration, the registration card of the driver shall forthwith be surrendered to the chief of police. In case of suspension only, the registration card shall be restored to the driver at the expiration of the period of suspension. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-66) 
Sec. 37-98. - Same-Driving during time of revocation or suspension. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city during the time his registration is revoked or suspended. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-67) 
Secs. 37-99-37-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TAXIMETERS, RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 37-105. - Required. 
    All taxicabs operating under this article shall be equipped with taximeters fastened to the taxicab in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times of the day and night; and, after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-68) 
Sec. 37-106. - Signal device. 
    Each taximeter shall have thereon a dome light or similar electronic device to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed. It shall be the duty of the driver to engage the dome light or similar electronic device of such taximeter into a recording position at a time when such vehicle is employed and such device shall remain in such recording position at all times during the transportation of passengers and at a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. It shall be unlawful for a driver to fail, refuse or neglect to put the taximeter in operation when such vehicle is employed and to keep the device in a recording position at all times during such employment. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 31-69; Ord. No. O-96-136, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 37-107. - Inspection generally; procedure in case of inaccuracy. 
    Taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the police department. Any inspector or other officer of such department or any officer designated by the city manager, may either on complaint of any person or without such complaint, inspect any such taximeter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, shall notify the person operating such taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon, such taxicab shall be kept off the streets until the taximeter is repaired and in the required working condition or until such taximeter has been replaced in the taxicab by a properly working taximeter. 
(Code 1959, § 31-70; Ord. No. O-16-049, § 2, 5-10-16 ) 
Sec. 37-108. - Rules and regulations as to inspection and sealing. 
    The city manager may promulgate additional rules and regulations regarding the inspection of taximeters and the sealing of such taximeters if he deems it in the public interest to do so. 
(Code 1959, § 31-71) 
Sec. 37-109. - Rates. 
    The rates to be charged passengers by owners or drivers of taxicabs shall be as provided in this section and it shall be unlawful for an owner to permit or a driver to make any greater or lesser charges for the transportation of passengers and luggage than the following charges: 
(a)  Trip rates. 
(1)  Mileage basis. 
For the first one-ninth mile, or fraction thereof ..... $1.80 
For each succeeding one-ninth mile, or fraction thereof ..... 0.25 
(2  Waiting time. 
For each minute of waiting time, or fraction thereof, after the first three minutes ..... 0.50 or $30.00 per hour waiting time 
(b)  Hourly rates. 
When hired on an hourly basis for one or more passengers, per hour ..... 30.00 
(c)  Trunks or footlockers. 
For transporting trunks or footlockers along with passengers, each piece ..... 1.00 
(d)  Hand luggage. 
(1)  For each hand baggage in excess of two bags per passenger, each additional bag ..... 0.10 
(2)  For packages without a passenger, each ..... 1.00 
(e)  Bags weighing 100 pounds, or over. 
For each piece of baggage weighing 100 pounds, or over ..... 1.00 
(f)  For transporting pets, other than seeing-eye dogs, an additional charge for each pet ..... 1.50 
(g)  Two or more passengers. An extra charge of $0.20 per passenger shall be made for each additional passenger traveling together and discharged along the route or at the same destination. 
(1)  Should the first person taken into a taxicab for transportation permit the driver to allow another or others traveling in the same direction to be transported in the same taxicab with him, pursuant to section 37-24, the passenger first arriving at his destination shall pay in accordance with the meter charge at that point, plus an extra charge of $0.20 for each additional passenger transported and discharged at that destination, whereupon the driver of the taxicab shall immediately clear his meter and set the same for immediate operation for the next passenger, who shall pay the meter charge upon arrival at his destination, plus an extra charge of $0.20 for each additional passenger transported and discharged at that destination. The same method shall be followed for each succeeding passenger. 
(2)  When two or more passengers are bona fide traveling together and engage a taxicab to different destinations, the charge shall be made as if the taxicab were hired for one passenger for the last destination, plus an extra charge of $0.20 for each additional passenger transported. 
(h)  Passengers to points beyond city limits. For transportation of passengers from the city to points beyond the city limits, the rates set out in this section shall be applicable only to so much of such trip as is within the city limits. 
(i)  In order to ensure payment of fares, drivers may request a security deposit of no more than $5.00 prior to accepting a passenger. The difference between such deposit and the actual fare shall be refunded to the passenger. 
(j)  Fuel cost surcharge. Effective July 1, 2008, a surcharge of $1.00 shall be added to the current meter charge for each trip. 
(Ord. of 7-22-75, § 31-72; Ord. of 6-26-79; Ord. No. O-82-213, § 1, 10-12-82; Ord. No. O-90-284, 9-11-90; Ord. No. O-99-091, 5-11-99, eff. 6-1-99; Ord. No. O-05-103, 8-9-05; Ord. No. O-08-088, 6-10-08, eff. 7-1-08) 
Sec. 37-110. - Receipt showing payment of fare. 
    A driver shall, upon request, deliver to the person paying the fare a receipt in legible type or writing showing the date, amount of fare paid, the name of the owner and driver, and the city license tag number of the taxicab. 
(Code 1959, § 31-73) 
Sec. 37-111. - Failure to pay fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who has been transported in a taxicab willfully fail, refuse or neglect to pay the driver of the taxicab the fare provided for under this division at the rates prescribed therefor immediately upon termination of the transportation, unless satisfactory arrangements are otherwise made with the driver for the payment of such fare. Every person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor for each offense. 
(Code 1959, § 31-74; Ord. No. O-96-136, 5-14-96) 
Secs. 37-112-37-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RENTAL VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- License fee for rental car agencies, § 36-114(a)(15). 

Sec. 37-123. - Definition. 
    Wherever used in this article, the term "U-Drive-It" shall be construed to apply to all automobiles or motorcars offered for rent, hire or lease, or which are rented, hired or leased for operation without a chauffeur. 
(Code 1959, § 31-75) 
Sec. 37-124. - Renting to person without driver's permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of offering automobiles or motorcars for rent, hire or lease, to be driven by the person hiring same, to hire, rent or lease such automobiles or motorcars to any person, unless such person exhibits to the owner or person in charge of such business a permit from a duly authorized authority permitting him to drive or operate a motor vehicle under the laws of the city and state in which such permit is issued. 
(Code 1959, § 31-76) 
Sec. 37-125. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 31-77) 
Chapter 38 - TREES AND VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to plant shade trees, § 38(9). 
Cross reference- Department of recreation and cultural services, § 2-248 et seq.; nuisances, Ch. 26; parks and public places, Ch. 28; planning, Ch. 30; license fee for landscaping, tree surgery, § 36-62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Buildings and grounds: The division in the department of public works under whose jurisdiction street trees fall. 
    Park: All public parks, or public open spaces having individual names. 
    Principal thoroughfare: Any street upon which trucks are not prohibited. 
    Property line: The right-of-way line of a street or highway. 
    Property owner: The person owning such property as shown by the city assessor's maps. 
    Public places: All other grounds owned by the city. 
    Public trees: All shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any street, right-of-way or any public areas where otherwise indicated. 
(a)  Large trees: Those attaining a height of 45 feet or more. 
(b)  Medium trees: Those attaining a height of 30 to 45 feet. 
(c)  Small trees: Those attaining a height of less than 30 feet. 
    Street or highway: The entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
    Treelawn: That part of a street or highway, not covered by a sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. 
    Urban forester: The person within buildings and grounds or his designated representative, assigned to carry out specified duties of this chapter. 
(Tax Code 1959, § 23.1-1; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1, 5-26-81; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99; Ord. No. O-12-136, 11-27-12) 
Sec. 38-2. - Community forest plan. 
    The urban forester is herewith charged to formulate and administer a community forest plan covering all trees and tree work within the municipal boundaries of the city. This plan shall list suitable species of trees to be planted on each of the streets or other public sites of the city. From and after the effective date of the community forest plan, or any amendment thereof, all planting shall conform thereto. 
(a)  The urban forester shall consider all existing and future utility and environmental factors in the formulation of this plan in order to minimize any conflict between trees and utilities. 
(b)  The urban forester shall have the authority to revise the community forest plan at any time circumstance dictates. An important tool in fulfilling the community forest plan and in managing overall supervision of all trees on city property shall be a computerized tree inventory system. 
(c)  The community forest plan shall utilize ANSI A300 (the standard set by the National Standards Institute). Pending issuance of any topical segment of A300, the Manual of Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice shall comprise the standards for tree work and tree care in the city. (See section 38-23 below.) 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-2; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-81-106, § 1,5-26-81; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-3. - Obstruction. 
(a)  Duty of occupant: It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees, shrubs, weeds and other vegetation, to prune such trees, shrubs, weeds and vegetation in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be eight feet over sidewalks, and 14 feet over all. 
(b)  Duty of property owner: It shall be the duty of any person or person owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees, shrubs, weeds and other vegetation which cause potential hazard to public safety, to prune or remove such trees, shrubs, weeds and other vegetation. 
(c)  Notice to prune: Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune trees, shrubs, weeds and other vegetation as hereinabove provided, the urban forester shall order such person or persons to so prune such trees, shrubs, weeds and other vegetation within a reasonable time. 
(d)  Service of order: All notices to comply with the provisions of this article shall be served either by personal service, publication, posting or by certified mail and such procedures shall be deemed the equivalent of personal service. If the owner or owners of any unoccupied lot or premises is not a resident of the city and does not have an agent in the city upon whom notice can be served, notice may be given by sending the same by certified mail to the last-known address of the non-resident owner. The last known address of the owner shall be that shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records. 
(e)  Failure to comply: When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within the specified time, the city may prune such trees, shrubs, weeds, and other vegetation, and the cost thereof shall be recoverable from such person so failing to comply. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-3; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99; Ord. No. O-12-136, 11-27-12) 
Sec. 38-4. - Abuse, mutilation, or damage to public trees. 
    Unless specifically authorized by the urban forester, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree on public property; nor attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any public tree; nor allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; nor set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor and, in addition thereto, shall be responsible for the cost of repair, or removal and replacement of any public tree so damaged. The owner of any vehicle which accidentally damages a tree(s) on public property shall be responsible for the cost of repair or removal, and the cost of a replacement tree(s) on public property. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-4; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-5. - Protection of trees. 
(a)  All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any excavation or construction of any building, structure or street work, shall be guarded with a good substantial fence, frame or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches dbh, whichever is greater, and all building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. 
(b)  No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet from any public tree without first obtaining a written permit from the urban forester.. 
(c)  The public works department shall notify the urban forester in advance of any applications for new curb, gutter, sidewalks, or driveway installations, or other improvements which might require the removal of or cause injury to any street tree, or its root system, or interfere with the fulfillment of the street tree plan. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-5; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-6. - Placing materials on public property. 
    No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place of the city, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing thereon, except by written permit of the urban forester. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-6; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-7. - Improper planting. 
    Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be lawful for the urban forester to remove or cause removal of said trees; and the cost thereof shall be recoverable from the person(s) responsible for such planting. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-7; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-8. - Removal, replanting, and replacement. 
(a)  If conditions prevent planting on treelawns, this requirement can be satisfied if any equivalent number of trees of an accepted species and size are planted on neighboring public or private property, so as to create a tree-lined street effect. 
(b)  No person shall remove a tree from the treelawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason, without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the urban forester, and without replacing the removed tree or trees in accordance with the adopted arboricultural specifications. Such replacement shall meet the standards of size, species and placement as provided for in a permit issued by the urban forester. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees removed. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-8; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-9. - Planting in rights-of-way. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cultivate any plants, trees, shrubs or other landscaping materials within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit therefor from the urban forester. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-9; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-10. - Planting by city on application of lot owner. 
    On the written application of any lot owner, desiring to have trees planted in the treelawn adjacent to his lot, and agreeing to pay the actual cost thereof, the urban forester may comply with such application, if the conditions are found to be favorable, and the convenient use of the street will not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-10; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-11. - City maintenance of trees and vegetation in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  The city is not required to cut and/or remove weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation growing in the public alleys, unimproved streets and other unimproved rights-of-way except as provided in subsection 26-28.1(c) of the city's weed ordinance. The city shall not cut and/or remove weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation growing in the unimproved portion of the public right-of-way lying between any public street and private property lines except when the weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation grow in such a manner as to obstruct the view of traffic signs, obstruct the view of an intersection or otherwise create a traffic hazard. 
(b)  If any tree growing in a public alley, unimproved street or other unimproved right-of-way is dead or is growing in such a manner that the branches, limbs or other parts of the tree extend or pertrude onto private property in a manner that constitutes a danger to citizens or property, the city will cut and remove or prune such tree once it has been notified of the condition of the tree. It shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner or tenant to notify the city when a tree is growing in such a manner that it needs to be cut and removed or pruned. 
(c)  Any adjacent property owner, tenant or citizen, at their own expense, may cut and/or remove any weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation growing in the public alleys, unimproved streets and other unimproved rights-of-way and in the unimproved portion of the public right-of-way lying between any public property and private property lines. No person shall cut and remove or prune any tree growing in the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the urban forester as required in section 38-38 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. O-95-327, 12-12-95; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12-136, adopted Nov. 27, 2012, repealed § 38-12. 
Secs. 38-13-38-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - URBAN FORESTER 

Sec. 38-22. - Urban forester. 
    The urban forester shall have the authority and jurisdiction of regulating the planting, maintenance and removal of trees on all publicly owned property in Lynchburg to ensure safety and/or preserve the aesthetics of such public sites. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-11; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-23. - Duties generally. 
    The urban forester shall have the authority to establish the rules and regulations of the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice governing the planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning, and bracing of trees on the streets or other public sites in the city, and shall direct, regulate, and control the planting, maintenance, and removal of all trees growing now or hereafter in any public area of the city. The urban forester shall cause the provisions of this chapter to be enforced. In the urban forester's absence these duties shall be the responsibility of a qualified alternate designated by the superintendent of buildings and grounds. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-12; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-24. - Supervision. 
    The urban forester shall have the authority and it shall be his duty to supervise or inspect all work done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-99-254, adopted Nov. 23, 1999, repealed § 38-25. 
Sec. 38-26. - Interference. 
    No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the urban forester or any of his assistants while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-13; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Secs. 38-27-38-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 

Sec. 38-38. - Required. 
    No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above ground, or otherwise disturb any tree on any street or city owned property without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the urban forester. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice adopted by this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-14; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-39. - Application-When due. 
    Application for permits required by the provisions of this article shall be made at the office of the urban forester not less than 48 hours in advance of the time the work is to be done. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-15; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-40. - Same-Planting. 
    The application for a permit to plant a tree under the provisions of this chapter shall state the number of trees to be set out; the location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such other information as the urban forester shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-16; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-41. - Same-Maintenance. 
    The application for a permit to maintain trees under the provisions of this chapter shall state the number and kinds of trees to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned or otherwise preserved; the kind of treatment to be administered; the composition of the spray material to be applied; and such other information as the urban forester shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(Code 1959,§ 23.1-17; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-42. - Standards of issuance. 
    The urban forester shall issue the permit required by this article if, in his judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed method of workmanship thereof is of a satisfactory nature. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-18; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-43. - Conditions. 
    The urban forester shall have the authority to affix reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-19; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-44. - Expiration. 
    Any permit granted under the provisions of this article shall contain a definite date of expiration and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the manner as therein described. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-20; Ord. of 5-23-78) 
Sec. 38-45. - Notice of completion. 
    Notice of completion of work authorized by a permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be given within five days to the urban forester for his inspection. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-21; Ord. of 5-23-78; Ord. No. O-99-254, 11-23-99) 
Sec. 38-46. - Voidance. 
    Any permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be void if its terms are violated. 
(Code 1959, § 23.1-22; Ord. of 5-23-78) 
Chapter 39 - WATER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority in relation to water generally, § 38(6). 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-225 et seq.; building, Ch. 11; erosion and sediment control, Ch. 16; housing and hygiene, Ch. 22; nuisances, Ch. 26; planning, Ch. 30; sewers, Ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Water supply systems generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-1239 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 39-1. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    Officers and employees of the department of public works are especially charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and for that purpose, are clothed with all the powers and functions of policemen. It shall be their duty to bring to the notice of the judge of the general district court every breach of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 32-13) 
Sec. 39-2. - Water and sewage disposal systems. 
    The construction, operation and maintenance of the water system and sewage disposal system of the city shall be under the direction and control of the utility department. 
(Code 1959, § 32-1; Ord. No. O-08-148, 12-9-08) 
Sec. 39-3. - Supervision of utility division. 
    The utility division of the department of public works shall be under the direct control of the director of public works. The director of public works shall be the executive officer thereof, and as such shall be responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance of said systems. 
(Code 1959, § 22-2) 
Sec. 39-4. - Appointment and term of assistants. 
    The director of public works shall recommend to the city manager for appointment by the city manager, such employees as are necessary for the efficient operation of the utility division, whose respective terms of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1959, § 32-3) 
Sec. 39-5. - Prohibited locations for private hydrants. 
    No private hydrant shall be placed on any sidewalk or on any street or other exposed position where water may be taken therefrom without detection. 
(Code 1959, § 32-5) 
Sec. 39-6. - Inspector's right of entry. 
    Every person occupying any lot or building into which water is introduced under this chapter shall permit any officer or employee of the department of public works, and also the inspector of plumbing, to enter such lot or building, at reasonable hours, to inspect the works therein or to see if the provisions of law have been complied with. 
(Code 1959, § 32-7) 
Sec. 39-7. - Maintenance generally. 
    When the occupant of a lot or premises on which fixtures to supply water have been installed shall permit the water to run from these fixtures without proper care to prevent waste or shall fail to keep his water pipes or fixtures in good repair and protected from freezing, there shall, in each case, be a fine on such occupant of not less than $5.00 nor more than $20.00 and, in either case, the utilities division shall stop the water from the lot or premises and not turn it on again until arrangements satisfactory to the department of public works are made to ensure against future waste or damage. In cases where there are two or more premises supplied by a single tap and the fixtures are accessible to all, a like penalty shall apply to each of the several occupants having access to the fixtures, unless one of the occupants assumes sole responsibility. 
(Code 1959, § 32-8) 
Sec. 39-8. - Defacing property, swimming in reservoirs, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 2 misdemeanor for any person to deface or injure any property of the department of public works or to bathe in the reservoirs, basin or canal thereof, or to deposit matter of any character in such reservoirs, basin or canal or, without lawful authority, to enter the premises of the department of public works or place any obstruction upon any structure or fixture thereof, or obstruct access thereto, or remove or injure any such fixture, or to tamper with any such fixture. 
(Code 1959, § 32-9) 
State Law reference- Authority to prevent injury to waterworks, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-292. 
Sec. 39-9. - Unauthorized use of city water. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 3 misdemeanor for any person to use city water without proper authority. 
(Code 1959, § 32-11) 
Sec. 39-10. - Allowing use by those not entitled thereto. 
(a)  Any occupant of premises, into which water has been introduced, who shall permit water to be used, taken or received by any person other than such occupant or members or visitors of his family, except as otherwise provided by this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor; provided, that this shall not be construed so as to prevent any person who has contracted for water on his premises and whose fixtures are out of order from obtaining water from some other person, with the consent of the person from whom the water is obtained. 
(b)  In case of the violation of the provisions of this section the department of public works may discontinue the service of water to the premises of the person permitting such use of water from his premises and such water service shall be restored only upon proper application by the person occupying such premises, in the manner provided by this chapter for application to use water on new premises. 
(Code 1959, § 32-10) 
Sec. 39-11. - Information as to waste of water. 
    It shall be the duty of the police and every employee of the city to give prompt and immediate information of any waste of water to the department of public works. 
(Code 1959, § 32-12) 
Sec. 39-12. - Opening or using fire hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 2 misdemeanor for any person, except a member of the fire division or an employee of the department of public works, to open or in any way use the high-pressure fire hydrant, which are painted lime green with a one (1) inch wide black band at the base. It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member of the fire division or an employee of the department of public works, to open or in any manner use any other fire hydrants of the city without the authority of the director of the department of public works. Unauthorized use of a hydrant will result in a two hundred dollar ($200.00) fee to the owner, developer, contractor, or individual. The billings and collections division-utility billing customer service office of the department of financial services or the utilities division of the department of public works will issue a miscellaneous invoice to the customer for the fee. 
(Code 1959, § 32-14; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88; Ord. No. O-03-111, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 39-13. - Obstructing access to fire hydrants, meters. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 3 misdemeanor for any person to place or cause to be placed around or near any of the fire hydrants or water meters of the city any goods or foliage or other thing in such a manner as to obstruct the free access to such hydrants or water meters. The occupant of any real estate for which a water meter has been installed and access is obstructed will be charged a fee of $30.00 for each subsequent visit to the property to gain access to the water meter. 
(Code 1959, § 32-15; Ord. No. O-03-111, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 39-16. - Responsibilities for maintenance of water services. 
    The city shall supply and maintain water in sufficient quantities and pressures as are necessary for the efficient operation of the city's water system. The owner of any property served by the city's water system shall be responsible for installing and maintaining any devices necessary for sustaining pressures meeting the owners' requirements. The city shall install and maintain all water services from the connection to the city main to and including the water meter and box. The owner shall be responsible for maintaining the service line from the water meter to his property in good working condition and shall be responsible for any contamination entering the service beyond the meter. 
(Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 39-17. - Required connection with city's water supply system. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by Section 15.2-2143 of the Code of Virginia the city does hereby adopt the following section requiring the connection of properties to the city's water supply system. 
(a)  Effective October 15, 2003, the owner or tenant of any piece of property located within the city and bordering upon a street or alley along which a public water line has been laid, and whose property is in need of water service shall connect their property to the public water line. It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant to use private wells or any other alternative water supply facilities when city water lines are available for connection. It shall also be unlawful for any owner or tenant whose property is connected to the city's water lines to disconnect the property from the city's water lines and connect the property to a private well or other alternative water supply facility. 
(b)  Effective October 15, 2003, the owner or tenant of any piece of property located within the city and bordering upon a street or alley along which a public water line has been laid, and whose property is connected to a private well or other alternative water supply facility, shall connect their property to the public water line when the well or other alternative water supply facility dries up or otherwise becomes unusable. 
(c)  The director of utilities may allow exceptions to paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section provided that the owner or tenant can demonstrate that compliance with these provisions creates an extreme hardship. 
(d)  The owner or tenant of any property which is required to be connected to the city's water system shall see that water from the city's system is connected to the property and not cut off from the city's water system at any time, except for necessary repairs, while such property is being occupied or used. The owner or tenant of the property shall cause the water bill for the use of water to be paid to the city when due. No person shall occupy or use any property which is required to be connected to the city's water system, if the property is not connected to, or is cut off from, the city's water system, except when necessary for repairs. 
(e)  Property owners and tenants may continue to use private wells or other alternative water supply facilities for irrigation, agricultural and landscaping purposes. 
(f)  Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity that violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-03-171, 10-14-03; Ord. No. O-12-013, 1-24-12) 
Secs. 39-18-39-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONNECTIONS WITH CITY WATER MAINS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 39-26. - Extension of mains-When authorized. 
    The city will grant the right to use water from its distribution system and will extend water mains where in the opinion of council it is practical and economically feasible under the following methods: 
(a)  Water mains installed by the city in the preservation of the health and general welfare of the citizenry for reasons of public necessity, 
(b)  Water mains installed in response to citizen request when evidenced by petition, 
(c)  Water mains installed in conjunction with industrial development and/or residential subdivision development. 
(Ord. of 10-27-75, § 32-16.1; Ord. of 6-15-77) 
Sec. 39-27. - General terms, conditions and provisions applicable to water mains extended or installed with city approval. 
(a)  Title to any water main extensions or service connections within the public right-of-way or requested easements shall vest in the city upon the completion of construction regardless of method of financing. 
(b)  Where public water systems are already installed, replacement or enlargement of the water pipes, when deemed necessary by the city, shall be made at the sole cost and expense of the city. 
(c)  Whenever any person owning property along the line of any water main in the city which has been extended, installed or purchased by the city in the preservation of the health and general welfare of the public, or by petition, but without the participation of him or a previous owner of this property, shall desire the water service from said main to his premises, he shall be required to do the following: 
(1)  Fulfill the criteria as outlined under subsection (g) hereof, involving water main connections 
(2)  Make an additional payment of an availability charge, the purpose of which is to defray in part the cost of providing transmission mains, booster pumping and distribution storage facilities. The availability charges are as follows: 
a.  Single-family residence: 
1.  Where 50 to 59 percent of the potential customers of the project as determined by the city engineer sign petitions requesting such project, the charge shall be $1,220.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
2.  Where 60 to 69 percent of said customers sign such petitions, the charge shall be $1,160.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
3.  Where 70 to 79 percent of said customers sign such petitions, the charge shall be $1,100.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
4.  Where 80 to 89 percent of said customers sign such petitions, the charge shall be $1,040.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
5.  Where 90 to 94 percent of said customers sign such petitions, the charge shall be $980.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
6.  Where 95 to 100 percent of said customers sign such petitions, the charge shall $920.00 per connection, for each such petitioner. 
b.  Multifamily structures and mobile home parks where a master meter is used: 
1.  For the first five units, $610.00 each. 
2.  For the second five units, $460.00 each. 
3.  For all additional units, $310.00 each. 
4.  Separate individual connections to each unit of a multifamily structure or mobile home park will require the same availability charge for each unit as a single-family residential unit. Separate connections serving more than one unit will require the availability charge as specified above in subsection 39-27(c)(2)b. 
c.  Commercial service: Up to 2,000 square feet of floor space or if a meter one inch in diameter or smaller is used, the charge shall be $1,220.00. If a meter in excess of one inch in diameter is required, the following charges shall apply: 
Availability 
charge Floor space $1,220.00 0 to 2,000 square feet $1,530.00 2,001 to 10,000 square feet $2,290.00 10,001 to 20,000 square feet $3,820.00 20,001 to 35,000 square feet $6,110.00 35,001 to 99,999 square feet As determined by city council 100,000 square feet or greater  
All availability charges for institutional service shall be as determined by city council on a case-by-case basis. 
d.  Just prior to the conclusion of each fiscal year, the city manager or his designee shall review all availability charges and connection fees, and recommend to council appropriate changes. 
e.  All extension agreements and service requests not included in original petitions shall be subject to the maximum prevailing availability charges and connection fees which are in effect at the time such agreement or request is approved by council, irrespective of the number of original petitioners. 
(d)  Whenever any property abutting a street is without a city water main, the owner desiring city water service shall be required to sign a petition for extension of water mains. 
(1)  Single-family and multifamily structures and mobile home parks: 
a.  Upon receipt of said petition signed by at least 50 percent of the owners representing properties to be served by the water main extension, the city shall prepare an estimate for the installation of a water main. 
b.  Such estimate shall be prepared on the basis that the location, character and size of the extension and the plans and specifications for the extension and the materials used in the installation, replacement, maintenance and repair of the extension shall be as specified by the city. 
(2)  Commercial service: 
a.  Where the council has determined the petitioned project to be economically feasible to the city, the availability charges set forth in subsection 39-27(c)(2)c. shall be applicable. 
b.  Where the council has determined that the petitioned project is not economically feasible to the city the cost of the project will be apportioned by council between the city and the benefitted property owners. The entire noncity portion shall be apportioned by council between the petitioning property owners as their availability charges. Any nonsigning property owner later petitioning for service shall pay the same proportioned share for each connection as the original signers. 
(e)  The owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling that did not have access to city sewer lines at the time it was constructed, may make arrangements to pay the availability charges in paragraph (c)(2)(a) and the connection charges in paragraph (g) of this section in installments. The city's billings and collections division may enter into a water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement with the owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling under the following conditions: 
(1)  Only an owner or occupant that actually connects their dwelling to the city's sewer system is eligible to enter into a water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement. 
(2)  The availability and connection charges and interest must be paid in full within one year. 
(3)  Interest at the rate of five percent per annum or the interest rate the city was charged for its most recent bond issue, whichever rate of interest is higher, will be charged on the unpaid balance of the availability and connection charges. 
(4)  Payments will be made on such dates and in such amounts as the billings and collections division, in its discretion, determines are appropriate. 
(5)  The unpaid balance of the availability and connection charges may be paid in full at any time without any prepayment penalty. 
(6)  The water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement cannot be assigned or assumed without the prior written consent of the billings and collections division. 
(7)  If the owners or occupants fail to make payments in accordance with the water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement, the city may discontinue water service to the property until all arrears for availability and connection fee installment payments due the city are paid in full. 
(8)  As provided in Section 15.2-104 of the Code of Virginia, or any succeeding section, the city will place a lien against the property that is served by the sewer line to secure the payment of the unpaid availability and connection charges. 
    The installment plan offered by this paragraph is for the benefit of the owners or occupants of single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings and is not available to developers or builders of residential subdivisions, apartments, boarding houses, lodging houses, rooming houses or other multi-family dwellings or to commercial and institutional facilities. 
(f)  Water main extensions involving industrial development, residential subdivision development of three or more dwelling units per lot, and/or any other planned unit or special development are excepted from this section. 
(g)  In addition to the previous applicable requirements, whenever any person owning property along the line of any water main in the city shall desire water service into his premises, he shall execute an agreement known as an "application for water." In addition thereto, the licensed plumber employed by him shall make written application therefor to the city on forms prescribed for that purpose. 
    Unless the service pipe and meter box have been previously installed, the plumber or building contractor shall clearly indicate at the premises by a stake or otherwise the exact location of the proposed meter and service. An applicant for any new service must make an estimate of the size connection needed for all meters greater than five-eighths-inch with a three-fourths-inch service for the particular building in order that the proper size service pipe and meter may be installed to satisfy the demand. Upon approval of the application and payment of certain fixed water connection fees must be made as follows: 
(1)  Three-fourths-inch service- 5/8 -inch meter, $1,150.00; 
(2)  One-inch service- 5/8 -inch meter $1,210.00; 
(3)  One-inch service-1-inch meter $1,400.00; 
(4)  Larger than one-inch service and one-inch meter - Cost plus 15%; minimum charge of $1,400.00; 
    The city will then install a service pipe leading from the main in the street to the water meter box near the property line and/or install the meter. This requirement also applies to houses formerly occupied by one family, but which are converted into two or more apartments, with a separate water service and meter for each apartment unit. When these requirements are complied with, the city will thereupon issue a permit for the plumber named in the application to make connection with the meter box. All such connections and all plumbing work incident to the introduction of water into the premises shall conform in all respects to the provisions of the plumbing code of the city. 
(h)  Residential subdivisions of no more than two dwelling units per lot: For all subdivisions located within the city containing no more than two dwelling units per lot, in addition to the construction of the system within the boundaries of the subdivision by the subdivider pursuant to subsection 24.1-31(a) of the city's subdivision ordinance, there shall be paid by the property owner to the city at the time of connection to the system a connection fee (without an easement credit) as required by subsection (g) for each connection, and an availability charge, the purpose of which is to defray in part the cost of providing transmission mains, booster pumping and distribution facilities, the sum of $300.00 per lot; provided, however, that if in any subdivision development any lot is served by a connection directly to lines installed by the city, the availability charges as listed in subsection 39-27(c)(2)a. will be paid by the property owner except, however, that where he or a previous owner of this property participated in the cost of such line, no availability charge shall be payable. 
(i)  Residential subdivisions of no more than one dwelling unit per lot: Notwithstanding the conditions of subsection 39-27(g) and 24-31(a) city council may, upon request and after having obtained appropriate commitments for development of streets, recreational facilities, and other issues related to providing for affordable housing in the city, enter into a special agreement with subdivision developers, whereas the city would reimburse the developer for 100 percent of the cost of installing waterlines within the subdivision boundaries provided that: the agreement provides for guarantees from the developer that 80 percent of the projected revenue from the annual water rates paid by customers connected to the installed waterline within the subdivision boundaries in the first ten years will pay the total cost of the reimbursed amount, within the following ten years. Guarantees may be in the form of liens placed on lots within the subdivision; cash payments; bonds; or other forms of securities satisfactory to the city attorney. Such guarantees shall remain in effect until the full amount of the security is paid. The director of utilities shall review such records relating to the agreement to assure that the projected revenue from the development will recover the cost of the waterline reimbursement over a period of 20 years. The developer shall be responsible for providing all information necessary to assure compliance with the terms of the agreement. The city shall render a bill to the developer after the first ten years that the agreement is in force for the difference of the amount of projected revenue from the customers connected to the waterlines at that time and the total amount of the reimbursement for the cost for the installation of the waterlines. If any covenants of the agreement are not satisfied, the city shall render a bill immediately relating to the remaining waterline costs. 
(j)  The owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling that did not have access to city water lines at the time it was constructed, may make arrangements to pay the availability charges in paragraph (c)(2)(a) and the connection charges in paragraph (g) of this section in installments. The city's billings and collections division may enter into a water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement with the owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling under the following conditions: 
(1)  Only an owner or occupant that actually connects their dwelling to the city's water system is eligible to enter into a water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement. 
(2)  The availability and connection charges and interest must be paid in full within one year. 
(3)  Interest at the rate of five percent per annum or the interest rate the city was charged for its most recent bond issue, whichever rate of interest is higher, will be charged on the unpaid balance of the availability and connection charges. 
(4)  Payments will be made on such dates and in such amounts as the billings and collections division, in its discretion, determines are appropriate. 
(5)  The unpaid balance of the availability and connection charges may be paid in full at any time without any prepayment penalty. 
(6)  The water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement cannot be assigned or assumed without the prior written consent of the billings and collections division. 
(7)  If the owners or occupants failed to make payments in accordance with the water and sewer service availability fee installment agreement the city may discontinue water service to the property until all arrears for availability and connection fee installment payments due the city are paid in full. 
(8)  As provided in Section 15.2-104 of the Code of Virginia, or any succeeding section, the city will place a lien against the property that is served by the water line to secure the payment of the unpaid availability and connection charges. 
    The installment plan offered by this paragraph is for the benefit of the owners or occupant of single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings and is not available to developers or builders of residential subdivisions, apartments, boarding houses, lodging houses, rooming houses or other multi-family dwellings, or to commercial and institutional facilities. 
(Code 1959, § 32-16.4; Ord. of 6-14-77; Ord. of 8-8-78; Ord. of 5-22-79; Ord. No. O-81-153, § 2, 6-23-81; Ord. No. O-83-145, § 1, 6-28-83; Ord. No. O-89-280, § 1, 10-10-89, eff. 1-1-90; Ord. No. O-96-142, 5-28-96; Ord. No. O-00-017, 1-25-00; Ord. No. O-01-182, 9-25-01; Ord. No. O-02-186, 10-8-02, eff. 3-3-03; Ord. No. O-03-051, 3-11-03, eff. 1-1-04; Ord. No. O-04-030, 3-9-04, eff. 1-1-05; Ord. No. O-06-036, 4-11-06, eff. 7-1-06; Ord. No. O-06-103, 8-8-06; Ord. No. O-07-046, 4-10-07, eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. O-08-046, 4-8-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. O-13-039, 3-26-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. O-16-031, § 1, 4-12-16 , eff. 7-1-16) 
Sec. 39-27.1. - Availability charges for city water service. 
    Those business firms which may be designated as "qualified business firm" pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 22, Title 59.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, (the Urban Enterprise Zone Act), shall be allowed to pay the availability charge imposed by subsection 34-4(c)(2) as follows: Commencing with the second anniversary date of the submission of the city's registered bill in the amount of the availability charge, 25 percent thereof will be due and annually thereafter on such anniversary date an additional 25 percent will be due until the charge is paid in full. 
(Ord. No. O-84-170, § 1, 6-26-84, eff. 7-1-84) 
Sec. 39-27.2. - Waiver of availability charges for connection to the city water main in certain situations. 
    City council, upon request, may waive the availability charges required by subsection 39-27(c)(2)a, of the City Code under the following conditions: 
(a)  Construction is for single-family homes only. 
(b)  Construction is within a designated redevelopment or conservation area or rehabilitation district. 
(c)  Construction is for: 
(1)  An individual who agrees to occupy the home for a minimum of ten years as his/her principle residence. If the home is sold or rented within that time, the availability fees would become due and payable; or 
(2)  A nonprofit corporation for resale to low-income persons with requirements for owner occupancy in the deed. 
(Ord. No. O-85-224, § 1, 9-10-85) 
Sec. 39-27.3. - Deferral of availability charges and connection fees to the city water system for certain persons. 
    For those owner-occupants of existing dwellings, who have an equity not exceeding $30,000.00 therein and who meet the financial eligibility requirements of the medicaid program for Group III Virginia localities, charges and connection fees imposed by subsection 39-27(c)(2) shall, upon request, be deferred until such time as title to the property passes by sale or inheritance. Such persons shall, prior to connection with the city water system, execute a petition, approved by the city attorney, granting to the city a lien in the amount of the fees and charges plus all interest which may accrue. When the charges are so deferred, they shall be subject to the payment of an annual simple interest charge of six percent on the unpaid balance of such fees and charges. Provided that such persons shall have the right at any time to make payments, partial or in full, of the balance due for such connection. Passage of title to a spouse shall not constitute inheritance under this section. 
(Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 39-28. - Connections outside city. 
    When any person owning property outside the city shall desire to have city water introduced into his premises, he shall contact the appropriate service authority having jurisdiction over his location. The service authority shall make application to the city to have said connection installed in accordance with existing contracts between the city and the authority. 
(Code 1959, § 32-17; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 39-29. - Turning water on after connection made within city. 
    The provisions of this section apply to water accounts that were established prior to July 1, 2012. As used in this section the term water account or water service includes the city's fees for water service, sewer service and storm water maintenance fees that are added to the city's combined water bill. Whenever any individual, commercial or industrial establishment desires the use of water on premises owned or leased by them within the city limits, where all connections have been made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, they shall make application therefor to the utilities customer service office, accompanying each application with a fee of $15.00 for turning on and/or transferring the account. Multi-unit facilities will require the owner, landlord, or property management agent to make application to the billings and collections division-utility billing customer service office of the department of financial services to activate water at a service address. Whenever any person applying for water service shall have complied with this requirement and his water fixtures are in good condition, the utilities customer service office shall then cause the water to be turned on. 
(Code 1959, § 32-18; Ord. No. O-80-103, § 1(32-18), 4-22-80, eff. 8-22-80; Ord. No. O-84-141, § 1, 6-12-84, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-88-062, § 1, 3-22-88, eff. 7-1-88; Ord. No. O-90-093, 3-27-90, eff. 7-1-90; O-91-053, 3-26-91, eff. 7-1-91; Ord. No. O-92-071, 3-10-92; Ord. No. O-95-027, 2-14-95, eff. 7-1-95; Ord. No. O-03-111, 6-10-03; Ord. No. O-12-083, 6-26-12, eff. 7-1-12) 
Sec. 39-29.1. - Deposit. 
    The provisions of this section apply to water accounts that were established prior to July 1, 2012. As used in this section the term water account or water service includes the city's fees for water service, sewer service and storm water maintenance fees that are added to the city's combined water bill. A deposit shall be required of any individual, commercial or industrial establishment desiring the use of water on premises owned or leased by them within the city limits, where all connections and applications have been made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, if such applicant is known to have a poor payment history. Poor payment history is defined as non-payment of city fees and taxes in a timely manner or excessive late fees on water and sewer accounts. 
    However, existing accounts will be required to pay the deposit only if the customer thereafter allows service to be severed for nonpayment and subsequently has service reinstated. The amount of the deposit is the greater of the customer's average quarterly water and sewer bill or $75.00 for a residential meter, or for a commercial meter, which deposit is based on meter size-five-eighth-inch meter, $75.00; one-inch meter, $145.00; one and one-fourth-inch meter, $200.00; one and one-half-inch meter, $255.00; two-inch meter, $310.00; three- and four-inch meter, $575.00; over four-inch meter, $1,000.00-to guarantee the payment of such account. The deposit shall be refunded, together with interest based upon the published rate in the daily Wall Street Journal for certificates of deposit having a maturity of one year, as of the date on which the city accrues interest for utility deposits, to each consumer who has maintained a satisfactory payment record for at least 12 months. The deposit plus interest of any consumer not refunded will be credited against any final bill rendered to such consumer at the time service is discontinued. If at any time a satisfactory payment record is not maintained by any consumer from whom a deposit was not required, the director of finance may require that such deposit be made or, if at any time a consumer whose deposit has been refunded does not maintain a satisfactory payment record, the director of finance may again require such deposit. 
(Ord. No. O-95-027, 2-14-95, eff. 7-1-95; Ord. No. O-12-083, 6-26-12, eff. 7-1-12) 
Sec. 39-30. - Collection of delinquent accounts. 
    If any of the fees and charges for water service, sewer service or storm water maintenance for water accounts that were established prior to July 1, 2012, are not paid when due and payable such fees and charges shall be collected in accordance with the collection procedures as set forth in Section 15.2-2119 of the Code of Virginia as such section existed on June 30, 2012. 
(Ord. of 6-26-12, Ord. No. O-12-083, eff. 7-1-12) 
Sec. 39-31. - Wrongful connections. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to introduce water from the water distribution system into any premises, except as provided in this chapter. 
    A $100.00 fee will be charged to the occupant or owner of any real estate using an unauthorized water meter connected to the City of Lynchburg water main for the purpose of obtaining water as provided in section 39-29 and section 39-29.1. 
(Code 1959, § 32-21; Ord. No. O-03-111, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 39-32. - Unauthorized addition or alteration of fixtures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any addition to, or alteration of, any fixtures on any premises, without the permission of the department of public works. 
(Code 1959, § 32-22) 
Sec. 39-33. - Cutting off or restoration of water service. 
    Whenever a customer requests the city to cut off or restore water service, a fee of $30.00 shall be charged for each call. 
(Ord. No. O-88-062, § 2, 3-22-88, eff. 7-1-88; Ord. No. O-91-053, 3-26-91, eff. 7-1-91) 
Secs. 39-34-39-38. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AUXILIARY SYSTEMS 

Sec. 39-39. - Connections generally. 
    All connections shall be made in compliance with all applicable federal, state and city laws and regulations. Cross-connections are prohibited within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 32-23) 
Sec. 39-40. - Connections for fire-fighting purposes. 
    Every fire service connection from the public mains where the secondary supply is of unapproved quality, shall be provided in compliance with all applicable state and city laws and regulations and installed as to permit ready inspection and shall be subject to the approval of the department of public works utilities division and fire department. Fire service connections shall also conform to the requirements of Section 19-40.2 (Subsection F 410.0) of the fire prevention code. 
(Code 1959, § 32-24; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 39-41. - Separation of manufacturing or domestic systems from fire-fighting systems. 
    Private pipe systems from which water is used for manufacturing or domestic purposes are to be entirely independent of private pipe systems used for fire-fighting service. 
(Code 1959, § 32-25) 
Sec. 39-42. - Fees, charges, collection of water accounts established after July 1, 2012. 
(a)  For water and sewer services provided by the city after July 1, 2012, a deposit will be charged to and collected from: (i) any person contracting for the same; (ii) the owner who is the occupant of the property or where a single meter serves multiple units; (iii) a lessee or tenant, provided that the lessee or tenant has written authorization from the owner of the property to obtain water and sewer services in the name of such lessee or tenant with such fees and charges applicable for water and sewer services. 
(b)  A deposit shall be required of any individual, commercial or industrial establishment desiring the use of water on premises owned or leased by them within the city limits, where all connections and applications have been made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except for water accounts that are set up in the name of a lessee or tenant the deposit which are addressed in paragraph (c) of this section, if such applicant is known to have a poor payment history. Poor payment history is defined as non-payment of city fees and taxes in a timely manner or excessive late fees on water and sewer accounts. The amount of the deposit is the greater of the customer's average quarterly water and sewer bill or $75.00 for a residential meter, or for a commercial meter, which deposit is based on meter size-five-eighth-inch meter, $75.00; one inch meter, $145.00; one and one-fourth-inch meter, $200.00; one and one-half-inch meter, $255.00; two-inch meter, $310.00; three- and four-inch meter, $575.00; over four-inch meter, $1,000.00-to guarantee the payment of such account. The deposit may be refunded, together with interest based upon the published rate in the daily Wall Street Journal for certificates of deposit having a maturity of one year, as of the date on which the city accrues interest for utility deposits, to each consumer who has maintained a satisfactory payment record for at least 12 months. The deposit plus interest of any consumer not refunded will be credited against any final bill rendered to such consumer at the time service is discontinued. If at any time a satisfactory payment record is not maintained by any consumer from whom a deposit was not required, the director of finance may require that such deposit be made or, if at any time a consumer whose deposit has been refunded does not maintain a satisfactory payment record, the director of finance may again require such deposit. 
(c)  In situations where a property owner is unwilling to establish a water account in his name the water account will be established in the name of the lessee or tenant. Provided, however, no water account shall be established in the name of a lessee or tenant unless the lessee or tenant provides the city with an authorization form signed by the property owner authorizing the city to establish a water account in the name of the lessee or tenant. When a lessee or tenant applies for water service the city will provide the lessee or tenant with an authorization form that is to be signed by the property owner. The authorization form will be in substantially the same format as set forth in Section 15.2-2119 of the Code of Virginia. The completed and signed form must be returned to the city before the city will authorize water service in the lessee's or tenant's name. Property owners who sign a form authorizing water service to be established in the name of a lessee or tenant will be sent a one-time notice in writing or by email that a lien may be placed on the owner's property if the lessee or tenant defaults on the payment of his water bill. 
    When a water account is established in the name of a lessee or tenant of a residential property the city will collect a security deposit in the amount of three months of typical water, sewer and stormwater charges for the property and when a water account is established in the name of a lessee or tenant of a commercial or industrial property the city will collect a security deposit in the amount of three months of typical water, sewer and stormwater charges for the property. In cases of newly constructed properties the amount of the security deposit will be based on the estimated water usage for the property. The city will not require a security deposit from the lessee or tenant to obtain water and sewer services in the name of such lessee or tenant if such lessee or tenant presents to the city a property owner authorization letter which has attached documentation showing such lessee or tenant receives need-based local, state, or federal rental assistance. When a lessee or tenant is not required to pay a security deposit because the lessee or tenant receives need-based local, state, or federal rental assistance the property owner shall pay a security deposit for the water account in the amount provided for in paragraph (b) of this section. 
    A water account shall be placed in the property owner's name and the security deposit required in this paragraph shall be collected from the property owner (i) when the property owner fails or refuses to submit the lessee tenant authorization form to the city and (ii) where a single water meter serves multiple tenant units. 
(d)  In addition to the security deposit required by this section, whenever any individual, commercial or industrial establishment desires the use of water on premises owned or leased by them within the city limits, where all connections have been made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, they shall make application therefor to the utilities customer service office, accompanying each application with a fee of $15.00 for turning on and/or transferring the account. 
(e)  A water account becomes delinquent if it is not paid within 21 days of the bill date. If any of the fees and charges for water service, sewer service or storm water maintenance for water accounts that are established after July 1, 2012, are not paid when due and payable such fees and charges shall be collected in accordance with the collection procedures as forth in Section 15.2-2119 of the Code of Virginia as adopted on July 1, 2012. 
(Ord. of 6-26-12, Ord. No. O-12-083, eff. 7-1-12) 
Secs. 39-43-39-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER RATES AND RENTS 

Sec. 39-53. - Assessment and collection. 
    The assessment and collection of the water rates and charges shall be under the direct charge of the office manager of the bureau of assessment and collection. 
(Code 1959, § 32-26) 
Sec. 39-54.1. - Schedule of water rates. 
    The monthly water rates for all consumers within the city shall be $2.68 per h.c.f. of water used. 
    There shall be, in addition to any other charge, a monthly service charge of $3.69 plus $4.00 per equivalent meter factor per meter for a total monthly service charge as shown in the following table. 
Meter 
Size Monthly 
Account 
Charge Meter 
Factor Fee per 
Equivalent 
Meter Factor Fee per 
Meter Total 
Monthly 
Service Charge 5/8 " $3.69 1.0 $4.00 $2.00 $7.69 3/4" $3.69 1.5 $4.00 $3.00 $9.69 1" $3.69 2.5 $4.00 $5.00 $13.69 11/2" $3.69 5.0 $4.00 $10.00 $23.69 2" $3.69 8.0 $4.00 $16.00 $35.69 3" $3.69 15.0 $4.00 $30.00 $63.69 4" $3.69 30.0 $4.00 $60.00 $123.69 6" $3.69 60.0 $4.00 $120.00 $243.69 8" $3.69 90.0 $4.00 $180.00 $363.69 10" $3.69 150.0 $4.00 $300.00 $603.69  
(Ord. No. O-96-035, 2-13-96, eff. 7-1-96; Ord. No. O-97- 038, 3-11-97, eff. 7-1-97; Ord. No. O-98-014, 2-10-98, eff. 7-1-98; Ord. No. O-99-041, eff. 7-1-99; Ord. No. O-00-045, 3-14-00, eff. 7-1-00; Ord. No. O-01-061, 3-27-01, eff. 7-1-01; Ord. No. O-02-045, 3-12-02, eff. 7-1-02; Ord. No. O-03-051, 3-11-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-04-030, 3-9-04, eff. 7-1-04; Ord. No. O-05-042, 4-12-05, eff. 7-1-05; Ord. No. O-06-036, 4-11-06, eff. 7-1-06; Ord. No. O-07-046, 4-10-07, eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. O-08-046, 4-1-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. O-09-020, 4-14-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. O-10-033, 4-13-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. O-11-027, 3-22-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. O-13-039, 3-26-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. O-14-030, 4-8-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. O-16-031, § 1, 4-12-16 , eff. 7-1-16; Ord. No. O-17-028 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 39-54.1.2. - Fire flow capacity charge. 
    The purpose of this charge is to recover the water system costs associated with providing fire protection and suppression capability from those customers with connections to the water system installed for the purpose of supplying water to on-site hydrants, standpipes, sprinkler systems or combinations thereof. The annual charges shall be as follows: 
Hydrant or 8" or small fire line ..... $246.96 
10" fire line ..... $443.40 
12" fire line ..... $703.68 
(Ord. No. O-96-035, 2-13-96, eff. 7-1-96; Ord. No. O-97-038, 3-11-97, eff. 7-1-97; Ord. No. O-98-014, 2-10-98, eff. 7-1-98; Ord. No. O-99-041, 3-9-99, eff. 7-1-99; Ord. No. O-00-045, 3-14-00, eff. 7-1-00; Ord. No. O-01-061, 3-27-01, eff. 7-1-01; Ord. No. O-02-045, 3-12-02, eff. 7-1-02; Ord. No. O-03-051, 3-11-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-04-030, 3-9-04, eff. 7-1-04; Ord. No. O-10-033, 4-13-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. O-16-031, § 1, 4-12-16 , eff. 7-1-16) 
Sec. 39-54.2. - Multi-family or multi-unit accounts. 
    Where two or more housing units or commercial units are served by one master meter and one billing account is established, the billing records will be established in the name of the owner, landlord, or property management agent. Existing billing accounts in tenants' names will be changed to the owner, landlord, or property management agent as problems occur and/or upon notification of an occupancy change. 
    A housing unit shall mean one or more rooms which are intended for occupancy by a family [one or more persons] and which generally includes therein provisions for food preparation. 
(Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88; Ord. No. O-03-111, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 39-55. - Separate service connection for each lot. 
    A separate connection shall be required for each subdivision lot upon which a building is constructed. Only one sewer service connection will be required where multiple lots are used to construct a building. 
(Code 1959, § 32-28; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 39-56. - Payment of flat rates; meters to be read, bills submitted, monthly or bimonthly. 
    In case of flat rates, water shall be paid for quarterly in advance. Where water is supplied through a meter, the meters shall be read and bills submitted therefor according to classification, monthly or bimonthly. 
(Code 1959, § 32-29) 
Sec. 39-57. - Reassessment upon repair of meter. 
    When any meter installed shall be out of order so as to prevent its use and the water has to be cut off so as to repair such meter, when the meter shall have been put in proper shape the reassessment for water shall be made at the average for the preceding three months of consumption. 
(Code 1959, § 32-30) 
Sec. 39-58. - Rates for outside city. 
    The rates for water used outside the city shall be as provided in contracts between the city and the customers. 
(Code 1959, § 32-31) 
Sec. 39-59. - Correction of erroneous assessments. 
    The department of finance, utilities customer services office, may at any time, upon discovering an error in a computation of water rates and charges against any consumer, make the necessary correction in the computation. 
(Code 1959, § 32-33; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 39-60. - When bills due. 
    Any charges for water furnished through meters for all customers shall be due and payable monthly on or before the due date shown on the bill. 
(Code 1959, § 32-34; Ord. of 5-31-77; Ord. No. O-80-103, § 1, (32-34), 4-22-80; Ord. No. O-03-113, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03; Ord. No. O-07-075, 5-8-07, eff. 7-1-07) 
Sec. 39-61. - Place of payment. 
    It shall be the duty of all persons against whom water charges are assessed to pay such assessments at the collection division or any of its collecting agencies during their office hours on or before the due date shown on the bill. 
(Code 1959, § 32-34; Ord. of 5-31-77; Ord. No. O-80-103, § 1, (32-34), 4-22-80; Ord. No. O-87-265, § 1, 11-24-87, eff. 1-1-88) 
Sec. 39-62. - Penalty for delinquency. 
    If any such water and sewerage bill is not paid within five days after due date, it shall be declared delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty of five percentum of the amount of the bill. The penalty shall be added to the unpaid bill or subsequent bills. 
(Code 1959, § 32-34; Ord. of 5-31-77; Ord. No. O-80-103, § 1(32-34), 4-22-80; Ord. No. O-85-270, § 1, 10-22-85) 
Sec. 39-63. - Discontinuance of service, reconnection and meter removal fees. 
(a)  The water furnished through meters to any customer shall be discontinued, at the discretion of the director of finance or his authorized representative, whenever any bill therefor is not paid within 30 days after due date and, if utilities division employees are dispatched to disconnect service, customers will be assessed a $25.00 service charge to cover the extra costs incurred by the city. The customer shall be responsible for paying the $25.00 service charge, the delinquent utility bill, the late payment penalty and applicable deposit, if any. Payment arrangements can be made on the $25.00 service charge twice during the life of the account. The delinquent utility bill, the late payment penalty and the applicable deposit, if any, must be paid in full before service can be restored. Exceptions can be made, at the discretion of the director of finance or his authorized representative, for accounts that have had leaks, which can be validated by the city. 
(b)  If, after the service has been discontinued, an inspection of the meter reading on a subsequent date discloses, when compared to a record of the reading when service was initially discontinued, that service has been restored other than by utilities division employees without the authority of the customer service office, the water meter may then be removed to prevent further unauthorized use of water. Service may not be restored after the meter has been so removed until a $60.00 "meter removal fee" has been paid, in addition to any unpaid bill, a $25.00 service charge and the appropriate deposit. 
(Code 1959, § 32-34; Ord. of 5-31-77; Ord. No. O-80-103, § 1(32-34), 4-22-80; Ord. No. O-84-141, § 1, 6-12-84, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-88-062, § 1, 3-22-88, eff. 7-1-88; Ord. No. O-91-053, 3-26-91, eff. 7-1-91; Ord. No. O-95-027, 2-14-95, eff. 7-1-95; Ord. No. O-99-042, 3-9-99; Ord. No. O-00-249, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 39-64. - Special water sales. 
(a)  Hydrant rental and meter deposit. The sale of water through temporary connections to fire hydrants shall be permitted by the city for short periods of time [less than 30 days] if it is deemed practical by the director of public works or his designee. The purpose of these sales shall be for use of contractors requiring large amounts of water for short periods of time and customers for filling swimming pools. Connections shall be made by the city through an auxiliary valve and portable meter. In no case shall private citizens or contractors operate city fire hydrants for this purpose. 
    Customers desiring said service shall apply to the utility customer services office at least five working days prior to the need for this service and service shall be provided on basis of availability of auxiliary valves and portable meters. 
    A deposit of $100.00 will be required at the time of application and will be refunded to the customer upon final settlement of charges for use of the temporary service; provided, that the auxiliary valve and portable meter are not damaged during service. 
    Charge for said service shall be $30.00 per day of use of the auxiliary valve and portable meter starting from the date installed and extending through date of requested removal. In addition, the water usage shall be metered and paid for at the regular city rates as described in subsection 39-54(a) with a minimum charge of $30.00 per day for the period of usage. 
(b)  Tank load of water. Customers desiring water by the tank load can obtain water coupons at the city collector's office. The charge for each coupon shall be $25.00. The water coupons can be redeemed for water at the city's College Hill Filtration Plant located at 6th & Taylor Streets by contacting the water plant operator on duty at least 24 hours in advance and arranging for filling of tanks at the College Hill Plant. Each coupon can be redeemed for 1,000 gallons of water, or a fraction thereof, and shall be based on the size of the tank provided by the customer. 
(Ord. No. O-84-141, § 1, 6-12-84, eff. 7-1-84; Ord. No. O-86-054, § 1, 4-8-86, eff. 7-1-86; Ord. No. O-91-053, 3-26-91, eff. 7-1-91; Ord. No. O-95-206, 7-11-95, eff. 9-1-95) 
Secs. 39-65-39-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLUORIDATION 

Sec. 39-75. - Supervision of treatment. 
    The director of health shall have general supervision over treatment of the public water supply with an approved fluoride compound. 
(Code 1959, § 32-35) 
Sec. 39-76. - Introduction of fluoride into water system. 
    Upon receiving a permit from the state department of health and until further direction of the council, the department of public works shall provide the means and proceed with the introduction of fluoride ion into the city water supply in such quantities as are required to maintain throughout the pipe distribution system a fluoride ion concentration as prescribed by the state health department. 
(Code 1959, § 32-36) 
Sec. 39-77. - Records to be kept; determination of fluoride ion concentration. 
    The department of public works shall keep an accurate daily record showing for each supply the number of gallons treated and the fluoride ion concentration of the water before and after treatment. The department shall also determine the fluoride ion concentration in the water distribution system at such points and at such intervals as may be directed by the director of health. 
(Code 1959, § 32-37) 
Sec. 39-78. - Records to be furnished to department of health. 
    The department of public works shall furnish to the department of health copies of the records required under section 39-77 at daily, weekly and monthly intervals as may be requested by the director of health. 
(Code 1959, § 32-38) 
Sec. 39-79. - Reports to council; surveys as to beneficial effects of program. 
    The director of health shall make periodic reports to council on the fluoridation of the public water supply and shall seek the cooperation of educational and scientific institutions to conduct surveys and research as to the beneficial effect, if any, of the fluoridation program and project on the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 32-39) 
Secs. 39-80-39-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 39-90. - Authority to declare water emergencies. 
    During the continued existence of climatic, hydrological and other extraordinary conditions the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Lynchburg may require that certain uses of water, not essential to public health, safety and welfare, be reduced, restricted or curtailed. As the shortage of raw or potable water becomes increasingly more critical, conservation measures to reduce consumption or curtail nonessential water use may be necessary. 
    The city manager, with the approval of the mayor, is authorized to declare a water emergency in the city restricting the use of water in any area of the city. All water stages are built upon and require compliance with previous water stages. For example when stage 3 is declared all provisions of stage 2 are in effect. 
    Also the city manager may declare any of the four stages, they do not have to be declared sequentially. 
(Ord. No. O-02-175, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 39-91. - Publication of declaration. 
    Upon the declaration of a water emergency, the city manager shall immediately post a written notice of the emergency at the front door of the city hall and shall place a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which such emergency has been declared. 
(Ord. No. O-02-175, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 39-92. - Water use considerations. 
    Upon the declaration of a water shortage or emergency, the city manager is authorized and directed to implement conservation measures by ordering the restricted use or absolute curtailment of the use of water for certain nonessential purposes for the duration of the water shortage or emergency in the manner hereinafter set out. In exercising this discretionary authority, and making the determinations set forth hereof, the city manager shall give due consideration to water levels, available/usable storage on hand, draw down rates and the projected supply capability in Pedlar reservoir and available James River flows; system purification and pumping capacity; daily water consumption and consumption projections of the system's customers; prevailing and forecast weather conditions; fire service requirements; pipeline conditions including breakages, stoppages and leaks; supplementary source data; estimates of minimum essential supplies to preserve public health and safety and such other data pertinent to the past, current and projected water demands. 
(Ord. No. O-02-175, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 39-93. - Limitation of restrictions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any governmental activity, institution, business or industry which shall be declared by the city manager, upon a proper showing, to be necessary for the public health, safety and welfare or the prevention of severe economic hardship or the substantial loss of employment. Any activity, institution, business or industry aggrieved by the finding of the city manager may appeal that decision to the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-02-175, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 39-94. - Water conservation measures. 
    Upon a determination by the city manager of the existence of the following conditions, the city manager shall take the following actions that shall apply to any person whose water supply is furnished from the city water system: 
(a)  Stage 1: When moderate but limited supplies of water are available, the city manager shall, through appropriate means, call upon the general population to employ prudent restraint in water usage, and to conserve water voluntarily by whatever methods available. 
(b)  Stage 2: When very limited supplies of water are available, the city manager shall order curtailment of less essential usages of water, including, but not limited to, one or more of the following: 
(1)  The watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, or any other vegetation, except indoor plantings, greenhouse or nursery stocks and except limited watering for new lawns and watering by commercial nurseries of freshly planted plants upon planting and once a week for five weeks following planting. Athletic fields are also exempt but shall only be watered to match the evaporation-transpiration rate. In all cases where the above exceptions apply, the watering is not to occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Watering with buckets that have a capacity of five or fewer gallons is permitted at any time. 
(2)  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, buses, airplanes, or any other type of mobile equipment, except in facilities operating with a water recycling system. The facility shall post a notice in public view that a recycling system is in operation. Exceptions are for tractor trucks, refuse trucks, septage haulers and city buses. Other exceptions must be approved by the director of utilities or a designee and be demonstrated to be necessary for health and safety purposes. 
(3)  The washing of sidewalks, streets, driveways, parking lots, service stations aprons, office buildings, exteriors of homes or apartments, or other outdoor surfaces, unless the use is approved by the director of utilities for health and safety. 
(4)  The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of water. 
(5)  The use of water from fire hydrants for any purpose other than fire suppression unless the use has been approved by the director of utilities. 
(6)  Water service lines from the meter box to the home or structure shall be maintained and have no visible leaks. 
(7)  Restaurants may serve water to customers only upon request. 
(c)  Stage 3: When critically limited supplies of water are available, the city manager shall institute a water surcharge on each residential and commercial customer as follows: 
The maximum allowable water use at the prevailing city rate will be the average water billed in November through April of the previous year. The actual water use will be recorded for each month and the sum divided by the number of months. The result is the allowable water use in hcf. The result will be rounded down to the nearest whole hcf. This is the maximum amount of water use that will be allowed at the prevailing rate in hcf and is termed the base amount. Use of water over this amount is subject to a surcharge of 25 percent up to 100 percent. The surcharge is calculated by subtracting the base amount from the actual water use and the remaining hcf is multiplied by the prevailing water rate multiplied by as an example 1.25. The total water portion of the bill is the base amount times the prevailing rate, the amount in excess of the base amount at the surcharge rate plus other applicable fees. For accounts less then one year old the base amount is fixed at 11 hcf. Failure to pay the full amount of the bill, when due, can result in water service termination. A $50.00 charge will be collected prior to service reconnection. 
(d)  Stage 4: When crucially limited supplies of water are available, the city manager shall restrict the use of water to purposes which are absolutely essential to life, health and safety. 
(Ord. No. O-02-175, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 39-95. - Penalty and enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the following civil penalties: 
(1)  For the first offense, violators shall receive a written warning delivered in person or posted by a representative of the City of Lynchburg utilities division. 
(2)  For the second offense, violators shall be fined $50.00, the fine to be imposed on the violator's next water bill, or in the case of violators not on the city's public water system, in a written notice. 
(3)  For the third and each subsequent offense, violators shall be fined $100.00 for each offense, the fine to be imposed on the violator's next water bill, or in the case of violators not on the city's public water system, in a written notice. 
(4)  Each violation by a person shall be counted as a separate violation by that person, irrespective of the location at which the violation occurs. 
(5)  The city manager may suspend water service to any person continuing to violate the provisions of this article or the regulations promulgated thereunder. If such water service is terminated, the person shall pay a reconnection fee of $50.00 before service is restored. 
(b)  Persons who have been assessed a penalty shall have the right to challenge the assessment by providing a written notice to the director of utilities within ten days of the date of the assessment of the penalty. The director or his designee shall determine that the penalty was properly assessed and notify the complaining person in writing of his determination. Should the director or his designee determine that the penalty was properly assessed, the person may appeal that determination by providing written notice to the public works director within ten days of receiving the notice determination. The public works director or his designee shall determine whether the penalty was properly assessed and notify the complaining person in writing of his determination. 
(c)  The director of utilities or his designee may waive the penalty if he determines that the violation occurred due to no fault of the person. 
(Ord. No. O-02-175, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 39-96. - Notification of end of water emergency. 
    The city manager shall notify the city council when, in his opinion, the water emergency situation no longer exists. Upon concurrence of the city council, the water emergency shall be declared to have ended. When this declaration is made, the information shall be conveyed to the general public through the news media. 
(Ord. No. O-02-175, 9-24-02) 
ARTICLE VI. - CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 

Sec. 39-97. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Backflow: The reversal of the normal flow of water or other fluids, mixtures or substances through the distributing pipes of the water system because of an increase in the downstream pressure to a rate that is higher than the supply pressure. 
(b)  Backflow preventer: Equipment or measures that are designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage, such as airgaps, reduced pressure principle devices, double check valve assemblies, pressure vacuum breakers and residential dual check valves. 
(c)  Back-siphonage: The reversal of the normal flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances through the distributing pipes of the water system because of negative pressure from a vacuum or partial vacuum in the pipes that supply water. 
(d)  Cross-connection: Any physical connection between a potable water supply and waste pipe, soil pipe, sewer drain or unapproved source or system, including any potable water supply outlet which is submerged or can be submerged in wastewater or any source of contamination. 
(e)  Director: The director of utilities or any person designated to act on the director's behalf. 
(f)  Owner: The owner, occupant or tenant of a building or structure. 
(g)  Plumbing fixtures: Receptacles, devices or appliances that are installed to supply, receive or discharge water or wastewater. 
(h)  Plumbing system: Water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing fixtures, traps, soil, waste and vent pipes, building drains, building sewers, water-treating and water-using equipment and connection devices and appurtenances that supply water to a building and that are located on the property where the building is located. 
(i)  Pollution: The presence of any foreign substance in water that tends to degrade its quality. 
(j)  Water, potable: Water that is free from impurities in amounts that are sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects and that contains bacteriological and chemical qualities which conform to the requirements of the Department of Health's Virginia Waterworks Regulations and of the city. 
(k)  Water, nonpotable: Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is not potable. 
(Ord. No. O-03-112, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03) 
Sec. 39-98. - Requirements for backflow and cross-connection control. 
    Every building and structure shall be constructed, equipped and maintained to prevent the pollution of the city's water supply from cross-connection, backflow or back-siphonage of liquids. 
(Ord. No. O-03-112, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03) 
Sec. 39-99. - Cross-connection prohibited. 
(a)  The city's potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained to prevent nonpotable liquids, solids or gases from being introduced into the potable water supply through cross-connections or any other pipe connections to the system. 
(b)  No person shall permit a cross-connection between the city's potable water supply system and other systems or equipment that contains water or other substances except when the director, or his/her designee, approves the cross-connection and the person has installed protective devices that have been approved by the director, or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. O-03-112, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03) 
Sec. 39-100. - Measures to prevent backflow or back-siphonage. 
    The owner shall install and maintain a backflow preventer, approved by the director, or his/her designee, on all fixtures, equipment and outlets where backflow or back-siphonage may occur. The owner shall install and maintain a backflow preventer on the water service line when the director, or his/her designee, determines that a backflow preventer is necessary to protect the water supply from backflow or back-siphonage. 
(Ord. No. O-03-112, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03) 
Sec. 39-101. - Prevention devices to comply with rules and regulations. 
    All cross-connection or backflow prevention devices or systems shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance with the following manuals: Cross-Connection Control Manual, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water Programs, Water Supply Division; the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code; article 3 of the Virginia Waterworks Regulations; and the City of Lynchburg Cross-Connection and Backflow Prevention Control Program. Copies of each manual shall be filed with the director of utilities, or his/her designee, and shall be made available to any owner who requests to see them. 
(Ord. No. O-03-112, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03) 
Sec. 39-102. - Responsibility of the director. 
(a)  The director, or his/her designee, shall inspect the plumbing system of every building or structure so as to determine that the plumbing system has been installed to prevent the possibility that the city's water supply will become polluted by cross-connection, backflow or back-siphonage. 
(b)  The director, or his/her designee, shall have the right to enter any building or structure during reasonable hours for the inspection of the plumbing system for cross-connection, backflow or back-siphonage. The owner shall furnish the director, or his/her designee, with all the information he requests regarding the plumbing system for the property. 
(Ord. No. O-03-112, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03) 
Sec. 39-103. - Violations. 
(a)  The director of utilities, or his/her designee, shall send a notice of violation by certified mail to the owner of any building or structure that is found to be in violation of this article. The director, or his/her designee, shall establish a reasonable deadline in the notice of violation for the owner to correct the violation. If the owner fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the time given by the director, or his/her designee, the director, or his/her designee may terminate water service to the building or deny water service to the building. 
(b)  If a backflow prevention device is removed or bypassed, if a cross-connection exists or if the pressure in the water system is lowered below ten psi gauge, the director, or his/her designee, shall take whatever actions he finds necessary to ensure that the water system is safe from pollution. 
(Ord. No. O-03-112, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03) 
Sec. 39-104. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 2 misdemeanor for any person to knowingly permit a violation of this article to remain uncorrected after the expiration of the time that the director, or his/her designee, provided for correcting the violation. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate violation and shall be subject to the penalty provided by this section. 
(Ord. No. O-03-112, 6-10-03, eff. 7-1-03) 
Secs. 39-105-39-115. - Reserved. 
Chapter 40 - WOOD FOR FUEL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Tax Code, Ch. 36; license for coal dealers, § 36-53. 

Sec. 40-1. - What constitutes a cord. 
    For the purposes of this chapter a cord of wood, when stacked, shall contain 128 cubic feet, being eight feet long, four feet high and four feet wide, or the equivalent thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-81-242, § 1, 10-13-81) 
Sec. 40-2. - Sale to be by cord or proportional part. 
    No person, firm or corporation, or any employee or agent thereof, shall sell or offer for sale, or transport by vehicle for the purpose of sale, within the city, any stick or long wood, sawed and block wood, to be used as fuel, except by the cord or its proportional parts. 
(Ord. No. O-81-242, § 1, 10-13-81) 
Sec. 40-3. - Ticket as to quantity, etc.; procedure when deficiency is suspected. 
    In transporting wood as referred to in section 40-2, the seller, his employee or agent, shall send with each vehicle a ticket on which shall be written in ink or indelible substance the quantity by cord measurement of the wood contained in such vehicle, the name and address of the seller, and the name and address of the customer. Such ticket shall be handed to the purchaser or his representative on delivery. 
(Ord. No. O-81-242, § 1, 10-13-81) 
Sec. 40-4. - Delivery, etc., of quantity less than shown on ticket. 
    No person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, shall dispatch or transport or deliver to any customer an amount of wood, as referred to in section 40-2, of less quantity than that shown on the ticket accompanying the same. 
(Ord. No. O-81-242, § 1, 10-13-81) 
Sec. 40-5. - Retailing from yard of quantity of less than one-eighth cord. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit sellers of wood from retailing from their yards in small quantities of less than one-eighth cord by the stick or block to persons who call for and personally carry away such small quantities. 
(Ord. No. O-81-242, § 1, 10-13-81) 
Sec. 40-6. - Authority of sealer of weights and measures to inspect, measure, etc. 
    Any police officer shall have the right and authority at any time to inspect and measure such wood as referred to in section 40-2, to require the driver of any vehicle transporting such wood to exhibit the ticket heretofore required, and to direct the driver of any such vehicle to drive same to the nearest location of any approved measuring device for measurement. 
(Ord. No. O-81-242, § 1, 10-13-81) 
Sec. 40-7. - Penalty for violation. 
    For each and every violation of any provision of this chapter, the offender shall be punished by a fine of not less than $90.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months, either or by both. The license of any person so convicted to do business in the city may be revoked in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. O-81-242, § 1, 10-13-81) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 2014 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 2014 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since 2014, not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code O-13-034  3-12-13 1       Added 35.1-38.2-35.1-38.4 2 35.1-11.11 35.1-25.1.2 35.1-25.1.8 35.1-25.1.9 35.1-25.1.11 35.1-25.1.12 35.1-25.1.16 35.1-26.3 35.1-26.5 35.1-26.9 35.1-26.10 35.1-47 O-14-069  6-10-14 1 36-126.19 O-14-070  6-10-14 1 16.2-1-16.2-5 16.2-8       Added 16.2-9, 16.2-10 16.2-20       Rpld 16.2-21       Rnbd 16.2-22, 16.2-23       as 16.2-21, 16.2-22       Rpld 16.2-24 16.2-36 16.2-38 16.2-40, 16.2-41 16.2-43       Added 16.2-53, 16.2-54 16.2-55-16.2-57       Added 16.2-58, 16.2-59       Rnbd 16.2-58       as 16.2-60       Added 16.2-61       Rnbd 16.2-59       as 16.2-62 16.2-71 16.2-75, 16.2-76 O-14-083  7- 8-14 1       Rpld 24-14 O-14-092  8-12-14 1 14-34 O-14-097  8-12-14 1 11-2 19-42 19-47.2 O-14-127 11-11-14 1 16.2-20 16.2-56 O-15-017  3-10-15 1 24-24.2 24-24.4 24-24.5 O-15-024  4-14-15 1 34-12.1 O-15-064  7-14-15 1       Added 31-18-31-21 O-15-072  9- 8-15 1       Added 13.2-1-13.2-5 O-15-078  9-22-15 1 26-55 26-57 O-16-018  2-23-16 1       Rpld 35.1-1-35.1-101       Added 35.2-1-35.2-113 O-16-031  4-12-16 1 34-4(g) 34-12.1(a)-(c) 34-70 39-27(g) 39-54.1 39-54.1.2 O-16-035  4-12-16 1       Added 25-188-25-188.8 O-16-049  5-10-16 1       Rpld 37-56-37-65       Rpld 37-67       Rpld 37-71       Rpld 37-76, 37-77 2 37-16, 37-17 37-22 37-28 37-31, 37-32 37-35, 37-36 37-44 37-46 37-54, 37-55       Rnbd 37-66       as 37-56       Rnbd 37-68       as 37-57       Rnbd 37-70       as 37-58       Rnbd 37-72-37-75       as 37-59-37-62 37-107 O-16-067  5-10-16 1 36-126.20 36-126.22(a) 36-126.26 36-126.28(a) 36-126.30 36-126.32(a) 36-126.43 O-16-084  6-28-16 1 26-1 O-16-085  6-28-16 1 36-151 O-16-106  9-13-16 1 35-72 35-74       Added 35-74.1 35-75 35-77 O-16-134 12-13-16 1 11-191, 11-192 O-17-013  2-14-17 1 35.2-14.2 35.2-33.1 35.2-34.1 35.2-40.4 35.2-41.4 35.2-42.4 35.2-43.4 35.2-44.4 35.2-45.2- 
35.2-45.4 35.2-46.2- 
35.2-46.4 35.2-47.2 35.2-48.2, 
35.2-48.3 35.2-56.7 35.2-63.9 35.2-71.4 35.2-71.7 35.2-72.23 35.2-80.4 35.2-80.7 35.2-84.6 35.2-102.1 O-17-021  3-14-17 1 14-35 O-17-028  4-11-17 1 39-54.1 O-17-038  5- 9-17 1 35.2-11.3 35.2-11.6, 
35.2-11.7 35.2-11.12 O-17-052  5- 9-17 1 36-223 O-17-060  7-27-17 1       Added 35-28-35-28.7 O-17-070  8- 8-17 1 36-177 36-177.1 O-17-091 10-10-17 35.2-46.2 O-17-095 10-10-17 1 25-375.1, 25-375.2 25-375.4 25-375.8 25-375.10 O-17-098 11-14-17 35.2-67.1 35.2-67.2       Added 35.2-67.3 O-17-103 11-28-17 5-6 O-18-004  1- 9-18 1 36-126.6 36-126.39 O-18-005  1- 9-18 1       Added 36-177.2 O-18-013  2-27-18 25-212 35-12 35-19.1 35-55 25-271 O-18-017  3-27-18 1 25-188.3 O-18-023  4-10-18 1 2-89 O-18-048  6-12-18 35.2-64.16 O-18-049  6-12-18 35.2-13.4 35.2-13.11 O-18-072  9-11-18 1       Added 25-188.3(a)(5) O-18-093 10-23-18 1 11-2 O-18-095 11-13-18 1 14-36 O-19-018  3-12-19 1 14-32 O-19-019  3-12-19 1 14-35 O-19-020  3-26-19 1       Added 7-42, 7-43 O-19-029  5-14-19 1 35-2.1 O-19-033  6-11-19 1 7-7 7-33, 7-34  
