CODE CITY OF MANASSAS PARK, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Adopted, October 21, 1980 
Effective, January 1, 1981 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF MANASSAS PARK 
(2017) 
____________ 
Jeanette Rishell 
Mayor 
____________ 
Suhas Naddoni 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Preston Banks 
Michael Carrera 
Hector Cendejas 
Miriam Machado 
Donald Shuemaker 
City Council 
____________ 
Laszlo Palko 
City Manager 
____________ 
Dean Crowhurst 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lana A. Conner 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS of the 
CITY OF MANASSAS PARK 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Wendall Hite 
Mayor 
____________ 
John Alvarez 
Charlie Miller 
Robert Maitland 
Douglas Parks 
Harry Pope 
Donald Tickner 
Council Members 
____________ 
Richard Arbore 
City Manager 
____________ 
Charles S. Perry 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lana A. Conner 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Manassas Park of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1971 Manassas Park Town Code and ordinances adopted by the Council subsequent to November 17, 1970, which was the cut-off date for such Code. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of this Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1971 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been appropriately catchlined to facilitate usage. Appropriate footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant Charter provisions and state laws have been included. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourteenth section of Chapter 7 is 7-14. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections, or even whole chapters, can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 4-4 and 4-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-4.1, 4-4.2, 4-4.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of each chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
    The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this looseleaf system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in Section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President and Robert D. Ussery, Vice President, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Charles S. Perry, City Attorney, Mrs. Lana A. Conner, City Clerk, and all other city officials for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
October 21, 1980 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 80-1700-163 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Manassas Park, Virginia; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not included therein; Providing for the Manner of Amending and Supplementing such Code; and Providing when such Code and this Ordinance shall become effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Council of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia: 
    Section 1.  That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 31, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia," which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before August 21, 1979, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
    Section 2.  That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the 1st day of January, 1981, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted on final passage on or before August 21, 1979, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code. 
    Section 3.  That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4.  That any person convicted of a violation of such Code shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-12 thereof, or as provided in any other applicable section of such Code. 
    Section 5.  That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section 6.  That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 1-12 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or, in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 7.  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
    Section 8.  This ordinance and the Code hereby adopted shall become effective on the 1st day of January, 1981. 
    ADOPTED this 21st day of October, 1980. 
/s/ W. R. Hite 
      Mayor         ATTEST: 
/s/ Lana A. Conner 
      City Clerk         
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Include/
Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 57 10-1700-893  9-21-10 Omit 57 10-1700-894  8- 5-10 Include 57 Supp. No. 58 10-1700-889  5-18-10 Include 58 11-1700-901  4-19-11 Include 58 11-1700-902  4-19-11 Include 58 11-1700-903  5-24-11 Include 58 11-1700-904  5-24-11 Include 58 11-1700-905  5-24-11 Include 58 11-1700-906  5-24-11 Include 58 11-1700-907  5-24-11 Omit 58 11-1700-908  5-24-11 Omit 58 11-1700-909  6- 7-11 Omit 58 11-1700-910  6-21-11 Include 58 11-1700-911  6-21-11 Include 58 11-1700-912  6-21-11 Omit 58 Supp. No. 59 11-1700-913 11- 1-11 Omit 59 11-1700-914 11- 1-11 Include 59 11-1700-915 12- 6-11 Omit 59 12-1700-916  1-24-12 Include 59 12-1700-917  2- 7-12 Include 59 Supp. No. 60 12-1700-920  4- 3-12 Include 60 12-1700-921  4- 3-12 Include 60 12-1700-922  4- 3-12 Include 60 Supp. No. 61 12-1700-923  4- 3-12 Omit 61 12-1700-924  5- 1-12 Include 61 12-1700-926  5-15-12 Omit 61 12-1700-927  5-15-12 Include 61 12-1700-928  6- 5-12 Omit 61 12-1700-929  6- 5-12 Omit 61 12-1700-930[A]  6-19-12 Include 61 Supp. No. 62 12-1700-931  7-31-12 Include 62 12-1700-936 10- 2-12 Include 62 13-1700-942  4-16-13 Include 62 Supp. No. 63 13-1700-945  7-16-13 Include 63 14-1700-947  2- 4-14 Omit 63 14-1700-952  5-20-14 Include 63 14-1700-953  6- 3-14 Include 63 14-1700-954  6- 3-14 Include 63 14-1700-956  6- 3-14 Include 63 Supp. No. 64 14-1700-957  7-15-14 Include 64 14-1700-958 10- 7-14 Include 64 14-1700-959 10-21-14 Include 64 14-1700-963 12- 2-14 Include 64 15-1700-964  2-24-15 Include 64 Supp. No. 65 15-1700-965  3- 3-15 Include 65 15-1700-970  6- 2-15 Include 65 Supp. No. 66 12-1700-930[B]  5-15-12 Include 66 16-1700-981  1- 5-16 Include 66 16-1700-982  2- 2-16 Include 66 16-1700-983[A]  4- 5-16 Include 66 16-1700-983[B]  4- 5-16 Include 66 16-1700-987  5- 3-16 Include 66 Supp. No. 67 15-1700-973  9- 1-15 Include 67 16-1700-993  6-21-16 Include 67 17-1700-999  4- 4-17 Include 67 17-1700-1000  4-19-17 Include 67 17-1700-1001  5- 2-17 Include 67 17-1700-1004  6- 6-17 Include 67 17-1700-1005  5-16-17 Include 67 17-1700-1007  8-15-17 Include 67 Supp. No. 68 17-1700-1009 12-12-17 Omit 68 18-1700-1011  2-20-18 Include 68 18-1700-1013  3-20-18 Include 68 18-1700-1015  6-19-18 Include 68 18-1700-1016  6-19-18 Include 68 18-1700-1019  6-19-18 Include 68 18-1700-1022  7-17-18 Include 68  
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Charter is set out herein as enacted by section 1 of Chapter 912, 1993 Acts of the General Assembly, as amended. Sections 2 and 3 of such act appear at the end of the Charter. Amendments are indicated by history notes appearing in parentheses ( ) at the end of the amended or new section. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived, unamended, from Acts 1993, Chapter 912, § 1. Any words appearing in brackets [ ] were added by the editor for clarity. 

CHAPTER I. - INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES 

§ 1.1. - Municipal corporation continued; name and style; general right; privileges and authority. 
    The City of Manassas Park, notwithstanding any other provision of law, shall be and continue to be a municipal corporation under the name and style of the City of Manassas Park, clothed with all the rights, privileges and authority granted it under this Charter and by the general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. The City of Manassas Park shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, and shall have a corporate seal which it may alter at its pleasure. 
§ 1.2. - Corporate limits. 
    The corporate limits of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia, shall be the boundaries of the Town of Manassas Park, its predecessor, as ordered in the final decree of the Circuit Court of Prince William County entered on January 21, 1957, recorded in Common Law Order Book 17, page 429, and as said boundaries were enlarged by certain orders of the Circuit Court of Prince William County, sitting as a duly constituted Annexation Court, one entered December 31, 1974, recorded in Common Law Order Book 67, page 297, and the other entered January 31, 1990, recorded in Common Law Order Book 130, page 1263. In addition to the above, the corporate limits shall include such territory as is otherwise added from time to time to the municipality as provided by law. 
CHAPTER II. - VESTMENT OF POWERS 

§ 2.1. - General grant of powers. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided in this Charter, all powers of the city and the administration and government of the city shall be vested in the mayor and city council, as defined in sections 3.4 and 3.6, as the governing body, as defined below, of the City of Manassas Park, and in such boards and officers as are hereafter mentioned, or as may be by law otherwise provided. The powers set forth in the Code of Virginia, and all other powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to cities under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth, are hereby conferred on and vested in the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
    The enumeration of certain powers in this Charter shall not be construed to impair or diminish any of the rights, powers or authority conferred upon cities or their officers by the general laws of the Commonwealth. 
    The governing body shall have, subject to the provisions of this Charter, the control and management of the fiscal and municipal affairs of the city and make such ordinances and bylaws relating to the same as it shall deem proper and necessary to carry out the following powers, which are hereby vested in it: 
(a)  Eminent domain. The powers of eminent domain as set forth in the Code of Virginia, as amended, are hereby conferred upon the City of Manassas Park with respect to lands and improvements thereon, machinery and equipment for any lawful purpose of the city, including but not limited to, mutatis mutandis, the rights, privileges and obligations set forth in the Code of Virginia, as amended, applicable to the Commonwealth Transportation Commissioner and the Department of Transportation, as set forth in Title 33.1. Chapter 1, Title 15 and Title 25, Chapter 1.1, of the 1950 Code of Virginia with respect to all lawful purposes for which the city is permitted to exercise the power of eminent domain. 
(b)  Financial powers. In addition to the powers granted elsewhere in this Charter, the city shall have the power: 
(1)  To raise by taxes and assessments, as permitted by general law, in the city, such sums of money as the governing body may deem necessary to pay the debts and defray the expenses of the city. In the event the fees, rents or charges payable for the use and services of any public utility or public service supplied by the City of Manassas Park for or in connection with any real property shall not be paid when due, interest may be charged on such unpaid balance at the legal rate of interest. Such fees, rents or charges and the interest due thereon shall constitute a lien against such property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid town, city or county taxes, and shall also be recoverable by the city in an action at law or a suit in equity. In addition to, but not as a limitation upon, this general grant of power, the city shall have power to levy and collect ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property and machinery and tools; to levy and collect taxes for admission to or other charge for public amusement, entertainment, performance, exhibition, sport or athletic event in the city, which taxes may be added to and collected with the price of such admission or other charge; to levy and collect taxes on hotel and motel rooms; to levy and collect privilege taxes, local general retail sales and use taxes as provided by law, and capitation taxes; unless prohibited by general law, to require licenses, prohibit the conduct of any business, profession, vocation or calling without such a license, require taxes to be paid on such licenses in respect to all businesses, professions, vocations and callings which cannot, in the opinion of the governing body, be reached by the ad valorem system; and to require licenses of all owners of vehicles or trailers of all kinds for the privilege of using the streets, and other public places of the city, require taxes to be paid on such licenses and prohibit the use of streets, alleys and other public places in the city without such license, said city to have the power to require as a condition precedent to the issuance of motor vehicle licenses the exhibiting by the motor vehicle license applicant of adequate proof of the payment of all personal property taxes then due and payable to the City of Manassas Park. 
(2)  To impose, levy and collect, in such manner and in an amount permitted by the Code of Virginia, a consumer or subscriber tax upon the amount paid for use of water, gas, electricity, telephone, and any other public utility services, and may provide that such tax shall be added to and collected with bills rendered consumers and subscribers for such services. 
(c)  Grants. The City of Manassas Park shall have the power to receive and accept from any federal, state or private agency, grants of any kind for or in aid of the construction of any project, the procuring or reserving of park land, open spaces, or any recreational facility and to do all such things or make any covenants or agreements which may be necessary or required in order to obtain and use such grants. The city may receive and accept aid or contributions from any source or money, property, labor or other things of value, to be held, used and applied only for the purpose for which such grants and contributions may be made. 
(d)  Debts, bonds, notes, etc. Governing body may, in the name and for the use of the city, contract debts and make and issue, or cause to be made and issued, as evidence thereof, bonds, notes or other obligations, upon the credit of the city or solely upon the credit of specific property owned by the city or solely upon the credit of income derived from property used in connection with any public utility owned and operated by the city subject to the provisions of the Code of Virginia and the Constitution of Virginia. 
(1)  Pending the issuance and sale of any bonds, notes or other obligations by this Charter authorized, or in anticipation of the receipt of taxes and revenues of the current fiscal year, it shall be lawful for the city to borrow money temporarily and to issue notes or other evidences of indebtedness therefor, and from time to time to renew such temporary loans or use current funds, to be ultimately repaid from the proceeds of the said bonds, notes or other obligations or from city taxes and revenues, as the case may be, subject to the provisions of the Code of Virginia and the Constitution of Virginia. 
(2)  The credit of the city shall not, directly or indirectly, under any device of pretense whatsoever, be granted to or in aid of any person, firm, association or corporation. 
(3)  Every ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds shall specify the purpose or purposes for which they are to be issued, the aggregate amount of the bonds, the terms for which they shall be issued, and the maximum rates of interest to be paid thereon. Any such ordinance may be amended by ordinance at any time before the bonds to be affected by such amendment have been sold; however, if there is omitted from this Charter any provision essential to the valid authorization, sale, execution and issuance of any bonds of the city, the provisions of general law with reference to similar bonds shall supply said omission. 
(4)  Any bonds issued by the city under this Charter shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, as defined below, under the seal of the city, and shall be made payable in the office of the city treasurer, as defined below, or such other place in or out of the Commonwealth as the council may provide in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of the particular bonds. Such bonds shall be advertised by the mayor and sold by the city treasurer, or by the city manager, as defined below, as may be provided in such ordinance, under the supervision of the mayor, city manager and city clerk, and the sale reported to and approved by the governing body, and the proceeds from said sale shall be paid to the city treasurer. 
(5)  So long as there exists any unpaid bonded indebtedness, the governing body shall set aside, or cause to be set aside, a sufficient portion of the revenues of the city during each fiscal year for the sinking fund requirement for that year and none of the funds so set aside shall be appropriated or used for any purpose other than the retirement of outstanding bonds and the payment of the interest on same. 
(e)  Public improvements. With the exception of electric utilities, the governing body shall have the power to construct, maintain, regulate and operate public improvements of all kinds, including municipal and other buildings and structures necessary or appropriate for the use and proper operation of the various departments of the city and the performance of its duties and functions. 
(f)  Waterworks and sewers. The governing body shall have the power to establish, maintain, and operate waterworks and sewer systems within and without the city; to purchase water therefor; to contract and agree with the owners of any land, springs, wells or water supplies for the use of or purchase thereof; or have same condemned according to law, for the location, extension, or enlargement of the said waterworks or sewer system, either or both, the pipes connected therewith, and the fixtures or appurtenances thereof; and to protect from injury by ordinance, prescribing adequate penalties, the said waterworks, water supply, sewer systems, pipes, fixtures, and land, or anything connected therewith, whether within or without the limits of the city. 
(g)  Streets, sidewalks and alleyways generally. The governing body shall have the power to open, extend, widen or narrow, close, lay out, graduate, curb, and pave, and otherwise improve streets, sidewalks, and public alleys in the city, and have them kept in good order and properly lighted. In order to properly light the streets of the city, the governing body may erect and operate such number of lamps and fixtures thereto belonging as it may deem necessary. It may build bridges in and culverts under streets, and may prevent or remove any structure, obstruction, or encroachment over, or under, or in any street, sidewalk, or alley in the city, and may permit shade trees to be planted along streets. No person shall occupy with his works, or any appurtenances thereof, the streets, sidewalks, or alleyways of the city without the consent of the governing body, duly entered upon its records. 
(1)  Removal of street encroachments. In every case where a street in the city has been or shall be encroached upon by a fence, building or otherwise, the governing body may require the owner to remove the same, and if such removal be not made within the time prescribed, it may impose such penalty as it may prescribe by ordinance for each and every day it is allowed to continue thereafter, and may cause the encroachment to be removed, and collect from the owner all reasonable charges therefor, with costs, by the same process that it is hereinafter empowered to collect taxes. Except, in any case where there is a bona fide dispute as to the true boundary line or the location of the true street line, and if passage over such street is not seriously impeded, the same shall first be established and determined by an adjudication of a court of competent jurisdiction in a proceeding instituted by either the city or the property owner for that purpose before the city shall take any steps to remove the said obstruction or encroachment, or to impose a penalty therefor. No encroachment upon any street, however long continued shall constitute any adverse possession to or confer any rights upon persons claiming thereunder as against the city. 
(2)  Dedication of streets. Dedication of any street, alley or lane in the city may be made by plat or deed. Any street or alley reserved in the division or subdivision into lots, of any portion of the territory within the corporate limits of the city, by a plan or plot of record, shall be deemed and held to be dedicated to public use, unless it appears by said record that the street or alley so reserved is designated for private use. The governing body shall have the right to elect, by resolution entered on its minutes whether it will, or will not accept the dedication of any street or alley. 
(h)  Encumbering streets, sidewalks, etc. The governing body shall have the power to prevent the encumbering of streets, sidewalks, alleyways, lanes, or bridges throughout the city in any manner whatever. 
(i)  Route and grade of public utilities. The governing body shall have the power to determine and designate the route and grade of any public utility laid out in the city, which power may be delegated to the appropriate officer of the city. 
(j)  Nuisances, unsafe or unsanitary structures, dangerous and unhealthy businesses, transportation of explosives, garbage, etc., and speed of trains; dangerous buildings: 
(1)  The governing body shall have the power to require and compel the abatement and removal of all nuisances within the city, at the expense of the person or persons causing the same, or the owner or owners of the ground whereon the same shall be; to require all lands, lots, and other premises within the city to be kept clean, sightly, sanitary and free from weeds or to make them so at the expense of the owners or occupants thereof; to make such rules, regulations, orders or ordinances as will protect its citizens from unsafe and unsanitary structures or walls, and to that end it shall have the power to cause to be condemned and taken down any such structure or wall, but no such condemnation shall be made or such structure or wall taken down until the owner thereof, or in the case of an infant or person declared incompetent pursuit to the Code of Virginia, his guardian or committee, is duly summoned before a board or a committee of the governing body or the full governing body as charged by the ordinances with such duty, and allowed reasonable opportunity to show cause against such action; to regulate the exercise of any dangerous, offensive or unhealthy business, trade or employment within the city; to regulate the transportation of coal, explosives, garbage and other articles through the streets of the city; to restrain and regulate the speed of locomotive engines and cars upon the railroads within the city. 
(2)  The governing body may by resolution, duly adopted and recorded, order the repair, wrecking or removal of any building or structure which has been complained of by the city manager or other authorized agent as a menace to adjoining property or to persons using a public thoroughfare or a public place adjacent to such building or structure; and condemnation shall be made only after such building or structure has been inspected and found unsafe by a committee composed of the city manager or other authorized agent and two reputable builders appointed by the governing body. If the owner of such menace fails or refuses to repair, wreck or remove the same within thirty (30) days from the date of written notice from the city clerk, transmitting such resolution of condemnation, the governing body may then order the city manager or other authorized agent to repair, wreck or remove such building or structure, and the cost of such repair, wrecking or removal by the city manager or other authorized agent shall be a charge against the property on which such menace is located; such costs shall be collectible by due process of law. 
(k)  Accumulations of stagnant water, unwholesome substances, etc., on private grounds; removal; collection of expenses, etc. If any ground in the city shall be subject to be covered with stagnant water, or if the owner or owners, occupier or occupiers thereof shall permit any offensive or unwholesome substance to remain or accumulate thereon, the governing body may cause such grounds to be filled, raised, or drained, or may cause such substance to be covered or to be removed therefrom, and may collect the expense of so doing from the owner or owners, occupier or occupiers, or any of them, except in cases where such nuisance is caused by the action of the city authorities or their agents, or by natural causes beyond the control of the owner or occupant, in which case the city shall pay the expense of abating the same, by distress and sale in the same manner in which taxes levied upon real estate for the benefit of the city are authorized to be collected; provided that reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard shall be first given to such owners or their agents. In the case of nonresident owners who have no agent in the city, such notice shall be given by publication at least once a week for not less than two (2) consecutive weeks in any newspaper having general circulation in the city. 
(l)  Establishing fire zones; adoption of building codes, etc.; fire prevention; discharge of fireworks and firearms. The governing body shall have the power to establish fire zones and regulate the character of buildings which may be erected or restored within same; to regulate and direct the storage of explosives and combustible substances and liquids; to prohibit the discharge of fireworks and firearms within the city, the building of bonfires within the city and the use of candles or lights in barns, stables, warehouses, etc. 
(m)  Franchises. Subject to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, the Constitution of Virginia and the provisions of this Charter, the governing body shall have the power to grant franchises under terms and conditions to be fixed by the governing body. 
(n)  Diversion of streams. The governing body shall have the power to divert the channels of creeks and flowing streams and for that purpose to acquire property by condemnation pursuant to the Code of Virginia and this Charter. 
(o)  Passage of ordinances, etc., to promote general welfare, etc. The governing body shall have the power to do all things whatsoever necessary or expedient, and to pass all ordinances, resolutions and bylaws for promoting or maintaining the security, general welfare, comfort, education, morals, peace, government, health, trade, commerce and industries of the city, or its inhabitants, not in conflict with the Code of Virginia and the Constitution of Virginia of the Constitution of the United States. 
(p)  Public utilities generally. The governing body shall have full control and regulation over the public utilities now owned or that may hereafter be acquired by the city, and to this end it shall have full authority to employ from time to time such employees as it deems necessary to properly maintain, conduct and operate the same. The governing body shall have full authority to incur indebtedness, unless otherwise prohibited by law, whenever the governing body may deem it necessary for the proper conduct, management and maintenance of the public utilities now owned by the city, or such as may hereafter be acquired by it. 
(q)  Requiring connection with sewers. The governing body shall likewise have authority, by ordinance duly enacted, to compel all owners of real estate within the corporate limits of the city to connect with such sewerage pipes or connection as may hereafter be installed or constructed by the city, whenever public health may render necessary such connection, upon such reasonable terms as may be prescribed by the governing body, together with all other authority necessary to proper maintenance and operation of an effective sewerage system. 
(r)  Special election required for sale of public utilities. The governing body shall have no authority to sell its public utilities, without first submitting the question of such sale at a special election to be called for that purpose only, to the qualified voters of the City of Manassas Park, which election shall be conducted as now provided by general law governing special elections. The Circuit Court of Prince William County shall order such special election upon the petition of twenty-five (25) per cent of the qualified voters of the City of Manassas Park or upon a resolution passed by a majority of the governing body of the city. For a period of not less than four (4) weeks prior to such special election, the substantial terms of any proposed sale shall be published over the signature of the city clerk, once a week for four (4) successive weeks in some newspaper having general circulation in the City of Manassas Park. The qualifications of voters in said special election shall be determined by existing statutes governing special elections. 
(s)  Penalty for ordinance violations. Where, by provision of this Charter, or by general law, the governing body has the authority to pass ordinances on any subject that it may prescribe a penalty, the penalty for a violation of such ordinances shall not exceed the penalty authorized by general law; however, such penalty shall not exceed the penalty authorized in general law for a like offense. Such penalties may be pursued through all avenues available under general law and recovered with the costs in the name of the City of Manassas Park. 
CHAPTER III. - ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT 

§ 3.1. - Designation of governing body and municipal officers. 
    The governing body of the City of Manassas Park shall consist of the mayor and city council. All powers of the City of Manassas Park as a body politic and corporate shall be vested in the governing body. The municipal officers of the city shall consist of a mayor, six (6) council members ("city council"), a city clerk, a city treasurer, a commissioner of revenue, a city attorney and a city manager so long as the city shall retain a managerial form of government. The mayor, council members, city treasurer and commissioner of revenue shall be elected by qualified voters of the city. The city manager, city clerk and city attorney shall be appointed by the governing body as hereinafter provided. 
§ 3.2. - Mayor and city council to have power and authority prescribed by law. 
    The power and authority of the mayor and city council as the governing body of the City of Manassas Park shall, in addition to those mentioned and authorized by this Charter, be such as are mentioned and prescribed by law. 
§ 3.3. - Oath and bond of officers. 
    All municipal officers of the city, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, shall be sworn in, pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth by anyone authorized to administer oaths under the laws of the Commonwealth. If any person elected or appointed to any office in the city shall neglect to take such oath on or before the day on which that person is to enter upon the discharge of the duties of the office, or shall for twenty (20) days after the beginning of the term of office fail to give such bond as may be required of that person by city council, a vacancy in said office shall then exist. 
§ 3.4. - Mayor. 
    The mayor shall be elected by popular vote of the qualified voters of the city as provided in this Charter. The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the city council and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, and as may be imposed by the governing body, consistent with his office. The mayor shall serve as the chief executive officer of the city, responsible to the governing body to see that the bylaws, ordinances, acts and resolutions of the governing body are executed and obeyed faithfully. At no time shall the mayor be authorized to serve concurrently as mayor and city manager, nor shall the mayor be authorized to act as city manager in an interim capacity. The mayor shall not have the authority to veto any action of the governing body, notwithstanding any other provision in this Charter or by general law. 
    The mayor shall have the right to vote as a member of the governing body, and as such shall have all rights, privileges, powers, duties and obligations of a voting member of the governing body, while performing the duties of mayor. 
    The mayor shall have the power to suspend and the governing body to remove any city officer appointed by the governing body for misconduct in office or neglect of duty to be specified in the order of suspension or removal. No removal shall be made without reasonable notice to the officer complained of and an opportunity afforded him to be heard in his defense. 
    The mayor may receive a salary to be fixed by the governing body, payable in such a manner and at such times as the governing body may direct. 
§ 3.5. - Vice-Mayor; acting mayor. 
    The Governing Body shall biennially, at its first regular meeting in January following the municipal election, choose one of its members as vice-mayor. The vice-mayor shall perform the duties of Mayor during the Mayor's absence or disability. In the event of the death, removal or resignation of the Mayor, the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with general law. 
    Should a member of City Council be chosen to serve as Mayor until the next municipal election, such City Council seat will be deemed to be vacant upon qualification of the former City Council member as Mayor. The vacancy thereby created in the City Council shall be filled by the Governing Body as provided in this charter. 
    The member of the City Council who shall be chosen as vice-mayor shall continue to have all rights, privileges, powers, duties and obligations as a member of the Governing Body while performing the duties of Mayor in the absence or disability of the Mayor of the City. 
(Acts 2007, Ch. 169, § 1, 3-9-07) 
§ 3.6. - City council. 
    The city council shall be composed of six (6) members. They shall be elected by popular vote of the qualified voters of the city as provided in this Charter. 
    In the event of the death, removal or resignation of a member of city council, the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with general law. 
    Each member of the city council may receive a salary to be fixed by the governing body, payable at such times and in such manner as the governing body may direct. 
§ 3.7. - Governing body, generally. 
(a)  The governing body shall establish its own rules of procedure. In addition to the foregoing, the governing body shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To exercise all powers granted to the City of Manassas Park by general law and this Charter. 
(2)  To inquire into the official conduct of any office or officer under its control and to investigate the accounts, disbursements, and expenses of any city employee; for these purposes, it may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of books, papers and other evidence; and in case any witness fails or refuses to obey any such lawful order of the council, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(3)  To provide for the performance of all the governmental functions in the city, and, to that end, provide for and set up all departments and agencies of government that shall be necessary. Whenever it is not designated in this Charter what officer or employee of the city shall exercise any power or perform any duty conferred upon or required of the city or any officer thereof by general law, then any such power shall be exercised or duly performed by that officer or employee of the city so designated by ordinance or resolution of the governing body. Any activity which is not assigned by the provisions of this Charter to specific departments or agencies of the city government shall be assigned by the governing body to the appropriate department or agency. The governing body may further create, abolish, reassign, transfer or combine any city functions, activities, or departments. The governing body shall appoint a city manager. The governing body, in its discretion, may appoint the same person to more than one appointive office; however, said appointments may not result in dual compensation or benefits of any kind. 
(4)  To fix a schedule of compensation for all city officers and employees. The governing body may by ordinance define certain classes of city employees whose salaries shall be set by the governing body. 
(5)  To prescribe the amount and condition of surety bonds to be required of such officers and employees of the city as the governing body may designate, not inconsistent with general law. 
(6)  The governing body may appoint a city attorney. The city attorney shall be an attorney licensed to practice under the laws of the Commonwealth and need not be a resident of the City of Manassas Park. 
(7)  To provide for a board of equalization as authorized by the Code of Virginia. 
(8)  To place the control and supervision of the police force of the city under either the mayor or the city manager as may appear advisable to the governing body. 
(9)  To take from any officer or employee of the city, whether elected by the voters of the city or appointed by the governing body, a bond, with surety, to be approved by the governing body, in such penalty as it may deem proper, payable to the city, with condition for the faithful discharge by the officer or employee of the duties of the designated office. 
(10)  To exercise full police powers, and it shall establish and maintain a police force for the City of Manassas Park with such number of police officers and employees as the governing body may deem necessary; the head of such force may be known as the chief of police. The chief of police and the police officers and employees of the police force shall be under the control and supervision of the city manager or mayor as the governing body may deem expedient. The compensation and terms of office or employment of the chief of police and such police officers and employees of the police force shall be fixed and determined by the governing body. Each member of the police force and the chief of police are hereby made and constituted conservators of the peace and endowed with all powers of a constable in criminal cases and all other powers which under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the ordinances and resolutions of the city may be necessary to enable the police officers to discharge the duties of their offices. 
(11)  To maintain a fire department for the City of Manassas Park and provide firefighting apparatus and equipment for such department, and it may accept for use of the department gifts, grants or donations in the form of money or equipment which, when made, shall be the property of the city as completely as if purchased and paid for by the city. The governing body may by ordinance or resolution prescribe such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary regulating the operation of fire department and the use of the apparatus, equipment, etc., as herein provided. The fire department may be manned by either volunteer firemen or firemen who are paid employees of the city. If maintained as a volunteer fire company, the governing body may grant the members of such company the right to select their own membership and officers subject to the approval of the governing body. The governing body may at its discretion add to the volunteer fire company such full-time, or part-time, paid members as may seem advisable to the governing body. 
(12)  Neither the governing body nor any of its members shall direct the appointment of any person to or his removal from any office or employment by the city manager or by any of his subordinates except as specifically provided in this Charter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the governing body and its members shall deal with the administrative services solely through the city manager, and neither the governing body nor any member thereof shall give orders either publicly or privately to any subordinate of the city manager. 
(b)  Except as herein provided, the governing body shall establish its own rules of procedure. 
(1)  The governing body shall meet in regular session at least once each month. 
(2)  The governing body shall provide for the calling of special meetings by the mayor, or any three (3) members of the governing body, and shall prescribe the method of giving notice thereof. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided by law, ordinances, resolutions, motions, and votes shall be adopted only by the affirmative votes of a majority of the quorum of the governing body present at a regularly scheduled or special meeting open to the public. 
(c)  The governing body shall have general power over all the officers and employees of the city as provided in this Charter. 
§ 3.8. - Quorum; required vote for appropriation of money or levy of taxes or licenses; reconsideration, at special meeting, of matters decided at stated meeting. 
    Four (4) members of the governing body shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No ordinance shall be passed or resolution adopted having for its object the appropriation of money in any sum, or the levy of taxes and licenses, except by the concurrence of at least four (4) members of the governing body. No vote or question decided at a stated meeting shall be reconsidered at a special meeting unless all members are present, and four (4) of them concur, each having been members of the governing body who previously voted in favor of the prevailing side during the previous voted decision on the issue in question. 
§ 3.9. - Induction of members. 
    The City Clerk shall administer the oath of office to the duly elected members of City Council and the Mayor on or before December 31, immediately following their election. In the absence of the City Clerk, the oath may be administered by anyone authorized to administer oaths under the laws of the Commonwealth. 
(Acts 2007, Ch. 169, § 1, 3-9-07) 
§ 3.10. - Meetings generally. 
    The governing body shall, by ordinance, fix the time for its stated meetings. Special meetings shall be called by the city clerk upon written request of the mayor, or any three (3) members of the governing body; no business shall be transacted at a special meeting but that for which it shall be called, unless the governing body so agrees by unanimous vote. The meetings of the governing body shall be open to the public, except when in the judgment of the governing body the public welfare shall require executive sessions as provided by law. 
§ 3.11. - Persons receiving emolument from federal government not barred from holding office. 
    No person presently receiving any emolument from the federal government shall be barred because of such fact from continuing to serve as an elected officer of the city or to seek reelection and to serve as a member of the governing body or to serve as a member of any board or commission of the city. 
§ 3.12. - City clerk. 
    The city clerk shall be the clerk of the governing body, shall keep a journal of its proceedings and shall record all ordinances in a book kept for that purpose. The city clerk shall be the custodian of the corporate seal of the city and shall be the officer authorized to use and authenticate said seal. All records in the office of the city clerk shall be public records and open to inspection at any time during regular business hours. The city clerk shall receive compensation to be fixed by the governing body and all fees received by the city clerk shall be paid into the city treasury. 
§ 3.13. - Election and general powers and duties of commissioner of revenue and city treasurer; filling of vacancies. 
    By general election every four (4) years, there shall be elected by the qualified voters of the City of Manassas Park a commissioner of revenue and a city treasurer. In case of a vacancy in the office of commissioner of revenue or city treasurer, the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with general law. The city treasurer and the commissioner of revenue shall have such powers and perform such duties and receive such compensation as are provided by the Constitution of Virginia, and, except as are otherwise provided in this Charter, as are provided by the provisions of general laws for cities. 
§ 3.14. - Specific duties. 
    The city treasurer shall be charged with receiving and paying out all moneys of the city. The city treasurer shall hold such moneys and/or place same in such depositories as the governing body may by resolution direct, and shall pay out such moneys under such conditions and in such manner as the governing body by resolution may direct. The city treasurer shall keep the moneys of the city in the name of the city and shall keep books showing accurately all receipts and disbursements and separate records for the several funds or accounts of the city as may be prescribed by the governing body from time to time. The city treasurer's books shall be open at all reasonable times for inspection as required by law. The city treasurer is specifically charged with the preparation and delivery of all bills for tax levies and license taxes due the city and the prompt collection of such taxes. Should any tax or taxes become delinquent, the city treasurer shall promptly proceed to collect the same in such a manner as prescribed by ordinance or law. The city treasurer shall furnish, in addition to any bond required by the Commonwealth of Virginia, a bond payable to the City of Manassas Park in such amount as the governing body may prescribe and conditioned upon the faithful and true performance of all the duties placed upon the city treasurer by this Charter. The city treasurer shall immediately deliver all such moneys, records and other property in that individual's possession to his duly appointed or elected successor, and the bonds as herein provided shall remain in force and effect until such moneys, records and property have been so transferred, accounted for, and by audit the funds and property are properly accounted for in the records so transferred. 
§ 3.15. - Specific duties of commissioner of revenue. 
    The commissioner of revenue shall perform such duties not inconsistent with the laws of the Commonwealth in relation to the assessment of property and licenses as may be required by the governing body for the purpose of levying city taxes and licenses. The commissioner of revenue shall have power to administer such oaths as may be required by the governing body in the assessment of license taxes or other taxes of the city. The commissioner of revenue shall make such reports in regard to the assessments of both property and licenses, or either, as may be required by the governing body. The commissioner of revenue shall perform such other duties as may be required by the governing body. 
§ 3.16. - City attorney. 
    The governing body shall appoint a duly licensed attorney as city attorney, who need not reside within the city, the scope of whose duties and whose compensation shall be fixed by the governing body and who shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body. 
§ 3.17. - City manager, generally. 
    There shall be a city manager who shall be the administrative officer of the city and shall be responsible to the governing body for the proper administration of the city government. The city manager shall have no direct responsibility or accountability to the mayor other than as shall be directed by this Charter or the direction of the governing body. The city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body and shall be appointed for a term acceptable to the governing body and the city manager. The city manager shall be chosen on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of this office and need not, when appointed, by a resident of the City of Manassas Park or the Commonwealth, but during his term of office, the city manager shall reside within the city. No member of the governing body shall, during the time for which elected or appointed, be chosen as city manager. 
    The city manager may be suspended by the mayor or governing body and removed from office by the governing body for cause. Before the city manager may be suspended or removed, the city manager shall, at the option of the city manager, be given a written statement of the reasons for suspension or removal and the right to be heard concerning the proposed removal at a meeting of the governing body prior to the final vote on the question of his removal. Pending and during such hearing on removal from office, the governing body may suspend the city manager from office. The action of the governing body in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the governing body. The mayor shall have no direct oversight or power to direct the city manager in matters relating to normal administration of city business, nor shall the mayor have the power to act in the capacity of city manager in the absence of the incumbent. 
    In the case of the absence, disability, death or resignation of the city manager, the governing body may by ordinance designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability, or until appointment of a successor. 
§ 3.18. - Duties of the city manager. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to: 
(1)  Supervise the administrative affairs of the city. 
(2)  Make such recommendations to the governing body concerning the affairs of the city as may seem to him desirable or advisable. 
(3)  Keep the governing body advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city. 
(4)  Prepare and submit to the governing body the annual budget estimate and be responsible for its administration after its adoption. 
(5)  Prepare in suitable form for publication and submit to the governing body not later than its first meeting following December fifth of each year a concise, comprehensive report of the financial transactions and administrative activities of the city government during the fiscal year ending on the preceding June thirtieth and cause to be printed such number of copies thereof as the governing body shall direct. 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the governing body such reports as may be required by that body, including adequate financial and activity reports at each regular meeting of the governing body. 
(7)  Attend all meetings of the governing body with the right to speak but not to vote. 
(8)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of the city manager by order or resolution of the governing body or which may be required of the chief administrative officer of the city, not inconsistent with this Charter and the general laws of the Commonwealth other than those duties conferred on the mayor by this Charter. 
§ 3.19. - Powers with respect to city personnel. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city manager may appoint or employ and he may remove or discharge such officers, employees and assistants as may be necessary to carry on the work in those departments and offices of the city committed to him by ordinance, in all their respective details, in an economical and satisfactory manner. Whenever the interests of the city require, irrespective of any other provisions of this Charter, the city manager shall have the power and authority to assign employees of any city department, bureau, office or agency, with the exception of the school division, to the temporary performance of duties in another city department, bureau, office or agency. The city manager may not remove or discharge appointive city officers; however, he may recommend their removal to the governing body. The salaries and conditions of employment of employees and assistants shall be recommended by the city manager subject to the approval of the governing body and as provided in general law. The city manager's action in all respects shall be subject to review by the governing body, and he shall be accountable to that body only. 
§ 3.20. - Relationship of city manager to boards, commissions and agencies. 
    The city manager shall have the right to attend and participate in the proceedings of, but not to vote in, the meetings of all boards, commissions or agencies created by this Charter or by ordinance. 
CHAPTER IV. - ELECTIONS 

§ 4.1. - General. 
(a)  The qualified voters of the City of Manassas Park shall elect the mayor and each city council member. The mayor, city council, commissioner of revenue and city treasurer shall be elected at large. The mayor, city council members, commissioner of revenue and city treasurer each shall be a qualified voter and a resident of the city. Elections for the offices of mayor, city council, commissioner of revenue and city treasurer shall be in the manner and time provided by general law. Individual citizens of the City of Manassas Park may qualify as a candidate for elective office within the city by being recognized as the nominated candidate of a political party recognized by the State Board of Elections or through petition to the city board of elections, said petition containing the validated signatures of registered voters of the City of Manassas Park pursuant to the general laws of the Commonwealth. Those citizens seeking elective office must meet state residency requirements as detailed in the general laws of the Commonwealth. 
(b)  The general laws of the Commonwealth relating to the conduct of elections, so far as pertinent, shall apply to the conduct of elections. Any member of the governing body or any member of a board or commission appointed by the governing body for a specified term may be removed in accordance with general law. 
(Acts 2005, Ch. 560, § 1, 5-22-05) 
§ 4.2. - Mayor and city council. 
    The Mayor and City Council members in office on the effective date of this charter shall continue to serve in office until July 1, following termination of their respective terms of office. Three City Council members shall be elected to four-year terms on the fist Tuesday in May 1994 and every four years thereafter. The Mayor and three City Council members shall be elected to four-year terms on the first Tuesday in May 1996 and every four years thereafter. The Mayor and members of City Council shall take office on July 1, following their election. The incumbent Mayor and City Council members shall hold office until the duly elected successor has qualified. However, beginning with the elections to be held in 2008, the Mayor and City Council shall be elected at the time set for the November general election to take office on January 1 following their election. The Mayor and members of Council in office on June 20, 2008, shall continue to serve until their duly elected successors have qualified. 
(Acts 2007, Ch. 169, § 1, 3-9-07) 
§ 4.3. - Commissioner of revenue and city treasurer. 
    The commissioner of revenue and city treasurer in office on the effective date of this Charter shall continue to serve in office until January first following termination of their respective terms of office. The commissioner of revenue and city treasurer shall be elected to four-year terms of office on the first Tuesday in November and shall take office on January first, following election. The incumbent commissioner of revenue and city treasurer shall hold office until their duly elected successors have qualified. 
CHAPTER V. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

§ 5.1. - Enforcement of surety bonds. 
    In all cases where a bond is required of any officer, such bond or bonds shall be with corporate surety and conditioned for the faithful discharge by the officer, or that officer's deputies, assistants or other subordinates, of the duties imposed by this Charter and all other ordinances passed in pursuance thereof. 
§ 5.2. - Officers to hold over until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
    Whenever, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, any officer of the city or member of any board of commission is elected or appointed for a fixed term, such officer or member shall continue to hold office until that officer's successor is elected or appointed and qualified. 
§ 5.3. - Restriction on appointment of city officers. 
    Whenever any officer of the city or member of any board or commission entitled to receive a salary by virtue of election or appointment to that position voluntarily resigns from that position prior to the expiration of the term of office required by this Charter or general law, the city officer, board or commission member may not subsequently or concurrently be appointed to another city office, board or commissioner member position entitled to receive compensation or salary for a period of one (1) year from the effective date of voluntary resignation. 
§ 5.4. - Validation and ratification of bonds, taxes and contracts. 
    All bonds issued and sold, all contracts, agreements and obligations made at any time prior to the enactment of this Charter or any amendment thereto by the governing body of the city, and the former Town of Manassas Park, not inconsistent with the Constitution of Virginia and general law, all taxes assessed and levied when the city was a town, and when the city was in transition from the status of a town to that of a city of the second class to the effective date of this Charter and its amendments, are hereby validated, ratified and confirmed; and all other proceedings authorizing the issuance of bonds, notes or other obligations of the City of Manassas Park and the former Town of Manassas Park heretofore had are hereby validated, ratified and confirmed and shall not lapse or terminate or be otherwise affected by reason of any of the provisions contained in this Charter, and such bonds, notes or other obligations may be authorized, sold or issued in accordance with the provisions of law in force prior to the effective date of this Charter or in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
§ 5.5. - Continuation of officers and boards. 
    The present mayor, members of the city council and all other officials, board and commission members shall continue to hold office until their successors have been elected or appointed and shall have qualified as provided by this Charter. The mayor and any member of the city council shall be eligible for reelection. All powers and authority conferred by this Charter shall be effective on the date of this Charter's adoption and shall be conferred on the present city officers. 
§ 5.6. - School division and school board. 
    The City of Manassas Park shall constitute a separate school division. The school board shall consist of five (5) members, appointed by the governing body, and the terms are to be for a period of three (3) years. 
§ 5.7. - Present ordinances and rules and regulations continued in effect. 
    All ordinances of the city and the former Town of Manassas Park and all rules, regulations and orders legally made by any department, board, commission or officers of the city and the former Town of Manassas Park, in force at the effective date of this Charter, insofar as they or any portion thereof are not inconsistent therewith, shall remain in force until amended or repealed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. No ordinance, petition or suit adopted or filed by the former Town of Manassas Park shall be invalidated or dismissed by reason of the Town of Manassas Park having become a city. 
§ 5.8. - Severance clause. 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this Charter shall, for any reason, be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid such judgment, order or decree shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder of said Charter, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, paragraph or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment, order or decree shall have been ordered. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
Year Chapter Section Disposition 1993 912 1 1.1-5.8 2005 560 1 4.1 2007 169 1 3.5 3.9 4.2  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Manassas Park Code." 
(Code 1971, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to codify and recodify its ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    And; or. The word "and" may be read "or" and the word "or" may be read "and" when the sense requires it. 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the city, being Chapter 722 of the 1976 Acts of the General Assembly, as amended. 
    City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Manassas Park, in the County of Prince William and State of Virginia. 
    Code; this Code. Whenever the words "Code" or "this Code" are referred to in this Code without further qualification, they shall mean the "Code of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia," as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
    Council. The words "council," "the council" or "city council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
    County. The words "county" or "the county" shall mean the County of Prince William in the State of Virginia. 
    Fee schedule. The "fee schedule" is a list of charges adopted by the governing body and modified from time to time for permits, applications, and inspections related to the building code, property maintenance code, subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinance, and the public facilities manual. 
    Following. The word "following," when used by way of reference to any section or sections in the Code, shall be construed to mean next following that in which such reference is made. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to corporations as well as to males. 
    Health department. The words "health department" shall mean the Health Department of Prince William County or the duly authorized agent of such department. 
    Health officer. The words "health officer" shall mean the Health Officer of the Prince William County Health Department, or his duly authorized agent. 
    In the city; within the city. The words "in the city" or "within the city" shall mean any territory, jurisdiction of which, for the exercise of its regulatory power, has been conferred on the city by public or private law. 
    Month. The word "month" shall be construed to mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Occupant or tenant. The word "occupant" or "tenant," applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of, or who actually occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, department, board, commission or other agency, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
    Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are referred to in this Code, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the city. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit. 
    Preceding. The word "preceding," when used by way of reference to any section or sections in this Code, shall be construed to mean next preceding that in which such reference is made. 
    Property. The word "property" shall mean real, personal or mixed property. 
    Public grounds. The words "public grounds" shall mean the parks and all public lands owned by the city and those parts of public places which do not form travelled parts of streets, as defined in this section. 
    Shall; may. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
    Shoulder. The word "shoulder" shall mean that part of the highway or street between the portion regularly travelled by vehicular traffic and the lateral curb line or ditch. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write, his name being written near it and being witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness. 
    State. The terms "state," "the state," and "this state" shall mean the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Street. The word "street" shall include avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. It shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. 
    Swear, sworn. The words "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense may include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Written; in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" shall include typewriting, printing on paper and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1971, § 1-2; Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 1, 6-19-18) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions and rules of construction applicable to state law, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
(a)  The catchlines of the sections of this Code, appearing in bold face type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to chapter 31 of this Code, the catchlines to the sections of that chapter having been adopted by the council. 
(Code 1971, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Provisions similar to subsection (a) above as to sections of state code, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9. 
Sec. 1-4. - Common law as to misdemeanors. 
    The common law of England, with respect to misdemeanors, insofar as it is not repugnant to the principles of the Bill of Rights, the Constitution of the state and the Charter and ordinances of the city, shall continue in full force within the city and be the rule of decision, except as altered by the General Assembly of the state or by the council. 
State Law reference- Continuation in effect of common law of England within state, Code of Virginia, § 1-10. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions of Code considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as the provisions of prior codifications and ordinances of the city included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1971, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-6. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds or any evidence of indebtedness; 
(2)  Authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract; 
(3)  Granting any franchise or right; 
(4)  Appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget; 
(5)  Authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement; 
(6)  Making any assessment; 
(7)  Establishing, extending or contracting the corporate limits of the city; 
(8)  The purposes of which have been accomplished; 
(9)  Which is temporary, although general in effect; or 
(10)  Which is special, although permanent in effect 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia (or the Manassas Park Code) is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  In the event a new section not herefore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia (or the Manassas Park Code) is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference- Authority to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Sec. 1-10. - Copies of Code and supplements to be available for public inspection. 
    At least three (3) copies of this Code and every supplement thereto shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall there be available for public inspection, during normal business hours. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Sec. 1-11. - Personal recognizance and cash deposit, in lieu of recognizance with surety, by persons charged with Code violations. 
(a)  When a person charged with a violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city is admitted to bail by an officer authorized by law so to do for his appearance before a court having jurisdiction of the case for a hearing thereon, he may, instead of entering into a recognizance with surety, give his personal recognizance and deposit with such officer, or cause to be deposited for him, in cash, the amount of bail he is required to furnish. 
(b)  Upon the giving of personal recognizance and deposit, as provided in this section, the officer receiving the same shall give to the person whose funds are so deposited an official receipt therefor. In order that the officer in question may be able to give such official receipt, it shall be the duty of the city to provide all such officers with official prenumbered receipt books, in triplicate, consisting of an original and two (2) carbon copies. The original receipt shall go to the person whose funds are deposited. The first carbon copy shall go to the court before which the person recognized is to appear and the second shall remain in the receipt book. The officer with whom cash was so deposited shall deliver the same, along with the first carbon copy of the receipt, to the court before which the person recognized is to appear, or to the clerk of such court, if authorized by law to receive the same, who shall give him an official receipt therefor. 
(c)  If there is no default in the observation of the conditions of the recognizance given under this section, or if there is default and it is a case which may be tried in the absence of the defendant, and he is so tried, and if, upon the trial of the case, the defendant is found not guilty, the money deposited under this section shall be refunded to the person making such deposit, or upon his order. If, however, the defendant is found guilty, the court trying the case shall apply the money, or so much thereof as may be necessary, to the payment of such fine and costs as may be adjudged against the defendant and the residue thereof, if any, shall be paid over to the person making such deposit, or upon his order. If there is an appeal from the judgment of the court trying any such case, the money so deposited shall be paid over by such court to the clerk of the court to which such an appeal is taken. 
(d)  If there is default in any such recognizance, and if the case is not tried in the absence of the defendant, the forfeiture shall be noted of record and proceedings had thereon as provided by law, and the money so deposited shall be held subject to the order of the court upon the final disposition of such proceeding. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance or resolution of the city or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or if any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, the violation of any such provision of such Code or other ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall, unless otherwise specifically provided, constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Whenever it is provided that any violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance or resolution of the city or any rule, regulation or other referred to in subsection (a) above constitutes a Class 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  For a Class 2 misdemeanor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  For a Class 3 misdemeanor, by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(3)  For a Class 4 misdemeanor, by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  Except where otherwise provided, every day any violation of such Code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city or such rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1971, § 6-1; Ord. No. 92-1700-480, 12-1-92) 
State Law reference- Classification of misdemeanors and punishment therefor, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-9, 18.2-11; authority of city to provide penalties for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-901; authority of court trying case, upon conviction, to require bond conditioned that the person convicted will not violate the ordinance for the breach of which he was convicted for a period of not more than one year, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-902; injunctive relief for continuing violations of ordinances, Code of Virginia § 15.1-905. 
Sec. 1-13. - Liability of corporations, etc., and agents for violations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment, as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization, for the violation by it of any provision of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order of any such person. 
(Code 1971, § 6-2) 
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of the remainder of this Code. 
(Code 1971, § 1-3) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 9-16 et seq.; resisting, obstructing, etc. city officers or employees or work for city, § 17-5; falsification or destruction of public records, § 17-6; police, Ch. 18; taxation, Ch. 22; zoning administrator, § 31-44; board of zoning appeals, § 31-48 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Elections. 
    Elections to the offices of mayor and city council members shall occur in even years on the date set by the Commonwealth of Virginia for November general elections. 
(Ord. No. 06-1700-809, § 1c., 7-18-06) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-1700-809, §§ 1a.-1c., adopted July 18, 2006, reorganized Art. I as follows: subsection 1a. deleted § 2-10; subsection 1b. renumbered existing §§ 2-1-2-9 as 2-2-2-10 respectively; and 1c. added a new § 2-1. These actions are effective July 1, 2007, pending approval of the 2007 session of the General Assembly. 
Sec. 2-2. - Voting places. 
    The voting place for Precinct One in the city is the Manassas Park High School, located at 8200 Euclid Avenue. The voting place for Precinct Two in the city is the Manassas Park Community Center in Costello Park, located at 99 Adams Street. The voting place for Precinct Three in the city is the Manassas Park City Hall Building, located at One Park Center Court. 
    A central absentee voter precinct created for the purpose receiving, counting, and recording absentee ballots cast in the city is located in the Manassas Park City Hall Building. 
(Code 1971, § 2-1; Ord. No. 85-1700-272A, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 02-1700-695, 12-3-02; Ord. No. 05-1700-775, § 2, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 05-1700-777, §§ 1, 2, 3-8-05; Ord. No. 06-1700-809, § 1b., 7-18-06; Ord. No. 15-1700-964, § 2, 2-24-15) 
Charter reference- Elections, § 4.1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-3. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the following thirtieth day of June. 
(Code 1971, § 8-2; Ord. No. 06-1700-809, § 1b., 7-18-06) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 2-1. 
Cross reference- Tax year, § 22-1. 
State Law reference- Uniform fiscal year and fiscal year accounting procedures for cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2500 et seq. 
Sec. 2-4. - Annual audit. 
    There shall be an annual audit of the financial and administrative affairs of the city, by a qualified and competent certified public accountant. 
(Code 1971, § 8-3; Ord. No. 06-1700-809, § 1b., 7-18-06) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 2-1. 
Sec. 2-5. - Depositories of city monies to post bond. 
    The city treasurer shall require any depository of city monies to post bond to the maximum amount of any monies on deposit, less that secured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The approval of such bonds shall be vested in the council. 
(Code 1971, § 8-4; Ord. No. 06-1700-809, § 1b., 7-18-06) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 2-1. 
Sec. 2-6. - Execution of deeds and other instruments requiring use of seal. 
    All deeds for the conveyance or exchange of the property of the city, and all agreements or other instruments requiring the seal of the city to be affixed thereto shall, when authorized by the council, be executed in the name of the city by the mayor and the seal of the city shall be affixed thereto and attested by the clerk. 
(Code 1971, § 2-3; Ord. No. 06-1700-809, § 1b., 7-18-06) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 2-1. 
Charter reference- Authority of city clerk with respect to city seal, § 3.7. 
Sec. 2-7. - Signing of warrants or checks. 
    All warrants or checks for the disbursement of city funds shall be signed by the mayor, the city clerk or an authorized member of the city council and shall be countersigned by the city treasurer or deputy treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 76-1700-91, § 13, 12-21-76; Ord. No. 03-1700-727, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 06-1700-809, § 1b., 7-18-06) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 2-1. 
Sec. 2-8. - Procedures for processing checks returned to city for insufficient funds. 
    The following procedures are hereby established for processing checks returned to the city for insufficient funds: 
(1)  If any check or other means of payment tendered to the city in the course of its duties is not paid by the financial institution on which it is drawn because (i) of insufficient funds in the account of the drawer, (ii) no account is in the name of the drawer, or (iii) the account of the drawer is closed, and the check or other means of payment is returned to the city unpaid, the amount thereof shall be charged to the person on whose account it was received, and his liability and that of his sureties shall be as if he had never offered any such payment. 
A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) or the amount of any costs, whichever is greater, shall be charged to the person or firm that utters, publishes or passes any check, draft or order for payment of taxes or any other sums due to the city, which is subsequently returned to the city treasurer for insufficient funds or because there is no account or the account has been closed, or because such check, draft or order was returned because of a stop-payment order placed in bad faith on the check, draft or order by the drawer. This fee shall be in addition to any penalty provided by law, except the penalty imposed by section 58.1-12 of the Code of Virginia shall not apply. 
(2)  The service for which the unpaid check or other means of payment was rendered shall be discontinued immediately or other appropriate action taken, as applicable. The amount due pursuant to subsection 2-8(1) above shall be presented to the city treasurer in the form of cash, money order or certified check for prompt resumption of service; otherwise service will be resumed once payment of this amount has been received by the city from the financial institution on which the check or other means of payment has been drawn. 
(Ord. No. 76-1700-88, 8-17-76; Ord. No. 78-1700-120, 6-6-78; Ord. No. 82-1700-202, 8-17-82; Ord. No. 03-1700-713, § 1, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 06-1700-809, § 1b., 7-18-06; Ord. No. 11-1700-901, § 1, 4-19-11; Ord. No. 18-1700-1011, § 1, 2-20-18) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 2-1. 
Sec. 2-9. - Applicants for city employment subject to criminal history check. 
    All applicants for employment with the city may be subject to a criminal history check. 
(Ord. No. 76-1700-90, 10-19-76; Ord. No. 06-1700-809, § 1b., 7-18-06) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 2-1. 
State Law reference- State to furnish criminal history record information for conduct of investigation of applicants for public employment, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-389. 
Sec. 2-10. - Holidays for employees. 
    The holiday schedule for full-time employees of the city shall be as follows: New Year's Day; Lee-Jackson-King Day; Presidents Day; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Columbus Day; Veteran's Day; Thanksgiving Day; the Friday after Thanksgiving; Christmas Day; and such other days as may be approved by the governing body. If a holiday falls on Sunday, the following day shall be observed as a holiday, and if it falls on Saturday, the preceding day shall be observed as a holiday. 
(Code 1971, § 20-1; Ord. No. 99-1700-612A, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 06-1700-809, § 1b., 7-18-06) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 2-1. 
Sec. 2-11. - Members of police department, fire department, volunteer fire company and rescue squad designated as part of official safety programs and entitled to benefits under Line of Duty Act. 
    The city hereby recognizes all members of the city police department, fire department and the members of the city volunteer fire company and rescue squad as an integral part of the official safety program of the city and they shall be recognized and entitled to receive benefits under the Line of Duty Act pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 9.1-400-9.1-406, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 75-1700-68, 1-7-75) 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 9-16 et seq.; police, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 2-12. - Assessment of additional court cost to support court-related facilities, construction, renovation and maintenance. 
(a)  There shall be assessed, in addition to any other fees prescribed by law, as a part of the cost incident to each criminal or traffic case filed in the courts which serve the city the sum of two dollars ($2.00). 
(b)  The assessment levied by subsection (a) above shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed and remitted monthly to the treasurer of the city. Such funds shall be held by the treasurer of the city subject to disbursements by city council for the construction, renovation or maintenance of courthouse or jail and court-related facilities and to defray increases in the cost of heating, cooling, electricity, and ordinary maintenance, pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 17.1-281. 
(Ord. No. 90-1700-427, § 19-4-90) 
Sec. 2-13. - Assessment of courthouse security fee. 
(a)  There shall be assessed, in addition to any other fees prescribed by law, as part of the cost incident to each criminal or traffic case filed in the district or Circuit Courts which serve the city, in which the defendant is convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(b)  The assessment levied by subsection (a) above shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the case is heard and remitted monthly to the treasurer of the city subject to appropriation by the governing body to the sheriff's office for the funding of courthouse security personnel, pursuant to the provisions of section 53.1-120, Code of Virginia (1950). 
(Ord. No. 02-1700-269, 7-2-02; Ord. No. 03-1700-721, § 1, 8-19-03; Ord. No. 07-1700-829, § 1, 5-15-07) 
Sec. 2-14. - Assessment of processing fee on individuals admitted to the Prince William-Manassas Regional Adult Detention Center following conviction of a crime. 
(a)  There shall be assessed, in addition to any other fees prescribed by law, and as part of the cost incident to processing arrested persons into the Prince William-Manassas Regional Adult Detention Center following conviction, a processing fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  The assessment levied by subsection (a) above shall be ordered as part of court costs collected by the clerk of court, deposited into the account of the city treasurer, and used by the Prince William-Manassas Regional Adult Detention Center to defray the costs of processing arrested persons. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-723, § 1, 8-19-03) 
Sec. 2-15. - Assessment for law library as part of costs in civil actions. 
(a)  There shall be assessed, in addition to any other fees prescribed by law, as part of the cost incident to each civil action case filed in the district or circuit courts which serve the city, in which the defendant is convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance, the sum of two dollars ($2.00). 
(b)  The assessment levied by subsection (a) above shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed, and remitted to the treasurer of such county, city or town, and held by such treasurer subject to disbursement by the governing body for the acquisition of (i) law books, law periodicals and computer legal research services, computer terminals for off-site placement to maximize access to the law library by the public, and (ii) equipment for the establishment, use and maintenance of a law library which shall be open for the use of the public at hours convenient to the public. In addition the disbursement may include compensation to be paid to librarians and other necessary staff for the maintenance of such library and acquisitions of suitable quarters for such library. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 42.1-70, Code of Virginia (2002). 
(Ord. No. 09-1700-880, § 1, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 2-16. - Assessment of $5.00 on each criminal and traffic case to fund costs of electronic summons system. 
(a)  The sum of five dollars ($5.00) is hereby assessed by the city as part of the costs in each criminal or traffic case filed in the courts of the 31st Judicial District or the 31st Judicial Circuit in which the defendant is charged with a violation of any statute or ordinance. 
(b)  The assessment levied by subsection (a) above shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed, remitted to the city treasurer, and held by the city treasurer subject to disbursements by the governing body to the city's police department solely to fund software, hardware, and associated equipment costs for the implementation and maintenance of an electronic summons system. 
(Ord. No. 15-1700-965, § 1, 3-3-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-1700-965, § 1, adopted March 3, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 2-14. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as § 2-16. 
Secs. 2-17-2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-1700-707, adopted April 1, 2003, changed the title of art. II, previously titled City Council. 
Charter reference- City council generally, § 3.1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-23. - When regular meetings held. 
    The governing body shall hold its regular meetings on the third Tuesday of each month, except when such date falls upon a holiday, in which event the meeting shall be held on the next business day. Regular meetings will begin at 7:00 p.m. and will follow the order of proceedings established pursuant to section 2-39 of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 2-4; Ord. No. 00-1700-616, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 04-1700-753, § 1, 7-20-04) 
Charter reference- Council to meet at least once each month, § 3.6. 
Cross reference- Disrupting meetings of city council, § 17-14. 
Sec. 2-24. - Notice of special meetings. 
    Notice of special meetings of the council shall be given by the city clerk or his designee to each member of the council. Such notice shall state the purpose for which the meeting is being called. 
(Code 1971, § 2-6) 
Charter reference- Call and notice of special council meetings, § 3.6. 
Sec. 2-25. - Where meetings held. 
    All meetings of the council shall be held in the council chambers or at such place as may be provided by the council. 
(Code 1971, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-26. - Meetings open to public. 
    All regularly constituted meetings of the council shall be open to the public, except that executive sessions and closed meetings may be held pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3711. 
(Code 1971, § 2-7) 
Charter reference- Ordinances, resolutions, etc., to be adopted at meeting open to the public, § 3.6(d). 
Sec. 2-27. - Agenda for meetings. 
    The council may prescribe the procedure for the establishment of an agenda for its meetings. 
(Code 1971, § 2-8) 
Secs. 2-28-2-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF PROCEDURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Council to establish its own rules of procedure, § 3.6. 

Sec. 2-36. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the members of the governing body in office shall constitute a quorum and have the power to transact all business which shall come before the council. 
(Code 1971, § 2-9; Ord. No. 03-1700-707, 4-1-03) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 3.6(c). 
Sec. 2-37. - Procedure in absence of quorum. 
    In the event a majority of the members of the governing body fail to attend within fifteen (15) minutes after the time appointed for a meeting, the city clerk shall enter the names of those present upon the record and they shall adjourn for want of a quorum. 
(Code 1971, § 2-10; Ord. No. 03-1700-707, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 2-38. - Member absenting self from meeting. 
    At any meeting of the governing body, after a member has been recorded as present, he shall not, without the permission of the presiding officer, absent himself from such meeting until its adjournment. 
(Code 1971, § 2-11; Ord. No. 03-1700-707, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 2-39. - Order of proceedings at regular meetings. 
    The order of proceedings at regular meetings of the governing body shall be established by resolution of the governing body. 
(Code 1971, § 2-12; Ord. No. 86-1700-327A, 3-18-86; Ord. No. 96-1700-547, 7-23-96; Ord. No. 00-1700-616, § 2, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 03-1700-707, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 04-1700-753, § 2, 7-20-04) 
Sec. 2-40. - Journal of proceedings. 
(a)  A journal shall be kept of the governing body's proceedings and, at the request of any member present, the yeas and nays shall be recorded on any question. At the next meeting the proceedings shall be read and signed by the person who was presiding when the previous meeting adjourned or, if he is not then present, by the person presiding when they were read. 
(b)  The journal of the proceedings of the governing body shall be open to inspection by the public. 
(Code 1971, § 2-13; Ord. No. 03-1700-707, 4-1-03) 
Charter reference- City clerk to keep journal of council proceedings, § 3.7. 
Sec. 2-41. - Form of petitions, etc., addressed to the governing body. 
    All petitions, resolutions and reports addressed to the governing body shall be in writing and shall be in respectful language. 
(Code 1971, § 2-14; Ord. No. 03-1700-707, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 2-42. - Requirements as to remarks and debates. 
    All remarks and debates in governing body meetings shall be regular, impersonal and pertinent to the issue. 
(Code 1971, § 2-15; Ord. No. 03-1700-707, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 2-43. - Limitation on nonmembers speaking to council. 
    No person not a member of the council shall speak to the council without first obtaining the permission of the council. 
(Code 1971, § 2-16) 
Sec. 2-44. - Listing and report of unfinished business. 
    All business unfinished at a meeting of the council shall be listed and reported at the next regular meeting by the city clerk. 
(Code 1971, § 2-17) 
Sec. 2-45. - Application of rules set out in Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised. 
    The proceedings of the governing body, except as otherwise provided in this division, shall be conducted according to the rules set out in Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised. 
(Code 1971, § 2-18; Ord. No. 00-1700-616, § 3, 1-18-00) 
Secs. 2-46-2-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ORDINANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Required vote for passage of ordinances, § 3.6. 

Sec. 2-57. - Numbering. 
    All ordinances of the city shall be consecutively numbered in annual series, the number of a particular ordinance to consist of the year in which passed and the consecutive number of the ordinance. 
(Code 1971, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-58. - Posting. 
    All ordinances passed by the council shall be posted, for a period of thirty (30) days after passage, on the bulletin board located in the lobby of the city hall. 
(Code 1971, § 2-19; Ord. No. 94-1700-519, 12-20-94) 
Sec. 2-59. - Effective date. 
    All ordinances passed by the council shall be in effect upon the date set forth therein or, if no date is specified, ten (10) days after enactment. 
(Code 1971, § 2-20) 
Sec. 2-60. - Ordinance book. 
(a)  The city clerk shall enter in a book copies of all ordinances passed by the council. The book in which ordinances are thus entered shall be known as the "Ordinances at Large of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia" and shall be indexed. 
(b)  The city clerk shall write an the first page of every ordinance entered in the book mentioned in this section, if the same has been amended or repealed, the words "amended" or "repealed," as the case may be, with a reference to the page of the ordinance book where the amending or repealing ordinance can be found. 
(Code 1971, §§ 2-31, 2-32) 
Secs. 2-61-2-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY MANAGER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- City manager designated as city officer, § 3.1; authority of council to appoint city manager, § 3-2(3); city manager generally, § 3.9 et seq. 

Sec. 2-72. - General powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall exercise administrative supervision and control over all departments of the city government and have general supervision over all improvements, works and services. He shall also perform such duties as may be required by the provisions of this Code, the Charter, and the Code of Virginia or by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 76-1700-91, § 10, 12-21-76) 
Sec. 2-73. - Duties with respect to city property. 
    The city manager shall be the custodian of all property belonging to the city, such as buildings, lands, equipment, machinery and personal property of any kind whatsoever, except property the custody of which is vested in some other officer by the Charter or other provisions of this Code. It shall be his duty to maintain an inventory of such properties and to report to the council, at least once a year, as to the condition of same. The use, rental, loan or lease of municipal property shall be the sole responsibility of the city manager and the responsibility for collection of rent or a service charge or fee for employment of any item of city property shall be the manager's. The manager shall keep all city properties adequately insured for such amounts as shall be approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 76-1700-91, § 11, 12-21-76) 
Sec. 2-74. - Attendance at council meetings; recommendations to council. 
    The city manager shall attend all meetings of the council, unless excused by the mayor, and recommend to the council, for adoption, such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient. 
(Ord. No. 76-1700-91, § 12, 12-21-76) 
Sec. 2-75. - Authority with respect to purchases. 
    The city manager shall be authorized to approve purchase orders or construction change orders up to the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), without approval of the governing body. This shall not be construed to include payrolls, utility bills, debt service or other legal obligations of the city. In cases of emergency, the ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) limit shall not apply, but the governing body shall be apprised of the emergency as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. 76-1700-91, § 14, 12-21-76; Ord. No. 86-1700-327A, 3-18-86; Ord. No. 97-1700-558, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 02-1700-685, § 1, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 2-76. - Termination of employment. 
(a)  The city council shall render at least two (2) weeks notice of termination of employment to the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager shall submit at least two (2) weeks notice prior to leaving the position. 
(c)  For the purposes of computing compensation for annual leave due and any unused sick leave, the city manager shall, upon termination of his employment, be considered a city employee and shall be subject to the relevant provisions of the then-current personnel policy for city employees. 
(Ord. No. 76-1700-91, § 3, 12-21-76; Ord. No. 04-1700-737, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 2-77. - Deputy city manager. 
    [The governing body of the City of Manassas Park hereby:] 
(1)  Designates the deputy city manager as the acting city manager, fully qualified to perform the duties of the office of city manager, in cases of the long-term absence (for periods exceeding ten (10) days), disability, death or resignation of the city manager; 
(2)  Ratifies any and all actions taken by the deputy city manager while serving as the acting city manager; 
(3)  Establishes a stipend to be paid to the deputy city manager while serving as the acting city manager in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per week in addition to his regular salary as deputy city manager, which regular salary shall reflect any and all adjustments for cost-of-living allowances and/or merit raises for the position of deputy city manager; and 
(4)  Agrees that at any time when the deputy city manager is not serving as the acting city manager, for whatever reason, he shall revert back to his status as deputy city manager and shall continue to receive his regular salary as such, which regular salary shall reflect any and all adjustments for cost-of-living allowances and/or merit raises for the position of deputy city manager. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-771, 11-23-04; Ord. No. 04-1700-773, 12-21-04) 
Secs. 2-78-2-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY ATTORNEY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- City attorney designated as city officer, § 3.1. 

Sec. 2-89. - Establishment of office; appointment and term. 
    The office of the city attorney is hereby established. The city attorney shall be appointed by the council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. 
(Code 1971, § 2-21) 
Charter reference- Authority to appoint, and qualifications of, city attorney, § 3.2(6). 
Sec. 2-90. - Attendance at council meetings. 
    The city attorney shall, when requested, attend any council meeting. 
(Code 1971, § 2-22) 
Sec. 2-91. - Compensation generally. 
    In addition to the annual retainer paid the city attorney by way of salary, he shall have additional compensation for all special services rendered by the council, in such amount as may be agreed upon by the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 2-23) 
Sec. 2-92. - Reimbursement for expenses. 
    From time to time, the city attorney shall present for payment any actual outlay or expense which the performance of his duties has entailed. 
(Code 1971, § 2-24) 
Secs. 2-93-2-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY CLERK[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- City clerk designated as city officer, § 3-1; city clerk generally, § 3.7. 

Sec. 2-104. - Creation of office; appointment and term. 
    The office of city clerk is hereby created. The city clerk shall be appointed by the council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. 
(Code 1971, § 2-25) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to appoint a city clerk, § 3.7. 
Sec. 2-105. - Creation of office of deputy clerk. 
    There is hereby created the office of deputy city clerk. 
(Code 1971, § 2-30) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to create offices, § 3.2(3). 
Sec. 2-106. - General duties. 
(a)  The city clerk shall keep an accurate journal of the proceedings of the council. He shall file and preserve all papers which may come into his hands as clerk, and shall attest and publish, as clerk, all ordinances or other papers or proceedings required by the council to be published. 
(b)  In addition to the books of account and records specifically provided for, the city clerk shall keep such other books and records as may be necessary to the discharge of the functions of his office. 
(Code 1971, §§ 2-27, 2-28) 
Sec. 2-107. - Attendance at council meetings. 
    The city clerk shall attend every meeting of the council, unless excused by the mayor. 
(Code 1971, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-108. - Examination and audit of clerk's books and papers. 
    The books and papers of the city clerk shall, at all times, be subject to examination and audit by the city council or its designated representative. 
(Code 1971, § 2-29) 
Secs. 2-109-2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CITY TREASURER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- City treasurer designated as city officer, § 3.1. 

Sec. 2-121. - General duties. 
    The city treasurer shall, collect and receive all moneys due the city for taxes, whether current or delinquent, assessments and fees or charges of every kind. He shall enforce the provisions of the ordinances of the city with regard to licenses and license taxes and shall check any or all of the records of the commissioner of the revenue and examine and audit the books of all persons whom he has reasonable cause to believe to be liable to pay a license tax. He shall have custody of all funds belonging to the city and the school board and deposit all funds coming into his hands to the account of the city or the school board, as the case may be, in such banks or shares or certificates of deposit in any building or savings and loan association lawfully authorized to do business in this state whose accounts are insured by the federal savings and loan insurance corporation; provided, however, the investment in such shares or certificates of deposit in any one such association shall not exceed such amount as shall be fully insured by the federal savings and loan insurance corporation and provided that such banks or associations be designated for the purpose by the council and the school board, respectively, subject to the laws of the commonwealth applicable to the city and the school board relative to the deposit of public funds. He shall perform such other duties, including the validating of school board warrants or checks, have such powers and be liable to such penalties as are now or may hereafter be prescribed by law or ordinance. He shall have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city or in its possession in a fiduciary capacity, unless otherwise provided by the Charter or by law, ordinance or the terms of any trust, and shall be responsible for the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration and exchange. 
Sec. 2-122. - Deputy. 
    The deputy city treasurer shall be appointed by the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-759, § 1, 8-17-04) 
Sec. 2-123. - Bond. 
    The city treasurer shall furnish a bond payable to the city in such amount as the council may prescribe. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful and true performance of all the duties placed upon the treasurer by the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 2-35) 
Charter reference- Official bonds, §§ 3.2(5), 5.1. 
Sec. 2-124. - Reports and budget request. 
    The city treasurer shall report to the council as requested and shall submit his annual budget request to the council before its submission to the state. 
Sec. 2-125. - Investment of idle funds. 
(a)  The city treasurer is authorized to invest idle funds whenever such funds are available subject to the approvals contained herein. 
(b)  The investments authorized herein are to be made with the written authorization of the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 78-1700-121, 6-6-78; Ord. No. 82-1700-200, 8-16-82; Ord. No. 01-1700-676, § 1, 7-17-01) 
Sec. 2-126. - Preparation of investment plan; reports. 
    The city treasurer shall: 
(1)  Prepare a formal investment plan, to be submitted annually to the governing body on or before July 1 of each year. The investment plan shall provide projected cash flow, the level of anticipated investments, and projected earnings during the ensuing fiscal year. 
(2)  Prepare an investment report, to be presented to the governing body by the fifteenth of each month, which report shall detail the amount of funds invested on behalf of the city and the school board, the location of such investment, the return expected on the investment, the date on which the deposit or investment was made, the date on which the deposit or investment is expected to mature, the name of the financial institution in which the funds have been deposited, and the extent to which those funds are insured or guaranteed. 
(Ord. No. 90-1700-421, §§ 1-3, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 01-1700-676, § 2, 7-17-01) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 90-1700-421, §§ 1-3, adopted May 15, 1990, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as § 2-126 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-127. - Authority to accept payment by commercially acceptable means; service charge. 
(a)  In accordance with section 2.2-614.1 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, the treasurer is authorized to accept payment of local taxes and other fees, penalties and interest by use of any commercially acceptable means, including but not limited to checks, credit cards, debit cards, and electronic fund transfers; and 
(b)  The treasurer shall add to any amount due to the city a sum not to exceed the amount charged to the city for acceptance of any payment by a means that incurs a charge to the city or the amount negotiated and agreed to in a contract with the city, whichever is less. The treasurer is authorized to investigate credit card entities and determine those that are responsible, efficient and capable of cooperating with the city for the collection of local taxes and other fees, and to establish a list of credit cards so determined that may be accepted for payment of local taxes and other fees, penalties and interest. 
(Ord. No. 92-1700-454, 3-3-92; Ord. No. 18-1700-1011, § 2, 2-20-18) 
Secs. 2-128-2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNING COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivision of land, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Local planning, Code of Virginia, Title 15.1, Chapter 11 (§ 15.1-427 et seq.). 

Sec. 2-141. - Created. 
    A city planning commission is hereby created. 
(Code 1971, § 2-44) 
Cross reference- Subdivision of land, ch. 21; zoning, ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Local planning; duty to create local planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210. 
Sec. 2-142. - Composition; appointment, qualifications and terms of members. 
    A local planning commission shall consist of not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) members, appointed by the governing body, all of whom shall be residents of the locality, qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development; provided, that at least one-half (1/2) of the members so appointed shall be owners of real property. The local governing body may require each member of the commission to take an oath of office. One (1) member of the commission may be a member of the governing body of the locality; and one (1) member may be a member of the administrative branch of government of the locality. The term of each of these two (2) members shall be coextensive with the term of office to which he has been elected or appointed, unless the governing body, at the first regular meeting each year, appoints others to serve as its representative. The remaining members of the commission first appointed shall serve respectively for terms of one (1) year, two (2) years, three (3) years and four (4) years divided equally or as nearly equal as possible between the membership. Subsequent appointments shall be for terms of four (4) years each. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term only. Members may be removed for malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1971, § 2-45; Ord. No. 79-1700-130, 2-6-79; Ord. No. 96-1700-547a, 8-6-96; Ord. No. 02-1700-691, § 1, 9-3-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
Sec. 2-143. - Functions, powers, duties and limitations. 
    The planning commission shall have the functions, powers and duties, and be subject to the limitations, which are prescribed by law, particularly those provided for in Code of Virginia, Title 15.2, Chapter 22, Articles 2 and 3. 
(Code 1971, § 2-46; Ord. No. 02-1700-691, § 1, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 2-144. - Where records kept. 
    All records of the planning commission shall be kept at the city office. 
(Code 1971, § 2-47) 
Secs. 2-145-2-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07-1700-830, § 1, adopted May 15, 2007, amended the title of art. IX to read as herein set out. The former title was "Industrial Development Authority." 

Sec. 2-156. - Created; name. 
    There is hereby created a political subdivision of the commonwealth, the name of which shall be the "Economic Development Authority of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia". 
(Ord. No. 75-1700-70, §§ 1, 2, 2-18-75; Ord. No. 80-1700-156, 5-20-80; Ord. No. 07-1700-830, § 1, 5-15-07) 
Sec. 2-157. - Powers. 
    The authority created by section 2-156 above shall have such public and corporate powers as set forth in the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act, constituting Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4900 et seq., as amended, including, but not limited to, the following powers together with all powers incidental thereto or necessary for the performance of those hereinafter stated: 
(a)  To sue and be sued and to prosecute and defend, at law or in equity, in any court having jurisdiction of the subject matter and of the parties. 
(b)  To adopt and use a corporate seal and to alter the same at pleasure. 
(c)  To enter into contracts; however, any written contract of the authority shall contain provisions addressing the issue of whether attorney's fees shall be recoverable by the prevailing party in the event the contract is subject to litigation. 
(d)  To acquire, whether by purchase, exchange, gift, lease or otherwise, and to improve, maintain, equip and furnish one or more authority facilities including all real and personal properties which the board of directors of the authority may deem necessary in connection therewith and regardless of whether any such facilities shall then be in existence. 
(e)  To lease to others any or all of its facilities and to charge and collect rent therefor and to terminate any such lease upon the failure of the lessee to comply with any of the obligations thereof; and to include in any such lease, if desired, a provision that the lessee thereof shall have options to renew such lease or to purchase any or all of the leased facilities, or that upon payment of all of the indebtedness of the authority it may lease or convey any or all of its facilities to the lessee thereof with or without consideration. 
(f)  To sell, exchange, donate, and convey any or all of its facilities or properties whenever its board of directors shall find any such action to be in furtherance of the purposes for which the authority was organized. 
(g)  To issue its bonds for the purpose of carrying out any of its powers including specifically, but without intending to limit any power conferred by this section or this article, the issuance of bonds to provide long-term financing of any pollution control facility, whether any such facility was constructed prior to or after the enactment hereof or the receipt of a commitment from an authority to undertake financing pursuant hereto, unless the major part of the proceeds of such bonds will be used to redeem any prior long-term financing of such facility other than financings pursuant to this chapter or any similar law. 
(h)  As security for the payment of the principal of and interest on any bonds so issued and any agreements made in connection therewith, to mortgage and pledge any or all of its facilities or any part or parts thereof, whether then owned or thereafter acquired, and to pledge the revenues therefrom or from any part thereof or from any loans made by the authority. 
(i)  To employ and pay compensation to such employees and agents, including attorneys, and real estate brokers whether engaged by the authority or otherwise, as the board of directors shall deem necessary in carrying on the business of the authority. 
(j)  To exercise all powers expressly given the authority by the governing body and to establish bylaws and make all rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, deemed expedient for the management of the authority's affairs. 
(k)  To appoint an industrial advisory committee or similar committee or committees to advise the authority, consisting of such number of persons as it may deem advisable. Such persons may be compensated such amount per regular, special, or committee meeting as may be approved by the appointing authority, not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting day, and may be reimbursed for necessary traveling and other expenses incurred while on the business of the authority. 
(l)  To borrow money and to accept contributions, grants and other financial assistance from the United States of America and agencies or instrumentalities thereof, the commonwealth, or any political subdivision, agency, or public instrumentality of the commonwealth, for or in aid of the construction, acquisition, ownership, maintenance or repair of the authority facilities, for the payment of principal of any bond of the authority, interest thereon, or other cost incident thereto, or in order to make loans in furtherance of the purposes of this article of such money, contributions, grants, and other financial assistance, and to this end the authority shall have the power to comply with such conditions and to execute such agreements, trust indentures, and other legal instruments as may be necessary, convenient or desirable and to agree to such terms and conditions as may be imposed. 
(m)  To make loans or grants to any person, partnership, association, corporation, business, or governmental entity in furtherance of the purposes of this article including for the purposes of promoting economic development, provided that such loans or grants shall be made only from revenues of the authority which have not been pledged or assigned for the payment of any of the authority's bonds, and to enter into such contracts, instruments, and agreements as may be expedient to provide for such loans and any security therefor. The authority may also be permitted to forgive loans or other obligations if it is deemed to further economic development. The word "revenues" as used in this subsection includes contributions, grants and other financial assistance, as set out in subsection (l) above. 
    The authority shall not have power to operate any facility as a business other than as lessor and shall not have the power to operate any single- or multifamily housing facilities. However, the authority shall have the power to apply for, establish, operate and maintain a foreign-trade zone in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 62.1-159 et seq., as amended. Any meeting held by the board of directors at which formal action is taken shall be open to the public. 
    No industrial development authority or economic development authority that has not been created by the governing body shall finance facilities, except pollution-control facilities, within the boundaries of the city, unless the governing body concurs with the inducement resolution adopted by the authority, and shows such concurrence in a duly adopted resolution. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing contained herein shall be deemed to invalidate or otherwise impair any existing financing by an authority or the financing of any facilities for which application has been made to an authority prior to July 1, 1981. 
(Ord. No. 75-1700-70, § 1, 2-18-75; Ord. No. 89-1700-401, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 07-1700-830, § 1, 5-15-07) 
Sec. 2-158. - Where records to be kept. 
    All records of the economic development authority shall be kept at the city office. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07-1700-830, § 1, adopted May 15, 2007, retitled Art. IX and amended §§ 2-156 and 2-157 to reflect the change from industrial development authority to economic development authority. At the editor's discretion and with the approval of the city, § 2-158 also was amended to eliminate conflict with the previous provisions. 
ARTICLE X. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROJECTS PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-159. - Planning commission to prepare and revise annually. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the planning commission, in cooperation with the planning division of the city manager's office, to prepare and revise annually a program of capital improvement projects for the ensuing five-year period, and to submit the program to the city manager annually, at such time as he shall direct. 
(b)  The program of capital improvement projects shall be based upon the city's comprehensive plan. 
(c)  In the preparation of each program of capital improvement projects, the planning commission shall consult with the city manager, the school board and superintendent of schools, the heads of departments and interested citizens and organizations, and shall hold such public hearings as it shall deem necessary, or as otherwise required by law. 
(d)  The program of capital improvement projects shall include, as the basis of the capital budget for the city, the planning commission's recommendations, estimates of costs of each project, and the method or methods of financing each project to be undertaken. 
(Ord. No. 82-1700-201, 8-17-82) 
Sec. 2-160. - Submission of capital improvement needs by each department, commission or board. 
    All capital improvement program material will be distributed by the city manager to each department, board or commission, including the school board, on the first working day of September. Each department, board or commission shall submit to the planning and zoning administrator, no later than the first working day of November, a detailed list of all immediate and long-range capital improvement needs or projects of its own department, commission or board; cost estimates of each need or project listed; the potential sources of funding for each need or project listed; and its recommendation as to the priority and timing of each need or project listed. 
(Ord. No. 82-1700-201, 8-17-82; Ord. No. 86-1700-329, 4-1-86) 
Sec. 2-161. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 86-1700-329, adopted April 1, 1986, deleted § 2-161, which pertained to the treasurer's report on the city's financial condition and derived from Ord. No. 82-1700-201, adopted Aug. 17, 1982. 
Sec. 2-162. - Submittal to city council. 
(a)  At the same time that the city manager submits the annual operating budget, the city manager shall submit to the council a program of proposed capital improvement projects including schools, previously acted upon by the planning commission, as provided in section 2-159 of this Code, for the ensuing fiscal year and for the four (4) fiscal years thereafter, with the city manager's recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(b)  The city manager shall submit with the program of proposed capital improvement projects a proposed ordinance which, if enacted, would make appropriations for the capital improvement projects proposed for the ensuing fiscal year, including the capital improvement projects proposed by the school board, and any ordinance or ordinances necessary to provide the revenue required to finance the proposed projects, unless such appropriations and revenues have been included in the revenue and appropriation ordinances for the general fund or for the water and sewer enterprise fund. 
(c)  Whenever the revenue for financing any capital improvement project or projects is to be derived from the sale of bonds, the bond ordinances need not be introduced at the time of submission of the program of proposed capital improvement project, but any appropriations for any project or projects to be so financed shall be contingent upon the issuance of such bonds being authorized in accordance with 2.5 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 82-1700-201, 8-17-82) 
Sec. 2-163. - Approval of city council. 
(a)  The council shall have power to accept with or without amendments, or reject, the proposed program of capital improvement projects and proposed means of financing for the ensuing fiscal year but, except in the case of emergency and except to meet needs for capital improvements arising out of annexation of additional territory taking effect during the current or preceding fiscal year and except to meet the needs for capital improvements which could not reasonably have been foreseen at the time of adoption of the capital budget, the council shall not authorize any capital improvement project or make any appropriation therefor unless the appropriation for such project is included in the capital budget as adopted by it. 
(b)  The council shall take final action on the program of capital improvement projects and on any revenue or appropriation ordinance submitted therewith, not later than the twenty-eight (28) days after the adoption of the general fund budget. Upon approval and adoption of the program of capital improvement projects, the first year's proposals of the five-year program shall constitute the capital budget of the city of the year it is enacted. 
(c)  The council shall in no event adopt a capital budget in which the total amount of expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year exceeds the estimated receipts unless at the same time council adopts measures for providing additional revenue in the ensuing fiscal year sufficient to make up the difference. 
(d)  No appropriation for a capital improvement project contained in the capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided that, a project shall be deemed to have been abandoned if after three (3) fiscal years from the appropriation, no expenditures from or encumbrances of the appropriation for the project have been made or incurred. Any such lapsed appropriation shall be applied to the payment of any indebtedness incurred in financing the project concerned, and if there be no such indebtedness shall be available for appropriation for another project in the next year's capital budget. 
(Ord. No. 82-1700-201, 8-17-82; Ord. No. 10-1000-892, 6-15-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-1000-892 approved June 15, 2010 stated "...that the Governing Body meeting in regular session on June 15, 2010 accepts the recommendation of the Planning Commission of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia and approves the FY2011-2016 Capital Improvements Program." 
Secs. 2-164-2-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Article XI, §§ 2-171-2-175, is derived from Ord. of Jan. 18, 1983, which ordinance did not expressly amend this Code. 

Sec. 2-171. - Policy regarding competition in procurement. 
    It is the policy of the City of Manassas Park, in conformance with the Virginia Public Procurement Act, Virginia Code Annotated, section 11-35, et seq. (the act), in order to obtain high-quality goods and services at reasonable cost, that all procurement procedures be conducted in a fair and impartial manner with avoidance of any impropriety or appearance of impropriety; that all qualified vendors have access to public business and that no offeror be arbitrarily or capriciously excluded; that competition shall be sought to the maximum feasible degree and that rules relating to any contract award are to be made clear in advance of competition for the award and that specifications shall at all times reflect the procurement needs of the city and the same shall not be drawn on to favor a particular vendor. There shall be a free exchange of information with vendors and prospective contractors concerning what is sought to be procured and what is offered. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-213, § 1, 1-18-83) 
Sec. 2-172. - Procedure. 
    In furtherance of the foregoing policy, the City of Manassas Park shall follow the procedure for procurement of goods and services as set forth in and as defined by the Virginia Public Procurement Act, Virginia Code Annotated, section 11-35, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-213, § 2, 1-18-83) 
Sec. 2-173. - Responsibility for procurement. 
    The purchasing system for the City of Manassas Park shall be administered by and shall be under the direction and supervision of the city manager. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the city manager from designating a responsible person or persons to perform the duties of purchasing agent, said agent to be subject at all times to the direction of the city manager. The city manager hereby is declared to be the official of the City of Manassas Park to receive the protest of any bidder or offeror regarding any award or decision to award a contract, as specified in the act. Prior to rendering any decision regarding any protest or any contractual claim, the city manager shall first consult and obtain the advice of the city attorney regarding conformance of such protest or dispute procedure and its disposition in accordance with the terms of the act. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-213, § 3, 1-18-83) 
Sec. 2-174. - Procedure for consideration of contractual claims. 
    Any contractual claims made against the city as provided in the act shall be submitted to the city manager in writing as provided by the act. In any event, all contracts which are the subject of any contractual claim shall require, and any claimant shall submit as a condition precedent to consideration of any claim, an invoice for final payment within forty-five (45) days after completion and acceptance of the work or acceptance of the goods which are the subject of the claim. Upon receipt of any claim, the city manager shall promptly arrange to hold a hearing with the claimant in order to permit the claimant fully to present the factual and legal basis for the claim. In any event, the city manager shall render his decision regarding the claim within forty-five (45) days from the date of submission of the claim and such decision shall be in writing and shall be deemed the final decision of the city for purposes of any condition precedent to invocation of administrative procedures or institution of legal action, all as provided by the act. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-213, § 4, 1-18-83) 
Sec. 2-175. - Small purchases. 
    Competitive sealed bids and/or competitive negotiation shall not be required for single or term contracts for goods and services other than professional services if the aggregate or the sum of all phases is not expected to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); provided, however, that competition must be used wherever practicable. Competitive negotiation shall not be required for single or term contracts for professional services if the aggregate or the sum of all phases is not expected to exceed sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-213, § 5, 1-18-83; Ord. No. 90-1700-429, 12-4-90; Ord. No. 83-1700-430, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 01-1700-665, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 14-1700-956, § 1, 6-3-14) 
Secs. 2-176-2-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - CITY ASSESSOR 

Sec. 2-181. - Office created. 
    In accordance with Virginia Code 58.1-3251 (1984 Repl. Vol.), this article creates the office of the city assessor for the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. The office of the city assessor shall consist of the city assessor and such other assessors and support personnel as the city council may direct. The city assessor shall be appointed by the city council and shall enjoy such terms and conditions of employment by contract as the city council or its designated representative may direct. 
(Ord. No. 90-1700-425, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 90-1700-426, 8-21-90) 
Sec. 2-182. - General duties. 
(a)  The city assessor shall be responsible for the annual assessment and reassessment and equalization of assessment of real estate in the city, and shall value all real property and shall assess all taxes and related fees on all nonexempt real estate property within the city, in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  The city assessor shall be responsible for the supervision, training and performance of all subordinate assessors and shall bear ultimate responsibility for their official actions. 
(c)  The city assessor shall be responsible for the administration and supervision of the office of the city assessor. 
(d)  The city assessor shall be responsible to maintain full and accurate records of assessments and valuation, including, but not limited to property appraisal cards or sheets required by Virginia Code 58-1332 (1984 Repl. Vol.). These records shall be subject to review by the city council, or its representative, during regular business hours. 
(e)  In order to effect a change to a July 1 effective date for real estate assessments and a fiscal year real estate tax, the reassessment for the fiscal year 2009-2010 real estate assessments shall take place on July 1, 2009 instead of January 1, 2009. Beginning on July 1, 2009, and thereafter, the annual assessment and reassessment and equalization of assessment for real estate in the city shall have an effective date of July 1. 
(Ord. No. 90-1700-425, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 90-1700-426, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 08-1700-860, § 1, 11-18-08) 
Sec. 2-183. - Attendance at council meetings. 
    The city assessor shall attend the meetings of the city council and other public bodies as directed by the city council or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 90-1700-425, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 90-1700-426, 8-21-90) 
Sec. 2-184. - Article not to affect section 2-121. 
    This article does not affect the operation of section 2-121 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-1700-425, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 90-1700-426, 8-21-90) 
Secs. 2-185-2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - BOARD OF EQUALIZATION 

Sec. 2-201. - Board of equalization established. 
    In accordance with Virginia Code, § 58.1-3373, the governing body created a permanent board of equalization for the City of Manassas Park, Virginia on April 21, 1994. The board of equalization initially consisted of three (3) members appointed by the Circuit Court of Prince William County, Virginia as follows: one member was appointed for a term of one (1) year, one (1) member was appointed for a term of two (2) years, and one (1) member was appointed for a term of three (3) years, with each term expiring on June 30 of the appropriate year. Thereafter, upon expiration of each term, their successors have been and shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. Effective July 1, 2008, however, the board of equalization shall be increased to five (5) members, with the two additional members to be appointed by the Circuit Court of Prince William County as follows: one (1) member shall be appointed for a term to expire on June 30, 2010, and one (1) member shall be appointed for a term to expire on June 30, 2011. Thereafter, upon expiration of each additional term, their successors shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. The members of the board of equalization shall be freeholders in the city and citizens of the city. In order to be eligible for appointment, each prospective member of the board of equalization shall attend and participate in the basic course of instruction given by the department of taxation under Virginia Code § 58.1-206. Any vacancy occurring on the board of equalization shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Circuit Court of Prince William County, Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 92-1700-463, § 1, 4-21-92; Ord. No. 08-1700-844, § 1, 2-19-08) 
Sec. 2-202. - General duties. 
    All duties imposed and all powers conferred by law at the review for equalization for assessments of real estate in the city shall be exercised by a board of equalization, which shall also have the power to review all assessments and changes of assessments previously made by the city assessor, the general reassessment board or any other assessing officer, board or authority in the city in accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3250 et seq. The board of equalization shall have authority, on its own motion or upon protest as provided in this article, to change any assessment of real estate in the city, to add to the tax rolls any real estate erroneously omitted, to remove properties from tax rolls when acquired by owners not subject to taxation, and to correct errors in tax assessment records, in accordance with the policies and procedures described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-1700-463, § 1, 4-21-92) 
Sec. 2-203. - Compensation. 
    Members of the board of equalization shall receive as compensation the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per day for each full day of service. In no event shall the members of the board of equalization receive compensation for more than fifteen (15) days per assessment, which should be sufficient time for the completion of the work of the board. 
(Ord. No. 92-1700-463, § 1, 4-21-92; Ord. No. 14-1700-952, 5-20-14) 
Sec. 2-204. - Organization and assistance. 
    The board of equalization shall elect one (1) of its members as chairman and another member as secretary, and may employ necessary clerical and other assistance and call in advisors and fix their compensation, subject to the approval of the Manassas Park City Council. 
(Ord. No. 92-1700-463, § 1, 4-21-92) 
Sec. 2-205. - Hearing. 
    The board of equalization shall establish the dates and times of hearings, as may be necessary to discharge the duties imposed and to exercise the powers conferred by this article. Of each hearing, public notice shall be given at least ten (10) days before by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. 
(a)  Such notice shall inform the public that the board shall sit at the place or places and on the days named in the notice, for the purpose of equalizing real estate assessments in the city and for the purpose of hearing complaints of inequalities, when the property owners allege a lack of uniformity in assessment, or errors in acreage in such real estate assessments. 
(b)  Any owner of real property or affected taxpayer, any person with a substantial legal or equitable interest in the property involved, or any authorized representative of the city council may file a protest of any assessment affecting such property by June 1 of the calendar year for which the board was appointed, or within sixty (60) days from the date of assessment when an assessment has been made after May 1 of any year. Such protest shall be filed with the city assessor. The protest shall be transmitted within ten (10) days to the board of equalization, which shall grant appeal of the assessment or change of assessment as a matter of right, and shall accord the protestant an opportunity for hearing in person, with witnesses, by counsel, or by submission of memoranda verified under oath. The board of equalization may, in its discretion, grant an appeal and opportunity for hearing for just cause shown and on any protest filed after such date. Effective November 18, 2008, any owner of real property or affected taxpayer, any person with a substantial legal or equitable interest in the property involved, or any authorized representative of the governing body may file a protest of any assessment affecting such property by August 1 of the calendar year for which the board was appointed, or within sixty (60) days from the date of assessment when an assessment has been made after May 1 of any year. 
(c)  The board shall hear and give consideration to such complaints and equalize such assessments and shall, moreover, be charged with the especial duty of increasing as well as decreasing assessments, whether specific complaint be laid or not, if in its judgment, such a change is necessary to equalize and accomplish the end that the burden of taxation shall rest equally upon all citizens of the city. 
(d)  Hearing shall be scheduled by the board of equalization with due regard for the convenience of the protestant and with due regard for the time required by the city assessor to investigate the protest and to prepare justification of the protested assessment. 
(e)  In making the assessments or changes of assessments, the board of equalization and the city assessor shall be governed by the Constitution of Virginia, the provisions of the Code of Virginia, titles 15.2 and 58.1, the applicable provisions of other laws, and the provisions of this article. 
(f)  The board shall keep minutes of its meetings and enter in its minutes all orders made. 
(g)  The board shall have authority to summon taxpayers or their agents, or any person: (1) to furnish information relating to the real estate of any and all taxpayers; (2) to answer, under oath, all questions touching the ownership and value of real estate of any and all taxpayers, and (3) to bring before it their books of account or other papers and records containing information with respect to the valuation of real estate of the taxpayer or any other real estate subject to taxation within the city. Such summons may be served in person or by registered mail. 
(h)  Any person refusing to answer the summons of the board of equalization, to furnish information or to produce his books of account, papers or other records, as required by this article, shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, and each day's failure to answer such summons, to furnish such information or produce such books of account, papers and other records shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 92-1700-463, § 1, 4-21-92; Ord. No. 94-1700-510, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 07-1700-822, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 08-1700-860, § 2, 11-18-08) 
Sec. 2-206. - Decisions. 
(a)  The board of equalization shall determine and rule upon all protested assessments and all proposed reduced assessments within ninety (90) days from the date of hearing. All actions of the board affecting assessments of real estate in the city shall be certified by the board to the city assessor on forms prepared by and prescribed by the city assessor and shall cease as of December 31 of each year. Notice of the decision of the board of equalization shall be prepared in triplicate, and a copy shall be given to the protestant and to the affected taxpayer by the city assessor through the mails, within ten days after the decision is certified. 
(b)  The board shall hear and determine any and all such petitions and, by order, may increase, decrease or affirm the assessment of which complaint is made; and, by order, it may increase or decrease any assessment, upon its own motion. No assessment shall be increased until after the owner of the property has been notified and given an opportunity to show cause against such increase, unless such owner has already been heard. 
(c)  The board may direct the city assessor to enter upon the land book and property appraisal cards real estate which is found to have been omitted, and to cancel duplicate assessments of real estate. 
(d)  The city assessor shall make in the land book and in the property appraisal cards or sheets the changes ordered by the board and, if such changes affect the land book and the property appraisal cards or sheets for the then-current year, the city assessor may for that year make a supplemental assessment in case of an increase in valuation. In case of a decrease in valuation, the order of the board shall entitle the taxpayer to an exoneration from so much of the assessment as exceeds the proper amount, if the taxes have been paid by him and, in case the taxes have been paid, to a refund of so much of the taxes found erroneous. 
(Ord. No. 92-1700-463, § 1, 4-21-92) 
Sec. 2-207. - Appeal. 
    The city attorney or any taxpayer, aggrieved by any such order of the board, may apply to the Circuit Court for Prince William County, Virginia, for the correction and revision of such order, in the same manner and within the same time as is provided by law for the correction of erroneous assessments of real estate by any person who is aggrieved. 
(Ord. No. 92-1700-463, § 1, 4-21-92) 
ARTICLE XIV. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 98-1700-589, adopted Oct. 6, 1998, repealed former Art. XIV, §§ 2-208-2-211, in its entirety which pertained to the commissioner of the revenue and derived from Ord. No. 94-1700-520, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 1994. 

Secs. 2-208-2-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - SALE OF SURPLUS EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 2-216. - Designation of surplus equipment. 
    After a department of the city notifies the city manager that the department no longer can use properly in its operation any piece of equipment or other publicly-owned personal property ("equipment"), the equipment shall be deemed to be surplus and in accordance with the authority granted in section 2-73, the city manager may dispose of the equipment in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-1700-518, 12-6-94) 
Sec. 2-217. - Procedure for sale. 
(a)  Other use. After any equipment has been declared as surplus by any department, the city manager shall first determine whether there exists within the city any other use of the equipment or any other department of the city which may use the equipment. 
(b)  Approval. After approval of the city council, the city manager may proceed to sell the equipment. Under normal circumstances, the sale shall be either at public auction or by securing sealed bids. In exceptional circumstances, however, for reasons which shall be fully documented by the city manager, the city manager has the sole discretion to decide that certain equipment shall be sold without the requirement for public auction or sealed bids. Before publishing notice of the proposed sale of any surplus equipment, the city manager shall attempt to establish the reasonable market value of the equipment, by appraisal or otherwise. 
(c)  Notice. Notice of the time and place of sale, if by public auction, and notice of sale, if sealed bids are to be sought, shall be given by advertisement in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. The city manager shall designate the time and place of any such public auction or shall designate the time, place and manner for receipt and opening of any such sealed bids. At least thirty (30) days shall elapse between publication of such notice and the auction or the date on which sealed bids will be opened. The notice shall set forth the conditions required for the sale of the equipment, which conditions may include any of those set forth in paragraph (d) below. 
(d)  Conditions for sale. The city manager may designate any conditions to apply to the sale of any surplus equipment, including but not limited to the following conditions: 
(1)  The city manager shall have the right to establish a minimum bid requirement and shall publish such minimum bid requirement in the public notice of sale. 
(2)  City officials and city employees shall not be permitted to purchase equipment sold pursuant to this article. 
(3)  The city manager shall have the right to withdraw any piece of equipment from the sale, at any time, before the city treasurer receives full and complete consideration for the purchase of such equipment. 
(4)  Unless otherwise required, all surplus equipment shall be advertised for sale in an "as is" condition. 
(5)  The city manager shall be responsible to insure that any equipment advertised for sale under this article, which equipment was originally purchased through bond proceeds, shall first be deemed to be subject to sale by these procedures. 
(6)  In the event any of the equipment noticed for sale pursuant to this article is not sold by the designated procedure, for whatever reason, the city manager shall have the authority to dispose of the equipment as he deems appropriate, in his sole discretion. 
(e)  Transfer. 
(1)  In the event the equipment is sold at public auction, the purchaser shall pay for such equipment at the time of the auction and shall remove the equipment from the premises at the time of sale. 
(2)  In the event the equipment is sold by sealed bids, the city manager shall notify the highest bidder in writing within three (3) business days following the opening of the bids. The purchaser shall be notified to purchase the equipment and remove the equipment from the premises within ten (10) business days following the opening of the bids. 
(3)  The city manager shall be responsible to insure that the transfer of all ownership documents, is complete. 
(Ord. No. 94-1700-518, 12-6-94) 
Secs. 2-218-2-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - PARK CENTER COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-225. - Creation of authority. 
    The Park Center Community Development Authority is hereby created as a body corporate and politic and political subdivision of the commonwealth in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act [Code of Virginia, ch. 51, tit. 15.2]. The CDA shall have the powers set forth in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-820, § 1, 1-9-07) 
Sec. 2-226. - Boundaries of CDA. 
    The CDA boundaries shall initially include the property identified as tax map parcels 24-A-7, 24-A-B, 25-1-2, 25-1-3, 25-1-4 and 25-3-1B, all as more particularly depicted on the map attached as exhibit A (the "CDA district"). In accordance with § 15.2-5157 of the Act [Code of Virginia, § 15.2-5157], a copy of the ordinance creating this article shall be recorded in the land records of the Circuit Court of Prince William County for each tax map parcel in the CDA district as such CDA district exists at the time of issuance of the CDA's bonds (the "bonds") and the CDA district shall be noted on the land records of the city. The CDA board may release or exclude from the CDA district at any time before or after the issuance of the bonds certain de minimis portions of land not to exceed approximately one acre. In addition, the CDA board may release and exclude from the CDA district parcels of land with respect to which all special assessments have been paid or prepaid. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-820, § 2, 1-9-07) 
Sec. 2-227. - Facilities and services. 
    The CDA is created for the purpose of exercising the powers set forth in the Act, including financing, acquiring, constructing and developing, operating and maintaining, if necessary, certain improvements in connection with the development of the property as described in the petition and the articles of incorporation. The CDA shall have all the powers provided by the Act. The CDA shall not provide services which are provided by, or obligated to be provided by, any authority already in existence pursuant to the Act unless such authority provides the certification required by § 15.2-5155 of the Act [Code of Virginia, § 15.2-5155]. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-820, § 3, 1-9-07) 
Sec. 2-228. - Articles of incorporation. 
    Attached hereto as exhibit B are the proposed articles of incorporation of the CDA. The city manager is authorized and directed to execute and file such articles of incorporation on behalf of the governing body with the State Corporation Commission in substantially the form attached as exhibit B with such changes, including insubstantial changes to the boundary description of the CDA district described therein, as the city manager may approve. The city manager is authorized to approve such changes or corrections to the articles of incorporation prior to filing with the State Corporation Commission as do not change the purpose or function of the CDA as set forth in this article and in the petition. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-820, § 4, 1-9-07) 
Sec. 2-229. - Capital cost estimates. 
    The governing body hereby finds, in accordance with § 15.2-5103(B) of the Act [Code of Virginia, § 15.2-5103(B)], that it is impracticable to include capital cost estimates, project proposals and project service rates, except as summarized in the petition. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-820, § 5, 1-9-07) 
Sec. 2-230. - Membership of the authority. 
(a)  The powers of the CDA shall be exercised by an authority board consisting of five (5) members. 
(b)  All members of the CDA board shall be appointed by the governing body in accordance with the provisions of § 15.2-5113 of the Act [Code of Virginia, § 15.2-5113]. 
(c)  The initial members of the CDA board shall be as set forth in the articles of incorporation for the terms set forth herein. 
(d)  Each CDA board member shall receive such compensation for his or her services as a CDA board member as may be authorized from time to time by resolution of the CDA board, provided that no member shall receive compensation in excess of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per meeting attended unless authorized by resolution of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-820, § 6, 1-9-07) 
Sec. 2-231. - Plan of finance; issuance of bonds. 
(a)  The improvements, services and operations to be undertaken by the CDA as described herein and in the petition shall be funded from all or some of the following sources: 
(i)  Bonds to be issued by the CDA; 
(ii)  Special assessments to be levied pursuant to § 15.2-5158(A)(5) of the Act [Code of Virginia, § 15.2-5158(A)(5)]; and 
(iii)  Any other source of funding available to the CDA including rates, fees and charges to be levied by the CDA for the services and facilities provided or funded by the CDA. 
(b)  The bonds to be issued by the CDA will be in the maximum aggregate principal amount of twenty-three million dollars ($23,000,000.00), will have no more than a forty-year debt schedule, and will be used to pay the costs of certain infrastructure and services as described herein and in the petition, the costs of issuing the bonds and any required reserves, and interest on the bonds prior to and during construction and for a period up to one (1) year after completion. 
(c)  Any bonds issued by the CDA or any other financing arrangements entered into by the CDA will be debt of the CDA, will not be a debt or other obligation of the city and will not constitute a pledge of the faith and credit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-820, § 7, 1-9-07) 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License tax for advertising business, § 14-51; use of radios, loudspeakers, etc., on vehicles for advertising purposes, § 15-7; advertising obscene exhibitions or performances, § 16-5; posting advertising matter on utility poles or trees, § 17-37; destroying or defacing properly posted advertisements or public notices, § 17-38; general sign regulations of zoning ordinance, § 31-29. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-1-3-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 89-1700-394, enacted March 7, 1989, repealed former §§ 13-16 and 13-18-13-21, and further specified that § 13-17 remain as codified. Former §§ 13-16 and 13-18-13-20, definitions, article violations, permit requirements and bond, derived from Ord. No. 77-1000-93, adopted Jan. 4, 1977, and former § 13-21, erection over city owned property, derived from Ord. No. 78-1700-117, adopted April 11, 1978. 

Sec. 3-16. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-17. - Exemptions from article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Signs having an area of not more than two (2) square feet, the message of which is limited to conveying street numbers, the name of the premises, the name of the owner of the premises and the name of the occupant of the premises. 
(2)  Signs having an area of not more than six (6) square feet, the message of which is limited to warning of any danger, prohibition or regulation of the use of property or traffic or parking thereon, or advertising the premises for sale or rent. 
(3)  The flag of any state or nation respectfully displayed. 
(4)  Signs located on the rolling stock of common carriers or on motor vehicles or trailers bearing current license plates which are travelling or lawfully parked upon public highways, or lawfully parked upon any other premises for a period not exceeding four (4) hours, or for a longer period where the primary purpose of such parking is not the display of any sign and where the number of vehicles bearing a sign or signs of any one advertiser does not exceed one plus one more for each twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of area of the premises. 
(5)  Church or institutional bulletin boards without interior illumination having an area not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(6)  On-premises signs located inside an enclosed building and visible through a window or windows thereof where the area of such signs does not exceed twenty (20) per cent of the area of the window or windows. 
(7)  Any and all signs advocating or opposing a candidate for public office or a position on an issue. 
(8)  Signs visible only from the premises on which located or visible off the premises only through a window or windows from which they are set back at least ten (10) feet. 
(9)  Labels identifying the source, brand name or manufacturer of merchandise exhibited for sale. 
(10)  Signs indicating only the date of erection of a building and having an area not exceeding six (6) square feet. 
(11)  Signs posted by duly constituted public authorities in pursuance of their public duties. 
(Ord. No. 77-1000-93, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 77-1700-109, 10-4-77; Ord. No. 89-1700-394, 3-7-89) 
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License tax for various amusements and amusement devices, § 14-40 et seq.; obscene exhibitions and performances, § 16-4 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC DANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- License tax for dance halls, § 14-59. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate public dance halls, § 18.2-433. 

Sec. 4-16. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this article, the word "adult" means a person eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Code 1971, § 7-2) 
Sec. 4-17. - Application of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to individual public dances. 
(Code 1971, § 7-3) 
Sec. 4-18. - Violations of article. 
    Any violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
Sec. 4-19. - Permit. 
(a)  Any person proposing to hold a public dance shall obtain a permit therefor from the city manager. Application for such permit shall be filed with the city manager in such form and shall give such information as the manager may require. 
(b)  Upon the filing of an application under this section, and upon payment of a fee of two dollars ($2.00) to the city treasurer, the city manager shall issue the permit applied for, if he is satisfied that the provisions of this article will be complied with. 
(Code 1971, §§ 7-12-7-14) 
Sec. 4-20. - Applicability of rules and regulations of alcoholic beverage control board. 
    All applicable rules and regulations of the state alcoholic beverage control board shall be in full force and effect during the conduct of a public dance. 
(Code 1971, § 7-4) 
Sec. 4-21. - Rules and regulations of city manager. 
    The city manager may make and promulgate such rules and regulations, in addition to the provisions of this article, as he may deem requisite for the proper conduct of a public dance. When such rules and regulations are approved by the council and filed with the city clerk, it shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations so made and promulgated. 
(Code 1971, § 7-11) 
Sec. 4-22. - Permitted days. 
    Public dances may be held only on Friday night and Saturday night; provided, however, a public dance may be held on the evening before and the evening of any national holiday, but no public dance may be held on such holiday when such holiday falls on a Sunday. 
(Code 1971, § 7-9) 
Sec. 4-23. - Permitted hours. 
    The hours for public dances shall be between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 1:00 a.m., except on December 31 when the permitted hours shall be between 7:30 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
(Code 1971, § 7-8; Ord. No. 81-1700-184, 12-1-81) 
Sec. 4-24. - Attendance at adult dances by minors. 
(a)  No person who is not an adult may attend an adult public dance, unless such person is the spouse of an adult patron attending the dance. 
(b)  At any adult public dance, the manager or holder of the permit issued pursuant to section 7-14, pursuant to which the public dance in question is conducted, may require of any patron that he produce evidence of his age prior to his admission to the dance. 
(Code 1971, §§ 7-6, 7-7) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate frequenting of public places of amusement by minors, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-432. 
Sec. 4-25. - Conduct of patrons generally. 
    Patrons at public dances shall conduct themselves in a reasonable and orderly manner. 
(Code 1971, § 7-5) 
Sec. 4-26. - Observance of applicable state laws and ordinances. 
    In addition to the provisions of this article, all applicable state laws and provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city shall be observed by patrons at public dances at all times. 
(Code 1971, § 7-10) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, adopted March 7, 2000, amended former Ch. 5, Arts. I-V, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1971 and the following ordinances: 
Ord. No. Date 76-1700-80  1- 6-76 77-1700-108  9- 6-77 79-1700-131  2- 6-79 83-1700-212  1-18-83  
Ord. No. Date 92-1700-463a  5-19-92 92-1700-479 12- 1-92 93-1700-483  3- 2-93 93-1700-498  2- 1-94  
Cross reference- Hunting of birds or mammals on city property, § 17-39.1. 
State Law reference- Comprehensive Animal Laws, § 3.1-796.66 et seq.; offenses involving animals, § 18.2-403.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Keeping of livestock. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any livestock; any animals of the genus llama, alpaca, horse, mule, any other equines; cow, sheep, goat, pig, swine, chickens, duck, and other poultry and fowl; and similar utilitarian animals or any other livestock animal within the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-2. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-3. - Misrepresentation of animal's conditions; penalties. 
    No person shall misrepresent the physical condition of any animal at the animal's sale, trade, delivery, or other method of transfer. For the purpose of this section, misrepresentation shall include selling, trading, delivering or otherwise transferring an animal to another person with the knowledge that the animal has an infection, communicable disease, parasitic infestation, abnormality or other physical defect that is not made known to the person receiving the animal. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Misrepresentation of animal's conditions; penalties; § 3.1-796.72. 
Sec. 5-4. - Fowl at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to permit fowl kept by him or under his control to stray or escape from his premises on the streets or sidewalks or upon the property of others. Violation of this section will be a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-5. - Keeping diseased animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly own, keep or harbor in the city any animal suffering or afflicted with any infectious or contagious disease. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-6. - Cruelty to animals; trapping and/or poisoning prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Override, overdrive, overload, torture, ill-treat, abandon, willfully inflict inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beat, maim, mutilate, or kill any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; or deprive any animal of necessary sustenance, food, drink, shelter or emergency veterinary treatment; 
(2)  Willfully set on foot, instigate, engage in, or in any way further any act of cruelty to an animal; 
(3)  Carry or cause to be carried in or upon any vehicle, vessel, or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal, or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or cause any of the above things, or being the owner or custodian of such animal permit such acts to be done by another. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle. Violation of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who (i) tortures, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly and unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates or kills any animal whether belonging to himself or another; or (ii) instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act or cruelty to any animal set forth in clause (i) of this subsection; or (iii) causes any of the actions described in subdivisions (i) and (ii) of this subsection, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another; and has been within five years convicted of a violation of this subsection or subsection (a), shall be guilty of a Class 6 felony if the current violation or any previous violation of this subsection or subsection (a) resulted in the death of an animal or the euthanasia of an animal based on the recommendation of a licensed veterinarian upon determination that such euthanasia was necessary due to the condition of the animal, and such condition was a direct result of a violation of this subsection or subsection (a). 
(c)  Any person who abandons any dog, cat or other domesticated animal in any public place including the right-of-way of any public highway, road or street or on the property of another shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the word animal shall be construed to include birds and fowl. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set or bait any trap or other contrivance for the catching of game or tame animals, or to knowingly permit any such trap to be set or baited on his premises or property or to set out any poisoned bait with the intent of poisoning any game or tame animal except by the consent of the city animal control officer or state game warden. 
(f)  This section shall not prohibit authorized wildlife management activities of hunting, fishing or trapping as otherwise regulated under the Code of Virginia, including, but not limited to Title 20.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or to farming activities as provided under this title or regulations promulgated thereto. 
(g)  In addition to the penalties provided in subparagraph (a) above, the court may, in its discretion, require any person convicted of a violation of subparagraph (a) above to attend an anger management or other appropriate treatment program or obtain psychiatric or psychological counseling. The court may impose the costs of such a program or counseling upon the person convicted. 
(h)  It is unlawful for any person to kill a domestic dog or cat for the purpose of obtaining the hide, fur or pelt of the dog or cat. A violation of this subsection shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of this subsection shall constitute a Class 6 felony. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, § 3.1-796.122 
Sec. 5-7. - Disposition of dead animals. 
(a)  If any animal dies in the city, the owner or custodian of such animal shall at once dispose of the same in a manner satisfactory to the health officer. It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of a dead animal to fail to dispose of or knowingly permit any dead animal to remain unburied upon his property when offensive to the public or, having in custody any maimed, diseased, disabled or infirm animal, to leave it to lie or be in a street, road or public place. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  When the owner or custodian of a dead animal is unknown, the dead animal shall be disposed of by the city, and if its owner or custodian is subsequently ascertained, he shall be charged a fee of ten ($10.00) dollars for an animal under thirty (30) pounds, and for an animal over thirty (30) pounds, he shall be charged a fee of twenty ($20.00) dollars, in addition to the penalty imposed for violating this section. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Leaving disabled or dead animals in road, or allowing dead animals to remain unburied, § 18.2-323; disposal of dead or companion animals, § 3.1-796.121. 
Sec. 5-8. - Fee for boarding animals at city impoundment facility. 
    When an animal is voluntarily taken to the city's impoundment facility by the owner or if the animal control officer or police officer is called to impound an animal or an animal is picked up for being at large in the city, a fee will be charged for each animal. Administrative/first day fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) and a ten-dollar ($10.00) boarding fee for each additional day will be charged until the animal is adopted or is disposed of by the animal control officer in a humane way. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-9. - Noisy animal generally. 
(a)  No person shall, on his own property or on any property in which he has any interest or over which he exercised any control, keep, maintain or allow to remain any animal which sets up, causes, emits or gives vent to noise or commotion of such a character or kind as to disturb any citizen of the city in the reasonable use and enjoyment of his property or to cause any person of ordinary sensibilities any actual physical discomfort. Each day that any person maintains or keeps or permits anyone else to maintain or keep on his premises or on any property in which he has any interest, or over which he has any control any such animal or fowl, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or may have the animal removed from the premises or both. 
(c)  The keeping by any person of any animal or fowl in violation of this section shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by law. Such remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the penalty provided for the violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-10. - Bee keeping. 
(a)  No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premise within the residential area of the city as established by the zoning ordinance shall maintain an apiary or keep any bees or hive of bees thereon. 
(b)  A fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall punish any person convicted of a violation of this section. Each day any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- State code for definition, § 3.1-610.1 
Secs. 5-11-5-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 5-19. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following words and terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the following meanings: 
    Abandon : To desert, forsake, or absolutely give up an animal without having secured another owner or custodian for the animal or by failing to provide the elements of basic care for a period of five (5) consecutive days. 
    Adequate care: "Care," the responsible practice of good animal husbandry, handling, production, management, confinement, feeding, watering, protection, shelter, transportation, treatment, and when necessary, euthanasia, appropriate for the age, species, condition, size and type of the animal and the provision of veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering or impairment of health. 
    Adoption: The transfer of ownership of a dog or cat from a releasing agency to an individual. 
    Animal shelter: A facility which is used to house or contain animals and which is owned, operated, or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
    Animal control officer: Any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this article or his/ her duly authorized agent. 
    At large: To run at large or running at large or to go at large or going at large shall mean to roam, loiter, walk, run or be off the premises of the owner or custodian without being caged, physically carried or held by a leash, cord or chain by a person thoroughly capable, both physically and mentally, of controlling the animal. 
    Collar: A well-fitted device, appropriate to the age and size of the animal, attached to the animals neck in such a way as to prevent trauma or injury to the animal. 
    Custodian: Any person who has the responsibility to guard, protect or maintain another persons dog or cat or pet. 
    Destructive animal: Any animal that has frequently or habitually injured or destroyed property or performed an act, which might reasonably lead to the destruction or injury of property of any person other than the owner or custodian thereof, or any animal that has frequently or habitually turned over or torn open garbage containers. 
    Direct and immediate threat: Means any clear and imminent danger to an animal's health, safety or life. 
    Enclosure: A structure used to house or restrict animals from running at large. 
    Humane: Any action taken in consideration of and with the intent to provide for the animal's health and well-being. 
    Kennel: Any building, enclosure, or premises used, designed or arranged for the boarding, breeding, or care of, or wherein more than three (3) canines, or four (4) felines, or a combination of more than four (4) pets or domestic animals are kept, that have attained the age of four (4) months. 
    Livestock: Any animals of the genus llama, alpaca, horse, mule, and other equines; cow, sheep, goat, pig, swine, chicken, duck, and other poultry and fowl; and similar utilitarian animals or hare raised for human food or fiber; or any other individual animals specifically raised for food or fiber. 
    New owner: An individual who is legally competent to enter into a binding agreement pursuant to subdivision B-2 of the state code 3.1-796.126:1, and who adopts or receives a dog or cat from releasing agency. 
    To neuter means: For a male animal, to castrate, and for a female animal, to spay. 
    Noisy animal: Any animal that has, by loud, frequent barking, howling or crying, or other noises, caused annoyance or disturbed the peace and quiet of any person or persons in the neighborhood, as witnessed by a duly registered complaint. 
    Owner: Any person, who has a right of property in an animal, keeps or harbors an animal, has an animal in his care, or acts as custodian of an animal. 
    Unlicensed dog or cat: Any dog or cat without a valid license tag attached. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 02-1700-686, § 1, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 5-20. - Enforcement of article. 
    The animal control officers, or his/her authorized agent, police officers, or health officers shall enforce the provisions of these articles. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-20.1. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provisions of these articles shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-21. - Kennels not to be located in residential area. 
    No person shall locate, operate or maintain any kennel in the residential area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS 

Sec. 5-22. - Run at large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or the custodian of any dog to allow such dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, to run at large in the city at any time. 
(b)  Upon a person being charged for a third time in a twelve (12) month period with the offense of allowing dog to run at large, the fine shall not be prepayable, and the animal control officer shall provide written notice to the owner (if known to the animal control officer) that the dog must be neutered, if it has not already been. The owner must arrange for a veterinarian to have the dog neutered or provide the animal control officer with a notarized statement of a veterinarian identifying the dog and stating that it has been neutered. 
The animal control officer shall keep the dog in his/her custody until the neutering or proof of neutering occurs unless, in the animal control officer's reasonable opinion, the dog owner can adequately confine the dog and will neuter it or provide proof of neutering. If the owner does not arrange for neutering, provide proof of neutering, or demand trial on the charge of running at large within five (5) days after receiving the written notice, the dog shall be deemed abandoned and the animal control officer may dispose of the animal in any lawful manner. The written notice to the owner shall include this section and shall state the penalty for its violation. 
(c)  If the owner is acquitted of the running at large offense, the dog shall be released to him without being neutered. If the owner is convicted and does not provide proof of neutering, the court shall order him or her to pay the cost of the dog's neutering, and the animal control officer shall deliver the dog to a veterinarian for neutering. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-23. - Impoundment of animal running at large; adoption of unclaimed animals; destruction of unclaimed animals. 
(a)  Any animal running at large in the city shall be impounded and kept at the city impounding facility for a period of five (5) days, during which time the animal control officer shall make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, if known. Licensed, or collared, or tattooed animals shall be kept at the city impounding facility for a period of ten (10) days, during which time the animal control officer shall make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner. The animal may be released to the owner upon payment of a boarding fee at the animal shelter. In the case of an unlicensed dog or cat, the owner shall purchase a license. In no case shall an animal be released until all requirements for licensing are met. 
(b)  To adopt an unclaimed dog or cat, the prospective owner shall pay an administration fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the animal, in addition to paying any required licensing fee. The prospective owner shall sign a statement that the owner will have the animal spayed/neutered within thirty (30) days of adoption or, in the event the animal is younger than six (6) months old, that the owner will have the animal spayed/neutered within thirty (30) days after the animal has reached six (6) months of age. Within six (6) months from the date of adoption, the animal control officer shall have a signed certificate from a licensed veterinarian that the animal has been spayed/neutered in accordance with this section. The new owner shall sign an agreement permitting the animal control officer to reclaim the animal in the event the new owner fails to comply with the requirements, as required by this section. 
(c)  If an unlicensed animal remains unclaimed after required holding time, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to authorize the disposal of the animal in a humane way. 
(d)  Any person who violates subsection (b) of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-24. - Killing certain dogs and cats at large which cannot safely be impounded. 
    If any vicious or dangerous dog or cat or any dog or cat suspected of having rabies, which is found at large, cannot be safely taken and impounded, such dog or cat may be humanely destroyed by any police officer or animal control officer without recourse. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-25. - Allowing animals to urinate or defecate on public property and property of another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willingly allow any animal belonging to or under the supervision or care of such person to defecate on any public property or the property of another, or to knowingly or willingly allow any such animal to urinate on any public property or the property of another if such urination causes property damage, without the consent of the owner of the property or his agent, provided that it shall not be unlawful to allow urination or defecation by such animal within the curb or gutter area of a public street or roadway if the owner of the animal removes all the animal's excrement promptly and disposes of it in a public trash receptacle, in a public sanitary sewer, or on the owner's own property in a lawful manner. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 14-1700-954, § 1, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5-26. - Animals causing unsanitary conditions or offensive odors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps or controls any animal to keep that animal in such a manner as to cause unsanitary conditions or to cause offensive odors beyond the confines of the owner's own property. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 14-1700-954, § 1, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 5-27. - Vicious or dangerous dogs. 
(a)  As used in this section, "Dangerous dogs" means a canine or canine crossbreed which has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal, other than a dog, or killed a companion animal, and "Vicious dog" means a canine or canine crossbreed which has (i) killed a person; (ii) inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or (iii) continued to exhibit the behavior which resulted in a previous finding by a court that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(1)  Any animal control officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within the city is a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. If the animal poses a substantial risk to humans or other animals, the animal control officer or owner or custodian shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. If the animal does not pose such a risk or the owner or custodian can adequately confine the animal without risk of its escape, the animal control officer or police officer shall order the owner or custodian to keep the animal confined inside a dwelling until such time as evidence may be heard and a verdict rendered. If the animal control officer or police officer orders such confinement, the animal may not be removed from the owner's or custodian's immediate property and shall be secured on a leash no longer than six (6) feet when not confined indoors or locked within an adequate structure. Failure to comply with such an order shall be a violation of this section. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of the ordinance. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of section 3.1-796.119 of the Code of Virginia. 
(2)  No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor shall the local governing body prohibit the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed. No animal shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was (i) committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian, (ii) committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian or (iii) provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. 
No police dog, which was engaged in the performance of its duties, as such, at the time of the acts complained of, shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. No animal which, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, or its owner or owner's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. 
(3)  The owner or custodian of any animal found to be a dangerous dog shall, within ten (10) days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the animal control officer for a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The animal control officer shall provide the owner or custodian with a uniformly designed tag, which identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner or custodian shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates obtained pursuant to this subdivision shall be renewed annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. If the owner or custodian fails to obtain such a certificate within the time allotted, the animal control officer shall have the power to seize and euthanize the animal in accordance with state law. 
(4)  All certificates or renewals, thereof, required to be obtained under this section, shall only be issued to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence (i) of the animal's current rabies vaccination, if applicable, and (ii) that the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure designed to prevent its escape or is and will be confined inside the owner's or custodian's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's or custodian's fenced-in yard with adequate shelter until the proper enclosure is constructed. In addition, the owner or custodian who applies for certificates or renewals, there, of under this section shall not be issued a certificate or renewal, thereof, unless they present satisfactory evidence that (i) their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property and (ii) the animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation. 
(5)  While on the property of its owner or custodian, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the animal with shelter from the elements of nature. When off its owner's or custodian's property, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash no longer than six (6) feet and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(6)  If the owner or custodian of an animal found to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(7)  After an animal has been found to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner or custodian shall immediately, upon learning of same, notify the animal control officer if the animal (i) is loose or unconfined; (ii) bites a person or attacks another animal; (iii) is sold, given away, or dies; or (iv) has been moved to a different address. 
(8)  The owner or custodian of any animal which has been found to be a dangerous dog who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(9)  All fees collected pursuant to this chapter, less the costs incurred by the animal control authority in producing and distributing the certificates and tags required by the ordinance, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund in the treasury for the purpose of paying the expenses of any training course required under 3.1-796.105. 
(10)  All certificates or renewal, thereof, required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons who present satisfactory evidence that the owner has liability insurance coverage, to the value of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), which covers animal bites. 
(11)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, provide that an animal control officer may determine, after investigation, whether a dog is a dangerous dog. If the animal control officer determines that a dog is a dangerous dog, he/she may order that animal's owner or custodian to comply with the provisions of the ordinance. If the animal's owner disagrees with the animal control officer's determination, he may appeal the determination to the general district court for a trial on the merits. 
State Law reference- Authority to control dangerous or vicious dogs, § 3.1-796.93:1 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-28. - Destructive animals. 
(a)  No person shall keep, within the city, a destructive animal. 
(b)  Any person owning, harboring or having in his possession or under his control an animal suspected of being destructive, shall be duly summoned before court to show cause why such animal should not be removed beyond the city limits. Upon proof that such animal is destructive such animal shall, upon order of the court, be removed beyond the city limits, as may be directed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-29. - Prohibiting animals to trespass. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, after being requested by the owner or tenant of any premises not to permit the animal to trespass upon such premises, to allow any such animal to go upon such premises. In addition, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to capture and confine any unrestricted animal found off the property of its owner or of undetermined ownership when such animal is causing a public nuisance or threat to public safety of health, subject to section 5-22. Any impoundment shall be in accordance with the provision of section 5-23. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 02-1700-686, § 2, 5-21-02) 
Sec. 5-30. - Dogs and cats deemed personal property; rights relating thereto. 
(a)  All dogs and cats in this city shall be deemed personal property and may be the subject of larceny and malicious or unlawful trespass. Owners, thereof, may maintain any action for the killing of any such animals, or injury thereto, or unlawful detention or use, thereof, as in the case of other personal property. The owner of any dog or cat which is injured or killed contrary to the provisions of this chapter, by any person, shall be entitled to recover the value, thereof, or the damage done thereto in an appropriate action at law from such person. 
(b)  An animal control officer or other officer finding a stolen dog or cat, or a dog or cat held or detained contrary to law, shall have authority to seize and hold such dog or cat pending action before a general district court or other court. If no such action is instituted within seven (7) days, the animal control officer or other officer shall deliver the dog or cat to its owner. 
(c)  The presence of a dog or cat on the premises of a person other than its legal owner shall raise no presumption of theft against the owner, and the animal control officer may take such dog or cat in charge and notify its legal owner to remove it. The legal owner of the dog or cat shall pay a reasonable charge for the keeping of such dog or cat while in the possession of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Dogs and cats deemed personal property, rights relating thereto, § 3.1-796.127. 
Secs. 5-31-5-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSE 

Sec. 5-36. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a dog or cat, which is four (4) months old, or older within the city unless such dog or cat has a current city license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Unlicensed dogs prohibited; local ordinances for licensing cats, § 3.1-796.85. 
Sec. 5-37. - Application: applicant must be a city resident. 
(a)  A person may obtain a dog or cat license by making oral or written application to the city treasurer, or animal control officer, accompanied by the proper amount of license tax and current certificate of rabies vaccination issued pursuant to the section 5-54. The city treasurer or animal control officer shall only have authority to license dogs and cats of resident owners or custodians who reside within the boundary limits of the city and may require information to this effect from any applicant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false statement in order to secure a dog license to which he is not entitled. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- How to obtain license, § 3.1-796.86. 
Sec. 5-38. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  License tax is hereby imposed on dogs or cats, required to be licensed under this division in the following amounts: 
(1)  Neutered dogs or cats ..... $5.00 
(2)  Fertile dogs and cats ..... 10.00 
(3)  Triennial neutered dogs and cats ..... 15.00 
(4)  Triennial fertile dogs and cats ..... 30.00 
(b)  No license tax shall be imposed under this section on any dog that is trained and serves as a guide dog for a blind person or that is trained and serves as a hearing dog for a deaf or hearing-impaired person. As used in this subsection, the term "hearing dog" means a dog trained to alert its owner, by touch, to sounds of danger and sounds to which the owner should respond. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Amount of license tax, § 3.1-796.87. 
Sec. 5-38.1. - When tax due and payable 
    The license tax imposed on dogs or cats by section 5-38 shall be due and payable as follows: 
(1)  On or before January first and not later than January thirty-first of each year, the owner of any dog or cat four (4) months old or older shall pay such tax. 
(2)  If a dog or cat shall become four (4) months of age or come into the possession of any person between January first and November first of any year, the license tax for the current calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner. 
(3)  If a dog or cat shall become four (4) months of age or come into the possession of any person between October thirty-first and December thirty-first of any year, the license tax for the succeeding calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner, and such license shall protect such dog or cat from the date of purchase. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provision of subsection (1), (2) and (3), the owner of any dog or cat may, at the time specified in subsection (1), (2) and (3), pay the license tax for a three-year period as long as this period does not exceed the period that the rabies inoculation is effective as certified by a veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- When license tax payable, § 3.1-796.88. 
Sec. 5-38.2. - Failure to pay tax when due. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay the dog or cat license tax imposed by this article when the same is due. Payment of the license tax subsequent to a summons to appear before a court for failure to do so, within the time required, shall not operate to relieve such owner from the penalties provided for such failure. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Unlawful acts; penalties, § 3.1-796.128. 
Sec. 5-39. - Issuance, composition and contents of license. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a proper application and the prescribed license tax the city treasurer shall issue a dog or cat license; provided, that no such license shall be issued for any dog or cat, unless there is presented evidence satisfactory to the city treasurer or to the animal control officer that the owner has complied with section 5-54 with respect to such dog or cat. 
(b)  Each dog or cat license shall consist of a license tax receipt and a metal tag. Such receipt shall have recorded thereon the amount of the tax paid, the name and address of the owner or custodian of the dog or cat, the date of payment, the year for which the license is issued, the serial number of the tag, and whether the license is for a male, female dog or cat. The metal tag issued hereunder shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked to show the name of the city, describing either dog or cat, the sex of the dog or cat, and the calendar year for which issued and for triennial license it shall have the year expiring, shall bear a serial number. The tags shall be issued in a serial number order and shall be sold beginning November 1 each year. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Evidence showing inoculation for rabies prerequisite to obtaining dog or cat license; rabies clinics, § 3.1-796.97; what dog or cat license shall consist of, § 3.1-796.90. 
Sec. 5-40. - Preservation and exhibition of license receipt; tag to be worn by dog or cat; exceptions. 
(a)  Dog or cat license receipts shall be carefully preserved by the licensees and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by the animal control officer or other officer. Dog or cat license tag shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by such dog or cat. It shall be unlawful for the owner to permit any licensed dog or cat four (4) months old or older to run or roam at large at any time without a license tag. The owner of the dog may remove the collar and license tag required by this section when the dog is engaged in lawful hunting or when the dog or cat is competing in a show or when the dog or cat has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar or when the dog is confined. 
(b)  Any dog or cat not wearing a collar bearing a license tag of the proper calendar year shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed, and in any proceedings under this division, the burden of proof of the fact that such dog or cat has been licensed or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time shall be on the owner of the dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Displaying receipts; dogs to wear tags, § 3.1-796.92; effect of dog or cat not wearing collar as evidence, § 3.1-796.89. 
Sec. 5-41. - Unlawful removal of tag. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except the owner or custodian, to remove a legally acquired license tag from a dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-42. - Duplicate tags. 
    If a dog or cat license tag is lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the city treasurer or his /her agent who issued the original license for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the city treasurer or his/her agent that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, he shall issue a duplicate license tag which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog. The treasurer or his agent shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for a duplicate tag for any dog or cat shall be one dollar ($1.00). 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Secs. 5-43-5-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 5-53. - Enforcement of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the animal control officer, or his/her agent, the police officers and health officers. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-54. - Vaccination of dog and cats. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or hold any dog or cat over the age of four (4) months within the city, unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated with a rabies vaccine administered by a licensed veterinarian and has received any required reimmunization for rabies as specified in the certificate of vaccination. 
(b)  Upon vaccination or reimmunization of a dog or cat as required by this section, a suitable and distinctive rabies tag and a certificate of vaccination, properly executed and signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the vaccination, shall be issued to the animal's owner by the veterinarian. 
(c)  The certificate issued pursuant to subsection (b) above shall certify that the dog or cat in question has been vaccinated in accordance with this article, and shall include the following information: The date of the vaccination; the date for required reimmunization; the rabies collar tag number, a brief description of the dog or cat and its sex and breed; and the name of the owner. 
(d)  The certificate issued under this section shall be carefully preserved by the owner of the dog or cat and exhibited promptly upon request for inspection by an animal control or law enforcement officer. 
(e)  A copy of the certificate, issued under this section, shall be retained by the veterinarian who administered the vaccination. 
(f)  Any person owning, keeping or holding any dog or cat over the age of four (4) months shall have the required rabies vaccination administered. 
(g)  Any person transporting any dog or cat into the city from some other jurisdiction shall be required to comply with vaccinations within thirty (30) days of the time of such transporting. 
(h)  No license tag shall be issued for any dog or cat unless there is presented to the licensing agent, at the time of application for the license, a current and valid certificate of rabies vaccination signed by a licensed veterinarian and certifying that the dog or cat for which the license is to be issued has been vaccinated by the veterinarian, within the prescribed by law, prior to the date the tag is issued. The certificate shall show the date of vaccination expiration, the rabies tag number, the sex and breed of dog and the name of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-55. - Emergency declaration of quarantine. 
    When, in the judgement of the health director, an emergency exists in the city, due to a wide-spread rabies epizootic, for the protection of public health, the city council, upon the advice of the health director, may declare a quarantine in the city, and restrict all dogs and cats to their owner's premises or leashed under restraint of the owner in such a manner that persons or animals will not be subject to the danger of being bitten. Such declaration shall be operative for a period of thirty (30) days, but may be renewed from time to time by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-56. - Procedure when animal bites person. 
(a)  The owner or custodian of an animal which has bitten a person or any person having knowledge of any animal which has bitten a person shall notify the animal control officer or the police department within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of such knowledge. The animal warden shall immediately examine such animal, and in his/her discretion: 
(1)  Confine the animal in a strong enclosure on the owner's premises, isolated from all other animals and persons, for a period of ten (10) days, unless the animal develops active symptoms of rabies or expires before that time; or 
(2)  Impound or board the animal, at the owner's or custodian's expense, with a licensed kennel or veterinarian hospital, for a period of ten (10) days, unless the animal develops active symptoms of rabies or expires before that time; or 
(3)  Impound the animal in the city animal shelter at the owner's or custodian's expense, for a period of ten (10) days unless the animal develops active symptoms of rabies or expires before that time. 
(b)  At the end of the period of confinement under this section, if, based upon the examination by the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian, or health official, it is determined that the animal has not developed active symptoms of rabies, it may be released to its owner. If the animal was confined at the animal shelter, the owner will pay the administration fee and daily charges prescribed by the animal shelter. 
(c)  If the animal was confined in a kennel or veterinarian hospital, the owner shall pay the standard boarding fee charged by such kennel or hospital, plus twenty dollars ($20.00) to the city if the animal was delivered to the kennel or hospital by city personnel. In the event that the animal confined expires or is determined to have rabies and is humanely destroyed prior to the end of the ten-day confinement period, the owner is required to pay confinement costs for the actual number of days the animal was confined. 
(d)  Every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal apparently afflicted with rabies shall report immediately to the health department or to the animal control officer the existence of such animal, the place where seen, the owner's name, if known, and the symptoms suggesting rabies. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-57. - Confinement or destruction of dogs or cats showing signs of or suspected of having rabies. 
(a)  Any dog or cat found within the city showing active signs of rabies or suspected of having rabies shall be forthwith taken into custody by the animal control officer or a police officer and confined under competent observation for such time as may be necessary to determine whether the animal is afflicted with rabies. If confinement is impossible or impracticable, such dog or cat shall be humanely destroyed and the head delivered to the health department for examination. 
(b)  Any dog or cat confirmed to be afflicted with rabies shall be immediately and humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian or person charged with the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, § 3.1-796.98. 
Sec. 5-58. - Destruction or confinement of dog or cat bitten by rabid animal. 
    Any dog or cat bitten by an animal believed to be afflicted with rabies shall be humanely destroyed immediately or confined, at the expense of the owner, in a pound, kennel or enclosure approved by the health department for a period not to exceed six (6) months. If the owner of the bitten animal has proof of valid rabies vaccination, the animal shall be revaccinate at the expense of the owner, and confined to the premises of its owner, approved by the health department for ninety (90) days. If the bitten animal does not have proof of a valid rabies vaccination, the animal shall be humanely destroyed or confined in an enclosure approved by the health department for six (6) months and receive a rabies vaccination four (4) weeks prior to release from confinement. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Rabid animals, § 3.1-796.98. 
Sec. 5-59. - Destruction or confinement of other animal than dog or cat. 
    When any potentially rabid animal, other than a dog or cat, exposes or may have exposed a person or any animal to rabies through a bite, or through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane, the animal control officer and health department will be notified and that animal shall be confined at the discretion of the health director in a manner approved by the health department or humanely euthanized and its head sent to the health department for evaluation. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-60. - Concealing animal to prevent its destruction, confinement under article. 
    It shall unlawful for any person to conceal any dog or cat or other animal to keep the same from being destroyed or confined in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
State Law reference- Regulations to prevent spread of rabies and running at large of vicious dogs, § 3.1-796.100. 
Sec. 5-61. - Penalty for violation of quarantine. 
    Any person who has been directed by the animal control officer, the health director, or both to confine any animal in accordance with the provisions of this article to prevent the potential spread of rabies, and who disobeys that direction in any particular, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-62. - Transportation, harboring and sale of skunks and raccoons prohibited. 
    The transportation or importation of foxes, skunks, and raccoons from other jurisdictions into the city and the sale of foxes, skunks and raccoons in the city is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to confine or keep any fox, skunk or raccoon as a pet or otherwise, except as specifically provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-63. - Humane destruction of animals. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the humane destruction or euthanasia of a seriously injured or sick animal. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-64. - Impoundment of unvaccinated dogs or cats. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to impound in the animal shelter any dog or cat which has not been vaccinated, as provided in the section 5-36. The dog or cat shall be held in the animal shelter as stated in section 5-23, unless the dog or cat is rabid or suspected of being rabid, in which case the dog or cat shall be held for further observation or destroyed upon authorization by a licensed veterinarian, animal control officer or health official. 
(b)  Any dog or cat impounded under this section which is not rabid or suspected of being rabid may be redeemed by the owner by paying the licensing and vaccinating fees and any another fees or fines that may be required by the city before release of the dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-65. - Violation of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provisions of this article shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
ARTICLE VI. - WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 5-66. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Animal shall include any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, not to include birds. 
    Pet shall mean any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
    Vicious animal shall mean any animal or animals that constitute a physical threat to humans beings or other animals but shall not include guard dogs. 
    Wild or exotic animal shall mean any live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, wolf hybrid, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake or tarantula which can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of crocodilian, including but not limited to alligators, crocodiles, caimans, and gavials. Ferrets, nonpoisonous snakes less than six (6) feet in length, rabbits and laboratory rats which have been bred in captivity and which never have known the wild shall be excluded from this definition. 
Sec. 5-67. - Display or exhibition. 
    No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild or exotic or vicious animal for display for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, circuses or veterinary clinics that are properly licensed by the federal government or Commonwealth of Virginia. In no case, however, shall such wild or exotic animal be exhibited or displayed in such a manner that persons other than their handlers can pet, fondle or otherwise come in direct physical contact with such animals. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-68. - Keeping as pet. 
    No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild or exotic animal, or non-poisonous snakes six (6) feet or longer in length as a pet. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-69. - Notice required at place of sale. 
    Any person who offers for sale a wild or exotic animal, as defined in section 5-66 of this article, shall post conspicuously at the place of sale or display the following notice: 
    "No person may lawfully keep or permit to be kept in Manassas Park any live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf or wolf hybrid, squirrel fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake or nonpoisonous snakes greater than six (6) feet or tarantula, which can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of crocodilian, including but not limited to alligators, crocodiles, caimans, and gavials." 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-70. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Each day, a violation of this article shall continue constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-71. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the animal control officer, director of public safety or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-72. - Disposition of wild animals. 
    Any person who keeps a wild, exotic or vicious animal(s) in contravention of this article may only dispose of the animal(s) by removal of the animal(s) from the city by: 
(1)  Giving or selling the animal(s) to a zoological park; or by 
(2)  Releasing the animal(s) to the animal control officer or his/her designee. The animal control officer is authorized to release the animal to the wild, to a zoological park, or euthanize the animal, if the circumstances warrant. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-73. - Effective date. 
    This article shall be effective immediately. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
ARTICLE VII. - SECURITY BOND 

Sec. 5-74. - Disposition. 
    Any animal found abandoned, neglected, cruelly treated, or unfit for use may be seized pursuant to Virginia Code Section 3.1-796.115 and humanely disposed of by sale, adoption, or euthanasia at the direction of the director of public safety or animal control officer or his/her designee; in accordance with a judicial determination by the general district court that the owner is unable to adequately provide for the animal or is not a fit person to own the animal, provided, however, that the hearing required by Virginia Code Section 3.1-796.115 to be set within ten (10) days of the date of seizure may be continued to a later date if the owner of the animal provides a cash or corporate surety bond in accordance with section 5-75. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-75. - Security. 
    A person claiming an interest in any animal confined pursuant to Virginia Code Section 3.1-796.115 may obtain a continuation of the hearing to a later date by posting a bond, cash or corporate surety, with the city treasurer prior to the expiration of the ten-day period in an amount sufficient to secure payment for all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for the animal, including estimated medical care, for the time period running to the date of the continued hearing. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the director of public safety and animal control officer or his/her designee, based on the current rate for board and on the condition of the animal after examination of the animal by the animal control officer. At the conclusion of the case, the bond shall be forfeited to the city unless there is a finding that the owner is able to adequately provide for such animal and is a fit person to own the animal. If a cash bond was paid into the city treasurer and a judicial determination is made that the owner is able to adequately provide for such animal and is a fit person to own the animal, the owner shall be entitled to a refund of the cash bond from the treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Sec. 5-76. - Notice. 
    The authority taking custody of the animal under the foregoing provisions shall give notice of the section by posting a copy of it at the location where the animal was seized or by delivering it to a person residing on the property of the owner within twenty-four (24) hours of the time the animal was seized. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-620, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Chapter 6 - BICYCLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic code, Ch. 24. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Condition. 
    All bicycles operated in the city shall be in good normal working condition. 
(Code 1971, § 4-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Riding after dark. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle after dark. This section shall not apply to a person riding after dark on business. 
(Code 1971, § 4-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Stunting; racing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to practice stunts or to race on the streets. 
(Code 1971, § 4-3) 
Sec. 6-4. - Parking at shopping center. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or set any bicycle on the sidewalk or the arcade of the Manassas Park Shopping Center. 
(Code 1971, § 4-5) 
Cross reference- Parking, § 24-47 et seq. 
Secs. 6-5-6-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-16. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle within the city unless it has been currently licensed in accord with this article. 
(Code 1971, § 4-7) 
Sec. 6-17. - Applicant to understand "Rules for Bicyclists." 
    A full understanding of the pamphlet "Rules for Bicyclists" by the applicant for a bicycle license shall be considered a prerequisite to the issuance of the license. 
(Code 1971, § 4-10) 
Sec. 6-18. - Fee. 
    The fee for a bicycle license shall be two dollars ($2.00). 
(Code 1971, § 4-11) 
Sec. 6-19. - Issuance. 
    Licenses for bicycles will be issued to bicycle owners only at the public schools. A policeman will issue such licenses. 
(Code 1971, § 4-9) 
Sec. 6-20. - Attachment of plate. 
    The proper license plate will be firmly attached to the frame of each bicycle. 
(Code 1971, § 4-8) 
Sec. 6-21. - Term. 
    A license issued under this article shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance. 
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2014, amended Ch. 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 7, §§ 7-1-7-12, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 04-1700-747, adopted April 20, 2004. 
Cross reference- Outdoor advertising signs, § 3-16 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation control; stormwater management and control, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; contractors, § 14-40; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 20; subdivision of land, Ch. 21; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 31. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Adopted. 
(a)  The provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (the "VUSBC"), as adopted, promulgated and amended from time to time by the State Board of Housing and Community Development in accordance with Chapter 6 of Article 36 of the Code of Virginia, are hereby adopted by reference as the official building code of the city (the "building code"). The building code shall control all matters concerning the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and structures and all other functions which pertain to the installation of systems vital to buildings and structures and their service equipment, as defined by the VUSBC. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority granted under § 36-105 of the Code of Virginia, the property maintenance provisions of the VUSBC are hereby adopted by reference as the official property maintenance code of the city (the "property maintenance code"). The property maintenance code shall be the standard for inspection and maintenance of existing buildings and structures, permanent or temporary, and their associated equipment, whether occupied or vacant, after completion of construction, or where not otherwise regulated by the provisions of the building code. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
Sec. 7-2. - Designation, qualifications and general duties of the building official. 
    The city manager shall designate a building official of the city (the "building official"). The building official shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of the building code and the property maintenance code, and, as such, shall be authorized to inspect buildings within the city for compliance with the building code and the property maintenance code. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
Sec. 7-3. - Permit and inspection fees. 
    The fees for permits and inspections provided for by the building code and the property maintenance code shall be determined by the fee schedule adopted by the governing body, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
Sec. 7-4. - Violation; penalties. 
(a)  Violations of this article are a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of not more than that amount authorized for violations of the VUSBC by § 36-106 of the Code of Virginia; additionally, if the violation concerns a residential unit and if the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in good order to comply with the building code of the property maintenance code, as applicable. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six (6) months following the date of conviction. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
ARTICLE II. - ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS, DUMBWAITERS AND MOVING WALKS 

Sec. 7-5. - Inspections. 
    Routine and periodic inspections and testing of elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, and moving walks shall be performed in accordance with the VUSBC and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers' Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
Sec. 7-6. - Approved inspection agency. 
    All required inspections and testing shall be performed by a qualified third party individual or inspection agency approved by the building official. The costs associated with inspection and tests will be borne by the owner of the building. All required inspections and tests shall be completed and accepted prior to the expiration date of the existing certificate, with results forwarded for approval to the building official no later than ten (10) days after completion of all inspections and testing. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
Sec. 7-7. - Renewal of certificates. 
    Required certificates shall be renewed once the building official reviews and approves inspection/testing reports submitted by the qualified third party individual or inspection agency and upon payment of all required fees. Failure to have a current certificate for each piece of equipment may result in revocation of the certificate of use and occupancy for the building. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
ARTICLE III. - CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 

Sec. 7-8. - General. 
    All backflow prevention devices shall be properly maintained to prevent the contamination of the public potable water supply. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
Sec. 7-9. - Inspections. 
    The building official is authorized to conduct annual inspections of all existing buildings within the city to identify any plumbing cross-connections that may present unsafe, unhealthy or unsanitary conditions and to ensure that required backflow prevention devices are properly maintained by the building's owner. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
Sec. 7-10. - Testing. 
    Periodic testing of backflow prevention devices shall be performed as required by law by a qualified third party individual or testing agency approved by the building official. The costs associated with such testing shall be borne by the owner of the building or the tenant. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
Sec. 7-11. - Testing procedure. 
    The testing procedure shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and such procedure, as well as the results thereof, shall be presented to the building official for approval. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
Sec. 7-12. - Failure to maintain devices or make corrections. 
    Failure to maintain backflow prevention devices or correct unsafe, unhealthy, or unsanitary plumbing cross-connections may result in revocation of the certificate of use and occupancy for the building or tenant space. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-958, § 1, 10-7-14) 
Chapter 7.5 - CABLE TELEVISION COMMUNICATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, adopted March 2, 1999, repealed former Ch. 7.5, §§ 7.5-1-7.5-66, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 82-1700-197, § 1, 5-5-82; Ord. No. 86-1700-334, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 94-1700-517, 12-6-94. 

Sec. 7.5-1. - General provisions. 
(a)  Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Manassas Park Cable Television Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  It is the policy of the governing body to provide for the adequate, economical, and efficient delivery of cable service to subscribers, and to protect subscribers from excessive prices and unfair competition. The following purposes, among others, underlie the provisions set forth in this chapter: 
a.  Cable service should be available to as many city residents as possible. 
b.  A cable system should be capable of accommodating both present and reasonably foreseeable future cable-related needs of the city and its residents. 
c.  A cable system should be constructed and maintained during a franchise term so that changes in technology may be integrated to the maximum extent possible into existing system facilities. 
d.  Cable system should be responsive to the needs and interests of the local community, and should provide the widest possible diversity of information sources and service to the public. 
e.  A cable operator should pay fair compensation to the city for the use of local public rights-of-way and public property, and reimburse the city for costs and expenses incurred as a result of actions requested by a franchisee for the benefit of the franchisee. 
(2)  The city intends that all provisions set forth in this chapter be construed to serve the public interest and the foregoing public purposes, and that any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter be construed to include the foregoing public purposes as integral parts thereof. 
(c)  Delegation of powers. To the extent permitted by law, the governing body may delegate the performance of any act, duty, or obligation, or the exercise of any power, under this chapter or under any franchise agreement issued pursuant hereto, to any city employee, officer, department or agency. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definitions and usage-General. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include the singular number; words in the singular number include the plural number; and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in Title 47 of the United States Code, as amended, and, if not defined therein, words shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
(b)  Access channel: Any channel on a cable system set aside by a franchisee for public, educational, or governmental use. 
(c)  Affiliate: Any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with a franchisee. 
(d)  Basic service: Any service tier that includes the retransmission of all signals of locally-received television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system), any public, educational and governmental access signals, and any additional video programming signals added to the basic tier by a franchisee. 
(e)  Cable Act: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
(f)  Cable service: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service, including but not limited to Internet access. 
(g)  Cable system or system: A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable television service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system if such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
(4)  An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573; or 
(5)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
A reference to a cable system in this chapter refers to any part of such system, including, without limitation, converters. The foregoing definition of "cable system" shall not be deemed to circumscribe or limit the authority of the city to regulate or franchise the activities of any other communications system or provider of communications services to the full extent permitted by law. Any franchise agreement issued to a franchisee shall define the services which the franchisee is authorized to provide using the public rights-of-way. 
(h)  Channel: A six megahertz (MHz) frequency band, which is capable of carrying at least one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or other non-video signals, or some combination of such signals. 
(i)  City: The City of Manassas Park, Virginia, and any agency or department thereof. 
(j)  City manager: The administrative head of the City government or his designee. 
(k)  Common shared easement or CSE: Those fifteen-foot easements dedicated by the city, private landowners in the city, for the placement of telephone, gas, and electric facilities, and compatible uses, which the telephone, gas and electric companies serving the city have agreed to jointly occupy and manage. 
(l)  Converter: An electronic device which may serve as an interface between a system and a subscriber's television receiver or other terminal equipment, and which may perform a variety of functions, including signal security, descrambling, electronic polling, frequency conversion and channel selection. 
(m)  Customer: Same as "subscriber." 
(n)  Educational access channel or educational channel: Any channel on a cable system set aside by a franchisee for educational use. 
(o)  Equitable price: Fair market value adjusted downward for any economic harm or property damage sustained by the city or subscribers as a result of a franchisee's breach of its franchise or any violation of this chapter. 
(p)  Fair market value: The price for a cable system valued as a going concern, but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. 
(q)  FCC: The Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any successor governmental entity thereto. 
(r)  Franchise: A non-exclusive authorization granted pursuant to this chapter and applicable law to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system within the public rights-of-way to provide cable service within all or a specified area of the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by state or city laws, ordinances or regulations, or for attaching devices to poles or other structures, whether owned by the city or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along public rights-of-way, public property or private property. 
(s)  Franchise agreement: A contract entered into pursuant to this chapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth, subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be granted and exercised. 
(t)  Franchise area: The area of the city that a franchisee is authorized to serve by its franchise agreement. 
(u)  Franchisee: A natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, stock or non-stock corporation, joint stock company, association, joint venture, limited liability company, professional limited liability company, or organization of any kind that has been granted a franchise by the governing body in accordance with the provisions of applicable law. 
(v)  Governing body: The mayor and city council of the city of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
(w)  Governmental access channel or governmental channel: Any channel on a cable system set aside by a franchisee for government use. 
(x)  Gross revenues: Any and all cash, credits, property or consideration of any kind or nature arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from the operation of a franchisee's system (including the studios and other facilities associated therewith) to provide cable services directly or indirectly by the franchisee, its affiliates, or any person in which the franchisee has a financial interest, or by any other entity that is a cable operator of the system. Gross revenues include, by way of illustration and not limitation, monthly fees charged to subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel, per-program service or cable programming service; internet access fees charged to subscribers; installation, disconnection, reconnection, and change-in-service fees; leased channel fees; franchise fees collected on behalf of the city; late fees and administrative fees; fees, payments, or other consideration received from programmers for carriage of programming on the system; revenues from rentals or sales of converters or other equipment; studio rental, production equipment, and personnel fees; advertising revenues; barter; revenues from program guides; revenues from the sale or carriage of other cable-related services; and revenues from home shopping and bank-at-home channels. Gross revenues shall not include (i) to the extent consistent with generally accepted accounting principles, actual bad debt write-offs, provided, however, that all or part of any such actual bad debt that is written off but subsequently collected shall be included in gross revenues in the period allocated; (ii) the value of complimentary services provided by a franchisee to its employees; or (iii) any taxes on services furnished by the franchisee which are imposed directly on any subscriber or user by the Commonwealth of Virginia, the city, or other governmental unit and which are collected by the franchisee on behalf of said governmental unit. A franchise fee is not such a tax. 
(y)  Installation: The connection of system services to subscribers' television receivers or other subscriber-owned or subscriber-provided terminal equipment. 
(z)  Leased access channel or commercial access channel: Any channel on a cable system designated or dedicated for use by a person unaffiliated with a franchisee pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 532. 
(aa)  Net profit: The amount remaining after deducting from gross revenues all of the actual, direct and indirect expenses associated with the cable system, including franchise fees, interest, depreciation and federal or state income taxes. 
(bb)  Normal business hours: The hours from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Saturday. 
(cc)  Normal operating conditions: Those service conditions that are within the control of a franchisee. Conditions that are deemed to be within the control of a franchisee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular or reasonably anticipated peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of a cable system. Conditions that are deemed not to be within the control of a franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. 
(dd)  Person: An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, domestic or foreign corporation, stock or non-stock corporation, limited liability company, professional limited liability company, or organization of any kind, or any lawful successor thereto or transferee thereof. Such term does not include the city. 
(ee)  Programmer: Any person or entity that produces or otherwise provides program material or information for transmission by video, audio, digital or other signals, either live or from recorded traces or other storage media, to users or subscribers by means of a cable system. 
(ff)  Public access channel: Any channel on a cable system set aside by a franchisee for use by the general public, including groups and individuals, and which is available for such use on a non-discriminatory basis. 
(gg)  Public rights-of-way: The surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, avenue, boulevard, drive, concourse, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, easement, or similar property or waters within the city in which the city now or hereafter holds any property interest, including, but not limited to, any riparian right, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was created, obtained or dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing, operating and maintaining a cable system. No reference herein, or in any franchise agreement, to a "public right-of-way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit use of the property for the purpose of installing, operating and maintaining a cable system. A franchisee shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use the property as are properly in the city, in its sole determination, and as the city may have the undisputed right and power to give. 
(hh)  Security fund: A letter of credit, cash deposit or other form of security acceptable to the city manager. 
(ii)  Service interruption: Loss of picture or sound on one (1) or more cable channels, or a reduction in the quality of sound or picture of one (1) or more channels below the average level of over-the-air broadcasts received within a one-mile radius of a subscriber's location. 
(jj)  State: The Commonwealth of Virginia, its agencies and departments. 
(kk)  Subscriber: Any person who legally receives any service delivered over a cable system. 
(ll)  Transfer: Any transaction in which (i) an ownership or other interest in a franchisee, its cable system, or any person that is a cable operator of the cable system is transferred from one (1) person or group of persons to another person or group of persons so that control of a franchisee is transferred; or (ii) the rights or obligations held by a franchisee under a franchise agreement are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons. The term "control," as used in this definition, means working control, in whatever manner exercised. By way of illustration, and not limitation, the addition, deletion, or other change of any general partner of a franchisee, any person who owns or controls a franchisee, or a cable operator of a cable system is such a change of control. 
(mm)  User: A person or organization using a channel or equipment and facilities for purposes of producing or transmitting signals. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-3. - Grant of franchise. 
(a)  Grant. 
(1)  The governing body may grant one (1) or more non-exclusive cable franchises, and each such franchise shall be awarded in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this chapter and applicable law. 
(2)  No person may construct or operate a cable system within the corporate boundaries of the city without a franchise. No person may be granted a franchise without having been issued a franchise agreement by the governing body pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  This chapter may be amended from time to time, and in no event shall this chapter be considered a contract between the city and a franchisee or the governing body and a franchisee, such that the governing body would be prohibited from exercising its legislative discretion to amend any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  Term of franchise. No franchise shall be granted for a period of more than fifteen (15) years, except that a franchisee may apply at any time for renewal, extension, or modification pursuant to applicable law. 
(c)  Franchise characteristics. 
(1)  A franchise authorizes use of public rights-of-way for installing cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit, and other devices necessary and appurtenant to the operation of a cable system to provide cable service within a franchise area, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize a franchisee to provide service to, or install a cable system on, private property without the owner's consent (except for use of compatible easements pursuant to section 621 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2)), or to use publicly or privately owned conduits or any other public property without a separate agreement with the owners thereof. 
(2)  A franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the cable services regulated by the provisions of this chapter and a franchise agreement. 
(3)  A franchise is non-exclusive and will not: explicitly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems within the city; affect the city's right to authorize use of public rights-of-way or city-owned property by other persons to operate cable systems or for other purposes as the city deems appropriate; or affect the city's right to itself construct, operate, or maintain a cable system, with or without a franchise. 
(4)  All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to (without limitation) the city's use and any prior lawful occupancy of the public rights-of-way or public property. 
(5)  The city reserves the right to reasonably designate where a franchisee's facilities are to be placed within the public rights-of-way or on any city-owned property the franchisee is otherwise authorized to use, and to resolve any disputes among users of the public rights-of-way or such city-owned property. 
(d)  Franchisee subject to other laws, police power. 
(1)  A franchisee at all times shall be subject to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws. A franchisee at all times shall be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the city, including but not limited to all rights the city may have under 47 U.S.C. § 552. Nothing in a franchise agreement shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes, ordinances, policies, rules, regulations, and practices of the city and the governing body. 
(2)  No course of dealing between a franchisee and the city, or any delay on the part of the city in exercising any rights hereunder, or any acquiescence by the city in the actions of a franchisee that contravene any of the city's rights (except to the extent such rights are expressly waived by the city in writing), shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the city. 
(3)  The city shall have the maximum authority to regulate cable systems, franchisees, and franchises as may now or hereafter be lawfully permissible; unless rights are expressly waived in a franchise agreement, they are hereby reserved, whether expressly enumerated or not. 
(4)  The city manager and the governing body may, from time to time, issue such rules and regulations concerning cable systems as are consistent with, or authorized by, applicable law. 
(5)  The city manager and the governing body may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of their jurisdiction under this chapter. 
(e)  Interpretation of franchise terms. 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter and any franchise agreement shall be liberally construed in favor of the city in order to effectuate the purposes and objectives of this chapter and the franchise agreement and to promote the public interest. 
(2)  The terms of a franchise or franchise agreement shall be subject to this chapter. 
(3)  Subject to federal law or regulation, a franchise agreement will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(f)  Operation of a cable system without a franchise. Any person occupying the public rights-of-way of the city for the purpose of operating or constructing a cable system, which person does not hold a valid franchise from the city, shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, those provisions regarding construction, technical standards and franchise fees. The city at any time may require such person to obtain a franchise agreement within thirty (30) days of receipt of a written notice from the city that a franchise agreement is required; require such person to remove its property from the public rights-of-way, and, at such person's sole expense, restore the area to a condition satisfactory to the city within a reasonable time period as the city shall determine; remove the property itself and restore the area to a satisfactory condition and charge the person the costs therefor; and/or take any other action permitted by law, including, but not limited to, filing for and seeking damages for trespass. In no event shall a franchise be created unless it is issued by action of the governing body and the franchise terms are set forth in a franchise agreement. 
(g)  Acts at franchisee's expense. Any act that a franchisee is or may be required to perform under this chapter, a franchise agreement, or applicable law shall be performed at the franchisee's expense, unless expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, a franchise agreement, or applicable law. 
(h)  Eminent domain. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the city's rights of eminent domain to the extent to which such rights may apply to any cable system or franchise. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-4. - Applications for initial grant, renewal, extension, or modification of a franchise. 
(a)  Application required. 
(1)  A written application shall be filed with the city manager for the grant of an initial franchise or modification of a franchise agreement pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 545. 
(2)  To be considered accepted for filing, a fully completed, signed original application, in a form prepared by or acceptable to the city manager, shall be submitted as provided in this section together with twelve (12) copies. The application shall be accompanied by any required filing fee, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain all information required by the city. All applications shall include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of all applicants with respect to the application. 
(3)  To the extent permitted by law, all applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the city for public inspection. 
(b)  Application for grant of an initial franchise. 
(1)  A person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting an application containing the information required in section 7.5-4(c) to the city manager. Upon receipt of such an application, the city manager may either (i) evaluate the application pursuant to section 7.5-4(b)(4), conducting such investigations as deemed necessary; or (ii) issue a request for proposals ("RFP"), after conducting, if necessary, a proceeding to identify the future cable-related needs and interests of the community. Any such RFP shall be mailed to any person requesting its issuance and made available to any other interested person. The RFP may contain a proposed franchise agreement. 
(2)  An applicant shall respond to a RFP by filing a proposal with the city manager within the time directed by the city, providing the information and material set forth in section 7.5-4(c). The procedures, instructions, and requirements set forth in the RFP shall be followed by each applicant. Any applicant that has already filed materials pursuant to Section 7.5-4(b)(1) herein need not refile the same materials with its proposal, but shall clearly identify each portion of the previously filed materials that are intended to satisfy the RFP requirements. The applicant shall further amplify its application to include any additional or different materials required by the RFP. The city manager may seek additional information from any applicant and establish deadlines for the submission of such information. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 7.5-4(b)(1) and 7.5-4(b)(2), a person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting an unsolicited application containing the information required in section 7.5-4(c) and requesting an evaluation of that application pursuant to Section 7.5-4(b)(4). Prior to evaluating that application, the city manager may conduct, or cause to be conducted, such investigations as are necessary to determine whether the application satisfies the standards set forth in section 7.5-4(b)(4) and may seek additional applications by RFP or otherwise. 
(4)  In evaluating an application for a franchise, the city manager shall consider, among other things, the following factors: 
a.  The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable franchise for the city; 
b.  Whether the quality of the applicant's service under any existing franchise or similar grant in the city, including signal quality, response to customer complaints, billing practices, and the like, has been reasonable in light of the needs and interests of the communities served; 
c.  Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal qualifications to provide cable service; 
d.  Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements established by the city and is otherwise reasonable to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests; 
e.  Whether, to the extent not considered under section 7.5-4(b)(4)d., the applicant will provide adequate public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities, or financial support; 
f.  Whether issuance of a franchise is in the public interest considering the immediate and future effect on the public rights-of-way, city-owned property and private property that would be used by the cable system, including the extent to which installation or maintenance as planned would require replacement of property or involve disruption of property, public services, or use of the public rights-of-way or city-owned property; the effect of granting a franchise on the ability of cable to meet the cable-related needs and interests of the community; and the comparative superiority or inferiority of competing applications; and 
g.  What effects a grant of the application may have on competition in the delivery of cable service in the city. 
(5)  After evaluating a fully-completed application, including all additional information requested by the city, the city manager shall transmit recommendations to the governing body. 
(6)  If the governing body finds that it is in the public interest to issue a franchise after considering the factors set forth in section 7.5-4(b)(4) and any other relevant factors permitted by law to be considered, and subject to the applicant's agreement to the terms of an appropriate franchise agreement, the governing body shall issue a franchise, after complying with the public hearing requirements of § 7.5-4(g). If the governing body denies the request for a franchise, then the governing body will issue a written decision explaining why the franchise was denied. Prior to deciding whether or not to issue a franchise, the governing body may hold one (1) or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on an application may be received. The governing body also may grant or deny a request for a franchise based on its review of an application without further proceedings and may reject any application that is incomplete or fails to respond to an RFP. This chapter is not intended and shall not be interpreted to grant any applicant or existing franchisee standing to challenge the denial of its application or the issuance of a franchise to another. 
(c)  Contents of application. An RFP for the grant of an initial franchise shall require, and any such application shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and form of business of the applicant, and an identification of the ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and addresses of the ten (10) largest holders of an ownership interest in the applicant and affiliates of the applicant, and all persons with five (5) percent or more ownership interest in the applicant and its affiliates; the persons who exercise working control over the applicant and its affiliates, and the persons who control those persons, to the ultimate parent; all officers and directors of the applicant and its affiliates; and any other business affiliation and cable system ownership interest of each named person. 
(2)  A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification of key personnel. 
(3)  A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including but not limited to a demonstration that the applicant meets the following criteria: 
a.  The applicant shall not have had any cable television franchise validly revoked by any franchising authority within three (3) years preceding the date of the submission of the application; 
b.  The applicant shall have the necessary authority under Virginia law to operate a cable system; 
c.  The applicant shall have the necessary authority under federal law to hold the franchise and operate a cable system. An applicant shall have, or show that it is qualified to obtain, any necessary federal licenses or waivers required to operate the system proposed; 
d.  The applicant is willing to enter into a franchise, to pay required compensation, and to abide by the provisions of applicable law, including those relating to the construction, operation or repair of its facilities, and has not entered into any agreement which would prevent the applicant from doing so; 
e.  The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time during the ten (10) years preceding the date of submission of the application, the applicant was convicted of any act or omission of such character that, in the sole opinion of the city, the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the city and the subscribers of the cable system, or to substantially comply with its lawful obligations under applicable law, including acts of moral turpitude, and obligations under consumer protection laws and laws prohibiting anticompetitive acts, fraud, racketeering, or other similar conduct; 
f.  The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide; and 
g.  The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if an elected official of the city has a personal interest in the franchise, unless otherwise permitted by the Virginia State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Va. Code §§ 2.1-639.1 through 639.24, or holds a controlling interest in the applicant or an affiliate of the applicant. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, and to the extent permitted by applicable law, the governing body shall provide an applicant with an opportunity to show that it would be inappropriate to deny it a franchise by virtue of the particular circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of cable systems. 
(4)  A demonstration of the financial qualifications of the applicant, including at least the following: 
a.  The applicant's proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and all other proposed equipment or services for the ensuing five (5) years; 
b.  A certified statement prepared by a certified public accountant regarding the applicant's financial ability to complete the construction proposed, to meet the time frame proposed and to operate the cable system proposed. If an applicant is a joint venture or partnership, the same information shall be provided for each participant in the joint venture or partnership; and 
c.  Pro forma financial projections for the proposed franchise term, including a statement of projected income, and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules. 
(5)  A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system ownership, construction, and operation, and an identification of each locality in which the applicant or any of its principals have, or have had, a cable franchise or any interest therein, including the name, address and phone number of each local franchising authority and references from each authority. 
(6)  A written description and a detailed map of the exact area or areas of the city to be served by the proposed cable system, including a description of the proposed franchise area's boundaries. 
(7)  A detailed description of the physical facilities proposed to be provided within Manassas Park, which description shall include at least the following: 
a.  A description of the channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics, headend, access (and institutional network) facilities and equipment; 
b.  The location of the proposed system, including a description of the miles of plant to be installed, and a description of the size of equipment cabinets, shielding and electronics that will be installed along the plant route, the power sources that will be used and a description of the noise, exhaust and pollutants, if any that will be generated by the operation of the same; 
c.  A map of the route the cable system will follow; a designation of the portions of the system that will be placed aboveground and portions that will be placed underground, and the construction techniques that the operator proposes to use in installing the system aboveground and underground; where applicable, a schedule for construction of the system, describing when and where construction will begin, how it will proceed, and when it will be completed; and the expected effect on right-of-way usage, including information on the ability of the public rights-of-way and any other property that would be used by the applicant to accommodate the proposed system, an estimate of the availability of space in conduits, and an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities; and 
d.  A description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will be done with existing facilities. 
(8)  A demonstration of how and when the applicant will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including descriptions of how the applicant will meet the needs described in any recent community needs assessment conducted by or for the city, and how and when the applicant will provide adequate public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities, or financial support to meet the community's needs and interests. 
(9)  Copies of any agreements which an applicant has entered into or proposes to enter into with any other person relating to the proposed system. 
(10)  If the applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already served by an existing cable franchisee, a written description and a detailed map of the area where the overbuild would occur and the ability of the public rights-of-way and other property that would be used by the applicant to accommodate an additional system. 
(11)  To the extent an applicant is in any respect relying on the financial or technical resources of another person, including an affiliate, the proofs required under sections 7.5-4(c)(2) and 7.5-4(c)(4) shall be provided for that person. 
(12)  Any other information that the city manager determines is reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance by the applicant with the requirements of this chapter. 
(13  Any additional information that the city manager or the governing body may request of the applicant that is relevant to the city's consideration of the application. 
(14)  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the application meets all federal and state law requirements. 
(15)  A declaration that no person not shown in the application has, or without the prior written consent of the governing body, will have any equity interest in the franchise exceeding five (5) percent. 
(16)  A declaration that the applicant agrees to comply with this chapter, and will abide by the governing body's decision to grant or deny a franchise. 
(d)  Application for grant of a renewal franchise or extension. 
(1)  If neither a renewal applicant nor the city activates in a timely manner or can activate the renewal process set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)-(g) (including, for example, if the provisions are amended or repealed), and except as to applications submitted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546(h), the provisions of sections 7.5-4(a)-(c) shall apply and a renewal request shall be evaluated using the same criteria as any other request for a franchise. The following requirements shall apply to renewal requests properly submitted pursuant to the Cable Act and this chapter. 
(2)  If the provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)-(g) are properly invoked, the city shall issue an RFP after conducting a proceeding to: (i) review the renewal applicant's past performance; and (ii) identify the city's future cable-related community needs and interests. The city manager shall establish deadlines and procedures for responding to the RFP, may seek additional information from the applicant, and shall establish deadlines for the submission of that additional information. Following receipt of the application responding to the RFP (and such additional information as may be provided in response to requests by the city), the governing body shall determine that the franchise should be renewed, or make a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed. This determination shall be made in accordance with the time limits established by the Cable Act. The preliminary determination shall be made by resolution. If the governing body determines that the franchise should not be renewed, and the applicant that submitted the renewal application notifies the city, either in its RFP response or within ten (10) working days of the preliminary assessment, that the applicant wishes to pursue any rights to an administrative proceeding it has under the Cable Act, then the city shall commence an administrative proceeding after providing prompt public notice thereof, in accordance with the Cable Act. If the governing body decides preliminarily to grant renewal, the city manager shall prepare a final franchise agreement that incorporates, as appropriate, the commitments made by the applicant in the renewal application. If the applicant accepts the franchise agreement, and the final franchise agreement is ratified by the governing body in accordance with applicable laws and procedures including, but not limited to, the public hearing requirements of § 7.5-4(g), the franchise shall be renewed. If the franchise agreement is not so accepted and ratified within the time limits established by 47 U.S.C. § 546(c)(1), renewal shall be deemed preliminarily denied, and an administrative proceeding commenced, if the applicant that submitted the renewal application requests a proceeding within ten (10) working days of the expiration of the time limit established by 47 U.S.C. § 546(c)(1). 
(3)  If an administrative proceeding is commenced pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546(c), the applicant's renewal application shall be evaluated considering such matters as may be considered consistent with federal law. The following procedures shall apply: 
a.  The governing body shall, by resolution, appoint an administrative hearing officer or officers (referred to hereafter as "hearing officer"). The governing body may appoint itself as hearing officer. The hearing officer shall conduct a formal administrative hearing at which the city and the applicant shall have the right to present evidence and witnesses. 
b.  The hearing officer shall establish a schedule for the hearing which allows for documentary discovery and interrogatory responses, production of evidence, and cross-examination of witnesses. Depositions shall not be permitted unless the party requesting the deposition shows that documentary discovery and interrogatory responses will not provide it with an adequate opportunity to require the production of evidence necessary to present its case. The hearing officer shall have the authority to require the production of evidence as the interests of justice may require, including the right to require the production of evidence by the applicant that submitted the renewal application and any entity that owns or controls or is owned or controlled by, or under common control with, such applicant directly or indirectly. The hearing officer may issue protective orders, but shall not prohibit discovery on the ground that evidence sought is proprietary or involves business secrets. Any order may be enforced by a court of competent jurisdiction or by imposing appropriate sanctions in the administrative hearing. 
c.  The hearing officer may conduct a prehearing conference and establish appropriate prehearing orders. Intervention by non-parties is not authorized, except to the extent required by the Cable Act. 
d.  The hearing officer shall require the city and the applicant to submit prepared testimony prior to the hearing. Unless the parties agree otherwise, the applicant shall present evidence first, and the city shall present evidence last. 
e.  Any reports or the transcript or summary of any proceedings conducted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546(a) shall, for purposes of the administrative hearing, be regarded no differently than any other evidence. The city and the applicant shall be afforded full procedural protection regarding evidence related to these proceedings, including the right to refute any evidence introduced in these proceedings or sought to be introduced by the other party. Both parties shall have the opportunity to submit additional evidence related to issues raised in the proceeding conducted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546(a). 
f.  Following completion of any hearing, the hearing officer shall require the parties to submit proposed findings of fact with respect to the matters that the city is entitled to consider in determining whether renewal ought to be granted. Based on the record of the hearing, the hearing officer thereafter shall prepare written findings with respect to those matters the city may consider, and submit those findings to the governing body and to the parties (unless the hearing officer is the governing body, in which case the written findings shall constitute the final decision of the city). 
g.  If the hearing officer is not the governing body, the parties shall have thirty (30) days from the date the findings are submitted to the governing body to file exceptions to those findings. The governing body shall thereafter issue a written decision granting or denying the application for renewal, consistent with the requirements of the Cable Act and based on the record of the entire administrative proceeding, including, without limitation, the RFP, the response to the RFP, the formal hearing, the findings of fact, and any exceptions to the findings of fact. A copy of the final decision of the governing body shall be provided to the applicant. 
h.  In conducting the proceedings, the hearing officer will apply such procedures and requirements as may be necessary in the interest of justice. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the above, a cable operator may submit an application for renewal of a franchise pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546(h). Such a proposal may be submitted at any time and the governing body may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time (including after proceedings have been commenced in accordance with 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)). An informal renewal application may be denied for any reason. If an informal renewal application is granted, then the steps specified in subsections (d)(2) and d(3)(a.-g.) of this section need not be taken, notwithstanding the provisions of those subsections. 
(5)  The provisions of this section 7.5-4(d) shall be read and applied so that they are consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546. 
(e)  Extension of a franchise. If a franchisee is requesting a franchise extension of more than twelve (12) months, the franchisee shall submit an application to the city manager that contains all of the information required by § 7.5-4(c) of this chapter. If a franchisee is requesting a franchise extension of twelve (12) months or less, the foregoing application requirement shall not apply, and the franchisee need only file a written request with the city manager that (i) explains the reason(s) for the proposed extension and (ii) describes any proposed terms and conditions. 
(f)  Application for modification of a franchise. 
(1)  An application for modification of a franchise agreement shall include, at minimum, the following information: 
a.  The specific modification requested; 
b.  The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the financial impact on the applicant if the modification is approved or disapproved, demonstrated through, inter alia, submission of pro forma financial statements; 
c.  A statement indicating whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the requested modification meets the standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 545; 
d.  Any other information that the applicant believes is necessary for the city to make an informed determination on the application for modification; and 
e.  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and certifying that the application is consistent with the requirements of applicable law. 
(2)  A request for modification submitted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 545 shall be considered in accordance with the requirements of that section. 
(g)  Public hearings. An applicant for an initial franchise, or modification or renewal of an existing franchise, shall be notified of any public hearings held in connection with the evaluation of its application and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. In addition, prior to the issuance of a franchise, the governing body shall provide for the holding of a public hearing, following reasonable notice to the public, at which every applicant and its applications shall be examined and the public and all interested parties afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(h)  Acceptance of franchise. Following approval by the governing body, any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, and the rights, privileges and authority granted by a franchise agreement, shall take effect and be in force from and after the first date on which both the franchisee and the city have accepted and signed the franchise agreement. By accepting and signing a franchise agreement, a franchisee acknowledges that it has carefully read all of the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement, and agrees to abide by the same. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-5. - Filing fees. 
    To be acceptable for filing, an application for an initial franchise, a renewal franchise, a transfer, a franchise modification or a franchise extension shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee, payable to the treasurer of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia, in the following amount or the maximum amount permitted by law, whichever is greater, to cover costs incidental to the award, renewal, modification, or extension of a franchise, as appropriate: 
(1)  For an initial franchise: 
a.  A request for issuance of an RFP ..... $5,000.00 
b.  A response to an RFP or an unsolicited application ..... 5,000.00 
(2)  For an existing franchise: 
a.  For renewal of a franchise ..... $5,000.00 
b.  For modification of a franchise agreement ..... 5,000.00 
c.  For review of a transfer ..... 5,000.00 
d.  For extension of a franchise for a period greater than twelve (12) months ..... 5,000.00 
    In addition to the foregoing initial filing fees, an applicant shall reimburse the city for the actual costs and expenses incurred by the city that are related to, or arise in the course of, reviewing and processing of each application described in subsections (1) and (2) above, including the city's direct staff and administrative costs, and the costs of legal, engineering, accounting and other consultants retained by the city, or services obtained by the city, to assist in reviewing the application. The franchisee shall reimburse the city for any such costs within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice from the city. Payments made by a franchisee hereunder are not a franchise fee and fall within one or more of the exceptions in 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2), and no such payments may be passed through to subscribers in any form. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-6. - Provision of cable service, quality of cable service. 
(a)  Provision of service. In addition to satisfying such requirements as may be established in a franchise, every franchisee shall operate its cable system subject to the following conditions, except as prohibited by federal law: 
(1)  It is the policy of the city that every franchisee shall provide service throughout its franchise area upon request to every residence in the city whose occupant requests service. Service shall be provided within the time limits specified in section 7.5-6(a)(2). 
(2)  Except as a franchise otherwise provides, a franchisee shall extend service to any resident or to any government building in the franchise area within seven (7) business days of a request. 
(b)  Quality of service. 
(1)  To the extent permitted by law, a franchisee's cable system within the city shall meet or exceed the technical standards set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.601, et seq., and any other applicable technical standards, including such standards as hereafter may be adopted by the city subject to applicable federal law. 
(2)  A franchisee shall perform, at its sole cost, all tests necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of a franchise agreement and other technical and performance standards established by applicable law. Unless a franchise agreement or applicable law provides otherwise, all tests shall be conducted in accordance with federal rules and in accordance with the most recent edition of the National Cable Television Association's "Recommended Practices for Measurements on Cable Television Systems," or such other manual as may be directed under FCC regulations. A written report of any test results shall be filed with the city within seven (7) days of a request by the city. If a location fails to meet technical or performance specifications, the franchisee, without requirement of additional notice or request from the city, shall promptly take corrective action, and retest the locations. 
(c)  System maintenance. Scheduled maintenance shall be performed by a franchisee so as to minimize the effect of any necessary interruptions of cable service. 
(d)  Continuity of service. 
(1)  It is the right of all subscribers in a franchise area to continuously receive all available services from a franchisee as long as their financial and other obligations to the franchisee are satisfied. 
(2)  A franchisee shall ensure that all subscribers receive continuous and uninterrupted service. At the city's request, a franchisee shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, operate its system for a temporary period (the "transition period") following the termination, revocation, sale or transfer of its franchise, as necessary to maintain service to subscribers, and shall cooperate with the city to assure an orderly transition from the existing franchisee to the successor franchisee. 
(3)  During such transition period, a franchisee shall neither sell any of the system assets, nor make any physical, material, administrative or operational change that would tend to reduce the quality of service to subscribers, decrease the system's income, or materially increase expenses, without the express written permission of the city. 
(4)  The city may seek legal and/or equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(5)  The transition period shall be no longer than the reasonable period required to ensure that cable service will be available to subscribers, and shall be no longer than eighteen (18) months, unless extended by the governing body for good cause. During the transition period, a franchisee will continue to be obligated to comply with the terms and conditions of its franchise, this chapter, and applicable laws and regulations. 
(6)  For its management services during this interim period, a franchisee shall be entitled to receive as compensation the net profit generated during the interim period. 
(7)  If a franchisee abandons its system during the franchise term, or fails to operate its system in accordance with the terms of its franchise during any transition period, the city, at its option, may (i) operate the system, (ii) designate another entity to operate the system temporarily until the franchisee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or until the franchise is revoked and a new franchisee designated by the governing body is providing service, or (iii) obtain an injunction requiring the franchisee to continue operations. If the city is required to operate or designate another entity to operate the cable system, the franchisee shall promptly reimburse the city or its designee for all reasonable costs and damages incurred that are in excess of the revenues from the cable system. 
(8)  A franchisee shall forfeit its rights to notice and a hearing, and the governing body may, by resolution, declare its franchise immediately terminated, in addition to any other relief or remedies the city may have under this chapter, a franchise, or other applicable law, if: 
a.  The franchisee fails to provide cable service in accordance with its franchise over a substantial portion of the franchise area for ninety-six (96) consecutive hours, unless the city authorizes a longer interruption of service or the failure is due to force majeure, as characterized in a franchise agreement; or 
b.  The franchisee, for any period, willfully, and without cause refuses to provide cable service in accordance with its franchise over a substantial portion of the franchise area. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-7. - Design and construction. 
(a)  System construction schedule. Every franchise agreement shall specify the construction schedule that will apply to any required construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable system. The schedule shall provide for prompt completion of the construction, upgrade or rebuild, considering the amount and type of work required, and shall show areas of the city that will be affected. 
(b)  Construction procedures. 
(1)  The construction, operation and repair of cable systems are subject to, and shall be performed in strict compliance with, all federal, state and city laws, ordinances, standards, rules and regulations, policies, and practices, including, but not limited to, the National Electrical Code (NEC), the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC), and any amendments or supplements thereto. In addition, the construction, operation and repair of systems shall be performed in a manner consistent with high industry standards. Persons engaged in the construction, operation or repair of cable systems shall exercise reasonable care in the performance of all their activities, and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public or to property. 
(2)  Every system, and all parts thereof, shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection and testing by the city to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter, a franchise agreement, and other applicable law. The city shall have the right, upon request, to be notified and to be present when a system is tested by a franchisee. Each franchisee shall respond to requests for information regarding its system and its plans for the system as the city may from time to time issue, including requests for information regarding its plans for construction, operation, and repair, and the purposes for which the plant is being constructed, operated or repaired. 
(3)  Construction, operation or repair of a cable system shall not commence until written permits have been properly filed for and obtained from the proper city officials and required permit and associated fees are paid. In any permit so issued, the city may impose, as a condition of the granting of the permit, such conditions and regulations as may be necessary to the management of the public rights-of-way or city-owned property, including, by way of example and not limitation, conditions and regulations for the purpose of protecting any structures in the public rights-of-way or on city-owned property, for the proper restoration of such public rights-of-way and city-owned property, and any structures located thereon, and for the protection of the city, the public and the continuity of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Cable system operators shall follow city requirements for placement of facilities in public rights-of-way, on city-owned property or in the common shared easement, including the specific location of facilities in the public rights-of-way, on city-owned property and in the common shared easement, and shall in any event install facilities in a manner that minimizes interference with the use of the common shared easement, city-owned property and public rights-of-way by others, including others that may be installing cable systems, other communications facilities, or utilities. The city may require that facilities be installed at a particular time, at a specific place, or in a particular manner as a condition of access to a particular public right-of-way or piece of city-owned property; may deny access if the operator is not willing to comply with the city's requirements; may remove any facility that is not installed in compliance with the requirements established by the city, or which is installed without prior city approval of the time, place, or manner of installation, and charge the operator for all the costs associated with removal; and may require a person using public rights-of-way, or city-owned property to cooperate with others to minimize adverse impacts on the public rights-of-way or city-owned property through joint trenching and other arrangements. The city shall have the right to inspect all facilities being placed underground before they are covered. It shall be a franchisee's responsibility to arrange for inspection of underground facilities by the appropriate city official, and the city shall have the right to require an operator to reopen a trench or other underground installation if any facilities are covered before the city has inspected them. 
(5)  Upon order of the city manager, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans or specifications for the work, or the requirements of this chapter, the franchise, or other applicable law, shall be promptly corrected or removed by the franchisee at its expense. 
(6)  Every franchisee shall make available to other users of the public rights-of-way any of its excess conduits, so long as it is excess, at a reasonable, non-discriminatory rental rate for such use. In a franchise agreement, the city may require as a condition of issuing any public right-of-way permit for underground conduit, the installation of which requires excavation of or along any traveled way, that the franchisee emplace conduit, in excess of its present and reasonably foreseeable requirements, for the purpose of accommodating other uses of the public rights-of-way for a reasonable charge. 
(7)  Each franchisee that places facilities underground shall be a member of the One Call Notification System (otherwise known as "Miss Utility") and shall field mark the locations of its underground facilities upon request. Throughout the term of a franchise, a franchisee shall locate its facilities for the city at no charge to the city. 
(8)  To the extent possible, a franchisee shall use existing poles and conduits within the common shared easement in installing its cable system. If such poles and conduits are unavailable, then a franchisee shall construct its own wireholding structures within the common shared easement, and install its facilities in those structures, provided there is sufficient room for additional structures in the common shared easement. Where the common shared easement cannot be used, a franchisee shall, to the extent possible, use existing poles and conduits located outside the common shared easement, after obtaining any necessary authorizations. In no case may additional poles or other structures be installed in the public rights-of-way or on any public property without the prior permission of the city. Any person who is permitted to install poles shall lease capacity on those poles to others, at a rate not higher than the rate that would be permitted if 47 U.S.C. § 224 applied. 
(9)  No tree trimming shall be performed without the permission of the city and other affected authorities. Any tree trimming shall be performed in strict accordance with this Code and all city rules, regulations, policies and procedures. 
(10)  The city shall have the right to install and maintain, free of charge upon any poles or in any conduit or duct owned by a franchisee, any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with cable system operations of a franchisee; provided that, if a franchisee is authorized to erect poles or install conduits or ducts, and the city uses a franchisee's conduits, ducts or poles to install a cable system that competes with the franchisee in the provision of cable service to residential subscribers, a franchise may provide that the franchisee may charge the city a fair market rate pursuant to that franchise for the use of the poles, ducts or conduits to provide residential cable service. A franchisee shall notify the city when the franchisee enters into an agreement for the use of its poles, ducts and conduits. Copies of agreements for the use of a franchisee's conduits, ducts or poles in the public rights-of-way or on other public property shall be available for review by the city upon request. 
(11)  Work by or on behalf of a franchisee concerning installation, maintenance, replacement or removal of a cable system, or any part thereof, shall be publicized by the franchisee, at its cost, in the manner and at the times the city manager periodically may direct. 
(c)  Use of public and private property. 
(1)  Should the grades or lines of the public rights-of-way or any city-owned property that a franchisee is authorized to use and occupy be changed at any time during the term of a franchise, the franchisee shall, if necessary, as determined by the city, relocate or change its system, at its own cost and expense, so as to conform with the new grades or lines. 
(2)  Any alteration to any water and sewage mains or lines, to any drainage system or to any structures in the public rights-of-way, on city-owned property, or on private property, which alteration is required on account of the presence of a franchisee's system in the public rights-of-way or on such city-owned property or private property, shall be made at the sole cost and expense of the franchisee. During any work of constructing, operating or maintaining of a system, a franchisee shall, at its own expense, protect all existing structures belonging to the city and any other person. The city may prescribe the manner in which a franchisee shall perform any work performed within the public rights-of-way, on city-owned property, or on private property. 
(3)  Unless otherwise specified in a franchise, all system facilities shall be constructed, installed, and located in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and policies, and in accordance with the following terms and conditions: 
a.  To the extent permitted by any existing common shared easement agreement, a franchisee shall install its system facilities within the common shared easement. A franchisee shall install its facilities using either armored cable or appropriate wire holding structures. 
b.  If, for any reason, a franchisee does not have access to the common shared easement, then system facilities shall be installed within a compatible use easement located outside the CSE, using armored cable or appropriate wireholding structures. 
c.  Poles, underground conduits, ducts or other wireholding structures shall not be installed in the public rights-of-way or on other city property without the written permission of the city, or on private property without the written permission of the owner unless there is a compatible easement available. 
d.  Whenever any existing telephone, electric utility, cable system, or other similar facilities are located underground within the public rights-of-way or on city-owned property, a person installing another cable system also shall place its facilities underground. 
e.  Whenever any existing telephone, electric utility, or communications facilities are located or relocated underground within the public rights-of-way or on city-owned or private property, franchisees that then occupy the same public rights-of-way, city-owned property or private property shall concurrently relocate their respective facilities underground, at their own expense. 
(4)  All public rights-of-way, public property, or private property that is disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation or repair of a cable system shall be promptly repaired, at its own cost and expense, by the franchisee that disturbed or damaged the public rights-of-way, public property or private property. 
(d)  Interference with public projects; relocation of facilities. 
(1)  Nothing in this chapter or any franchise agreement shall be in preference to, or in hindrance of, the right of the city, the governing body or any board, authority, commission or public service corporation to perform or carry on any construction, public works or public improvements of any description. Should a franchisee's system in any way interfere with the construction, maintenance or repair of any public works or public improvements, the franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, protect or relocate its system, or part thereof, as directed by the city, the governing body, the city manager or any city official, board, authority, or commission. 
(2)  If any person that is authorized to place facilities in the public rights-of-way, or on city-owned or private property, requests a franchisee to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, remove, or relocate its facilities to accommodate the construction, operation, or repair of the facilities of such other person, the franchisee shall, after seven (7) calendar days' advance written notice, take action to effect the necessary changes requested. If the requested action is necessary to address an emergency that, in the opinion of the city, might affect the public health, safety or welfare, then the franchisee shall take immediate action upon receipt of notice of the request to complete the requested action. Unless the matter is governed by a valid contract, a local ordinance, regulation or policy, or a state or federal law or regulation, or in other cases where the system that is being requested to move was not properly installed, the reasonable cost of the same shall be borne by the party requesting the protection, support, temporary disconnection, removal, or relocation and performed at no charge to the city. 
(3)  A franchisee shall, at the request of any person holding a valid permit issued by a governmental authority, temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires to permit the temporary or permanent moving of buildings, structures, equipment of whatever nature, or other objects. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be borne solely by the person making such a request, unless otherwise agreed upon by the franchisee and the requesting party. A franchisee shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(e)  Permits. In addition to such permits as may otherwise be required by the city or any other entity having jurisdiction, a franchisee shall be required to obtain permits for the installation of its facilities in the public rights-of-way, as required by the Manassas Park Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-8. - Channels and facilities for public, educational and governmental use, leased access. 
(a)  Management of channels. The governing body may designate one (1) or more entities, including a non-profit community access corporation, to perform any or all of the following functions: 
(1)  To manage any necessary scheduling or allocation of capacity on any institutional network; and/or 
(2)  On the city's behalf, to program any public, educational or governmental access channel. Until such entities have been designated, the city manager shall be responsible for these functions. 
(b)  Public access programming rules. For any public access channel, the community access corporation managing such channel shall prohibit the presentation of: any advertising material designed to promote the sale of commercial products or services (including advertising by or on behalf of candidates for public office); and lottery information, and shall establish rules to this effect as well as rules requiring first-come, nondiscriminatory access, and rules permitting the public inspection of the names and addresses of all persons and groups requesting access time. Records of such requests shall be retained by the entity managing the Public Access Channel for a period of two (2) years. 
(c)  Leased access. A franchisee shall provide leased access channels as required by federal law. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-9. - Consumer protection. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  This section 7.5-9 sets forth customer service standards that a franchisee shall satisfy. In addition, a franchisee shall at all times satisfy any additional or stricter requirements established by a franchise agreement or other applicable federal, state, or local law or regulation, as the same may be amended from time to time, including, without limitation, consumer protection laws. 
(2)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit the governing body from waiving the requirements established in this section 7.5-9, where such waiver is in the best interests of the city and its residents. 
(3)  Nothing in this chapter in any way relieves a franchisee of its obligation to comply with other applicable consumer protection laws and its franchise agreement. 
(b)  Telephone and office availability. 
(1)  Each franchisee shall maintain an office at a convenient location in the city to allow subscribers to request service, pay bills, and conduct other business. Each franchisee shall perform service calls, during at least the hours 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, provided that a franchisee shall respond to outages twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. Each franchisee shall perform installations during at least the hours 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Saturday. Each franchisee shall perform disconnects during at least the hours 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, but shall make reasonable good faith offers to accommodate subscribers at other times. Each franchisee shall establish a publicly-listed, local toll-free telephone number. The phone shall be answered by customer service representatives at least Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. for the purpose of receiving requests for service and inquiries; and at least Monday through Friday 8:30 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and Sunday 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for the purpose of receiving complaints; after those hours a franchisee shall arrange for the phone to be answered so that customers can register complaints and report service problems on a twenty-four (24) hour per day, seven (7) day per week basis, and so that the franchisee can respond to service outages as required herein. 
(2)  Telephone answering time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds or four (4) rings, and the time to transfer the call to a customer service representative (including hold time) shall not exceed an additional thirty (30) seconds. This standard shall be met ninety (90) percent of the time, measured quarterly. Under normal operating conditions a subscriber will receive a busy signal less than three (3) percent of the time. When the business office is closed, an answering service capable of receiving and recording service complaints and inquiries shall be employed. The after-hours answering service shall comply with the same telephone answer time standard set forth in this section. 
(3)  A franchisee shall hire sufficient staff so that it can adequately respond to customer inquiries, complaints, and requests for service in its office, over the telephone, and at the subscriber's residence. 
(c)  Scheduling work. 
(1)  All appointments for service, installation, or disconnection shall be specified by date. Each franchisee shall specify a specific time at which the work shall be done, or offer a choice of time blocks, which shall not exceed four (4) hours in length. A franchisee shall also, upon request, schedule service installation calls outside normal business hours, for the express convenience of the customer. If at any time an installer or technician believes it is impossible to make a scheduled appointment time, an attempt to contact the customer will be made prior to the time of appointment and the appointment scheduled at a specific time convenient to the customer, if rescheduling is necessary. It is a franchisee's burden to prove it met an appointment. 
(2)  A franchisee shall give to subscribers who have experienced a missed appointment (where the missed appointment was not the subscriber's fault): at a minimum, installation or service call free of charge. A franchisee shall be responsible for ensuring that a subscriber's bill reflects any credit or deduction required by this section, without notice from or complaint by the subscriber. 
(3)  With regard to mobility-limited customers, upon a subscriber's request, each franchisee shall arrange for pickup and/or replacement of converters or other franchisee equipment at the subscriber's address or by a satisfactory equivalent (such as the provision of a postage-prepaid mailer). 
(4)  Requests for service, repair, and maintenance shall be responded to by a trained customer service representative within twenty-four (24) hours. Calls made before 2:00 p.m. shall be responded to the same day. A franchisee shall respond to all other inquiries (including billing inquiries) within five (5) business days of the inquiry or complaint. 
(5)  Repairs and maintenance for outages or service interruptions, and repairs other than outages or service interruptions not requiring in-unit work, shall be completed within twenty-four (24) hours, except for calls received before 2:00 p.m., which shall be serviced the same day. Work on all other requests for service shall be begun by the next business day after notification of the problem, and shall be completed within three (3) days from the date of the initial request, except installation requests, provided that a franchisee shall complete the work in the shortest time possible where, for reasons beyond the franchisee's control, the work could not be completed in those time periods even with the exercise of all due diligence; the failure of a franchisee to hire sufficient staff or to properly train its staff shall not justify a franchisee's failure to comply with this provision. If a franchisee makes a temporary repair in order to restore service within the time period specified above, the franchisee shall complete permanent repair of the problem within ten (10) business days. Except as federal law allows, no charge shall be made to the subscriber for repair, except for the cost of repairs to the franchisee's equipment or facilities where it can be documented that the equipment or facility was damaged by a subscriber. 
(6)  Except in cases of severe weather, a franchisee shall not cancel a service or installation appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day preceding the appointment. 
(7)  The standards of sections 7.5-9(c)(4) and 7.5-9(c)(5) shall be met at least ninety (90) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(8)  The installation time standard in section 7.5-6(a)(2), and below shall be met no less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis: requests for additional outlets, service upgrades or other connections (i.e., DMX, VCR, A/B Switch) separate from an initial installation shall be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed. 
(d)  Notice to subscribers. 
(1)  A franchisee shall provide each subscriber at the time cable service is installed, and at least every twelve (12) months thereafter, the following materials: 
a.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
b.  Written instructions for placing a service call, filing a complaint, or requesting an adjustment (including when a subscriber is entitled to refunds for outages and how to obtain them); 
c.  A notice showing the telephone number of the city office responsible for receiving customer complaints; 
d.  A schedule of rates and charges, channel positions, and a description of programming services; 
e.  A copy of the service contract (at initial installation only); and 
f.  A description of the franchisee's installation and service maintenance policies, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures, and any other of its policies applicable to its subscribers. 
(2)  Copies of the materials specified in the preceding subsection shall be provided to the city manager, upon request. A franchisee shall provide the city manager and all subscribers at least thirty (30) days notice of any significant changes in the information required to be provided by this section 7.5-9(d). Such notice shall be in writing and by announcement on the system. 
(3)  All franchisee promotional materials, announcements, and advertising of cable service to subscribers and the general public, where price information is listed in any manner, shall clearly and accurately disclose price terms. In the case of pay-per-view or pay-per-event programming, all promotional materials shall clearly and accurately disclose price terms and in the case of telephone orders, a franchisee shall take appropriate steps to ensure that customer service representatives clearly and accurately disclose price terms to potential customers in advance of taking the order. 
(4)  Each franchisee shall maintain a public file containing all notices provided to subscribers under these customer service standards, as well as all promotional offers made to subscribers. The notices and offers shall be kept in the file for at least one (1) year from the date of such notice or promotional offer. 
(e)  Interruptions of service. 
(1)  A franchisee may intentionally interrupt service on the cable system only for good cause, during periods of minimum use, and for the shortest time possible and, only after a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours prior notice, except in emergency situations, to subscribers and the city manager of the anticipated service interruptions. 
(2)  For any period in which a subscriber suffers a service interruption for one (1) hour or more during the period from 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m., or for more than four (4) hours in any 24-hour period, other than a planned interruption pursuant to section 7.5-9(e)(1), a franchisee shall credit against the subscriber's next bill an amount equal to one-thirtieth ( 1/30 ) of the monthly charge for any service or service tier affected, and shall pay a direct refund to any subscriber who terminates service before all credits owed are applied. The charge for any per-program selection that is materially affected by the outage shall also be refunded or credited. A franchisee shall be responsible for making such refunds or credits upon receipt of a complaint of a service interruption from a subscriber, unless the franchisee can show that the service interruption was insufficient in length or character to require a credit, or that the subscriber was responsible for the service interruption. A franchisee shall also credit or refund appropriate amounts to all subscribers that the franchisee can reasonably identify as affected by a service interruption, regardless of whether any complaint has been filed. 
(f)  Billing. 
(1)  A franchisee's first billing statement after a new installation or service change shall be prorated as appropriate and shall reflect any security deposit. 
(2)  A franchisee's billing statement shall be clear, concise and understandable, shall itemize each category of service and equipment provided to the subscriber and must state clearly the charge therefor. 
(3)  A franchisee's billing statement shall show a specific payment due date not earlier than the later of (i) fifteen (15) days after the date the statement is mailed; or (ii) the fifteenth (15th) day of the period in which the service being billed is rendered. Any balance not received by the due date may be assessed a late fee no greater than the maximum permitted by state law. The late fee shall appear on the following month's billing statement. Subscribers shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by a franchisee, including failure to timely or correctly bill a subscriber, or failure to properly credit a subscriber for a payment timely made. 
(4)  A franchisee shall notify a subscriber that he or she can remit payment in person at the franchisee's office in the city and inform the subscriber of the address of that office. 
(5)  A franchisee shall respond to all written billing complaints from subscribers within thirty (30) days of receipt of the complaint. 
(6)  Refund checks to subscribers shall be issued no later than (i) the earlier of the subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution of the refund request, or thirty (30) days; or (ii) the date of return of all equipment to franchisee, if service has been terminated. 
(7)  Credits for cable service shall be issued no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle after the determination that the credit is warranted. 
(8)  If a subscriber terminates service before the end of a prepaid period, a pro rata portion of any prepaid service fee, using the actual number of days in the month as a basis, shall be refunded to the subscriber. If any subscriber terminates service during the first six (6) months of that service because of the failure of a franchisee to render satisfactory service to that subscriber, the franchisee shall refund to the subscriber an amount equal to the installation charge paid by the subscriber multiplied by the fraction of the six-month period for which the subscriber will not be receiving service. 
(g)  Disconnection/downgrades. 
(1)  A subscriber may terminate service at any time. 
(2)  A franchisee shall promptly disconnect from its system or downgrade any subscriber who so requests. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination or downgrade of service may be required of subscribers by any franchisee. No charge may be imposed for any voluntary disconnection or downgrade, except to the extent that federal law provides that the franchisee shall be permitted to so charge a subscriber. So long as a subscriber returns any equipment necessary to receive a service within five (5) business days of the disconnection, no charge may be imposed by any franchisee for any cable service delivered after the date of the disconnect request. However, if a subscriber does not return, or permit a franchisee to retrieve, such equipment within five (5) business days after disconnection, a franchisee may charge a subscriber for any cable service delivered until the equipment is returned. 
(3)  A subscriber may be asked, but not required, to disconnect a franchisee's equipment and return it to the business office. 
(4)  Any security deposit and/or other funds due a subscriber that disconnects or downgrades service shall be returned to the subscriber within thirty (30) days or in the next billing cycle, whichever is earlier, from the date the disconnection or the downgrade was requested, except in cases where the subscriber does not permit a franchisee to recover its equipment, in which case the amounts owed shall be paid to subscribers within thirty (30) days of the date the equipment was recovered, or in the next billing cycle, whichever is earlier. 
(5)  If a subscriber fails to pay a monthly subscriber fee or other fee or charge, a franchisee may disconnect the subscriber's service; however, such disconnection shall not be effected until after forty-five (45) days from the due date of the monthly subscriber fee or other charge, including at least ten (10) days advance written notice to the subscriber in question of intent to disconnect. If the subscriber pays all amounts due, including late charges, before the date scheduled for disconnection, the franchisee shall not disconnect service. After disconnection, upon payment by the subscriber in full of all proper fees or charges, including the payment of a reconnection charge, if any, the franchisee shall promptly reinstate service. 
(6)  A franchisee may immediately disconnect a subscriber if (i) the subscriber is damaging or destroying the franchisee's cable system or equipment; or (ii) the subscriber is not authorized to receive cable service, or is facilitating, aiding or abetting the unauthorized reception of cable service by others. A franchisee may pursue criminal or civil action against said subscriber as appropriate. After disconnection, a franchisee shall restore service if the subscriber provides adequate assurances, including monetary or legal assurances, that it has ceased the practices that led to disconnection, and paid all proper fees and charges, including any reconnect fees and amounts owed the franchisee for damage to its cable system or equipment. 
(7)  A franchisee may also disconnect a subscriber that causes signal leakage in excess of federal limits. A franchisee may do so after five (5) days written notice to the subscriber, if the subscriber fails to take steps to correct the problem. In addition, a franchisee may disconnect a subscriber without notice where signal leakage is detected originating from the subscriber's premises in excess of federal limits, provided that the franchisee shall immediately notify the subscriber of the problem and, once the problem is corrected, reconnect the subscriber without charge. 
(8)  With respect to home wiring, a franchisee shall comply with 47 C.F.R. § 802, and any other applicable rules or requirements. 
(h)  Deposits. A franchisee may require a reasonable, non-discriminatory deposit on equipment provided to subscribers, in addition to any allowable monthly fees. Any subscriber deposit required by a franchisee shall bear interest in accordance with applicable law. All deposits, with interest, shall be returned to a subscriber when the equipment is returned at time of disconnection of reception of service. 
(i)  Complaint procedures. 
(1)  Each franchisee shall establish a clear procedure for resolving complaints filed by any interested party, providing that complaints may be made orally or in writing, at the complainant's option, and identifying a person responsible for handling complaints that are not already being handled by a customer service representative. 
(2)  Each franchisee shall provide an initial response to a complaint within five (5) days of its receipt and a final written response within thirty (30) days after the complaint is made. The final written response shall include a notice stating that, if the complaint has not been resolved to the complainant's satisfaction, the matter may be referred to the city manager. 
(j)  Parental control option. A franchisee shall make available to any subscribers, upon request, the option of blocking the video and audio portion of any channel or channels of programming entering a subscriber's home. This control option shall be provided at no charge, except to the extent that federal law specifically provides that a franchisee shall be permitted to so charge a subscriber, provided that the franchisee may require a reasonable deposit for the use of any customer premises device. The control option described herein shall be made available to all subscribers requesting it when any cable service is provided, or within a reasonable time thereafter. 
(k)  Enforcement. 
(1)  A franchisee shall file annually with the city a statement signed under oath by an officer or employee certifying compliance with these customer service standards for each calendar quarter. Each such certification shall be filed with the franchisee's annual report. If a franchisee is unable to certify full compliance for each calendar quarter, the franchisee shall indicate in its filing each standard with which the franchisee is in compliance and in noncompliance. 
(2)  If a franchisee is in noncompliance with any standard during any calendar quarter, the franchisee shall include in its annual filing a statement specifying areas of noncompliance, the reason for the noncompliance and a remedial plan. 
(3)  An officer or employee of a franchisee who knowingly and intentionally signs under oath a false compliance certificate or noncompliance statement shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by law. 
(4)  A franchisee that fails to file a compliance certificate or noncompliance statement as required herein shall be liable for the penalty specified for violation of customer service standards in section 7.5-14 herein. 
(5)  Except as prohibited by federal law, a franchisee, if it fails to comply with the standards herein, shall be subject to penalties, forfeitures and any other remedies or sanctions available under federal, state or local law including, without limitation, this chapter and a franchise agreement if it fails to comply with the standards herein. 
(l)  Exclusive contracts and anticompetitive acts prohibited. 
(1)  A franchisee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or manager to enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or continuing cable service. However, nothing herein prevents a franchisee from entering into an otherwise lawful, mutually desired exclusive arrangement with a building owner or manager of a multiple dwelling unit or commercial subscriber. 
(2)  No franchisee shall engage in acts that have the purpose or effect of limiting competition for the provision of cable service or services similar to cable service in the city, except for such acts as are authorized by federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-10. - Rate regulation. 
(a)  General authority. The city reserves the right to regulate all rates and charges, except to the extent it is prohibited from doing so by law. 
(b)  Nondiscrimination. 
(1)  Nondiscriminatory rates. Subject to applicable law, a franchisee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the same general class of subscribers and which shall be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a franchisee from offering, by way of illustration and not limitation, (i) discounts to senior citizens or economically disadvantaged groups; (ii) discounts to commercial and multiple-family dwelling subscribers billed on a bulk basis; (iii) promotional discounts; or (iv) reduced installation rates for subscribers who have multiple services. 
(2)  Applicability. The provisions of this section 7.5-10(b) shall apply to all rates, whether or not they are otherwise subject to rate regulation, except to the extent specifically prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-11. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  Finding. The governing body finds that public rights-of-way to be used by a franchisee for the operation of a cable system are valuable public property acquired and maintained by the state and city at great expense to the taxpayers. The governing body further finds that the grant of a franchise to use public rights-of-way is a valuable property right without which a franchisee would be required to invest substantial capital. 
(b)  Payment of franchise fee. Each franchisee shall pay a franchise fee of five (5) percent of gross revenues, unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement. Every franchise agreement shall reserve the right to increase this fee to the maximum that may be charged consistent with federal and state law. 
(c)  Not a tax or in lieu of any other tax or fee. 
(1)  Payment of the franchise fee shall not be considered in the nature of a tax or in lieu of other taxes or fees imposed by the city. 
(2)  The franchise fee is in addition to all other taxes, fees and payments that a franchisee may be required to pay under its franchise agreement or any federal, state, or local law, and to any other tax, fee, or assessment imposed by utilities and cable operators for use of their services, facilities, or equipment, including any applicable amusement taxes and annual license taxes, except to the extent that such fees, taxes, or assessments shall be treated as a franchise fee under Section 622 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542. 
(3)  A franchisee shall not designate the franchise fee as a tax in any communication to a subscriber. 
(d)  No accord or satisfaction. No acceptance by or payment to the city of a franchise fee, or any portion thereof, shall be construed as a release or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums due or for the performance of any other obligation of a franchisee, or as an acknowledgment that the amount paid is the correct amount due. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-12. - Reports and records. 
(a)  Access to books and records. 
(1)  Upon request, each franchisee shall provide the city with access to all documents, including contracts, books, and records, related to the construction, operation, or repair of its system so that the city may audit, inspect and/or copy these documents, books, and records. A franchisee's obligation includes the obligation to produce all documents, books and records related to revenues derived from the operation of the system. A franchisee is responsible for obtaining or maintaining the necessary possession or control of all documents, books, and records related to the construction, operation or repair of its system, so that the franchisee can produce the documents upon request. Documents, books, and records shall be maintained for a period of five (5) years, except that (i) any record that is a public record shall be maintained for the period required by state law; (ii) any contract shall be maintained until it expires; and (iii) a franchise may specify a shorter period for certain categories of voluminous documents, books and records where the information contained therein can be derived simply from other materials. 
(2)  For purposes of this chapter, the terms "records," "documents" and "books" shall be construed as such terms are defined in the Virginia Freedom of Information Act and shall be read expansively to include information in whatever format stored. Records, documents, and books requested shall be produced to the city at the city manager's office, unless the city directs otherwise, or by agreement or pursuant to section 7.5-12(a)(3). 
(3)  If any documents, books and records are too voluminous, or for security reasons cannot be copied and moved, then a franchisee may request that the inspection take place at some other location mutually agreed to by the city and a franchisee, provided that (i) the franchisee shall make necessary arrangements for copying documents, books and records selected by the city after its review; and (ii) the franchisee shall pay all travel and additional copying expenses incurred by the city (above those that would have been incurred had the documents, books and records been produced in the city) in inspecting those documents, books and records or having those documents, books and records inspected by its designee. 
(4)  Without limiting the foregoing, a franchisee shall provide the city with the following within ten (10) days of receipt or (in the case of documents, books or records created by the franchisee or its affiliate) filing: 
a.  Notices of deficiency or forfeiture related to the operation of the system; and 
b.  Copies of any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy by a franchisee, or by any partnership or corporation that owns or controls the franchisee directly or indirectly. 
(b)  Retention of records; relation to privacy rights. Each franchisee shall take all reasonable steps throughout the term of the franchise to ensure that it is able to provide the city with all information which shall be provided or may be requested under this chapter, a franchise or applicable law, including by providing appropriate subscriber privacy notices. Each franchisee shall be responsible for redacting any data that applicable law prevents it from providing to the city. Nothing in this section shall be read to require franchisee to violate state or federal law protecting subscriber privacy. 
(c)  Communications with regulatory agencies. Within five (5) days after a franchisee, its affiliates and/or subsidiaries have filed a report, petition, or communication with any city, state, or federal agency or regulatory commission pertaining to any aspect of operations hereunder or the financial arrangements therefor, the franchisee shall file a copy of such report, petition or communication with the city manager. Any reports, petitions or communications a franchisee receives from any state, or federal agency or regulatory commission concerning the operation of the system shall be filed with the city manager within thirty (30) days of the date they are received by the franchise agreement holder, except that if applicable law permits a response to such materials by the city and sets a deadline of sixty (60) or fewer days for the city's response, such materials shall be filed with the city within five (5) days of the date they are received by the franchisee. 
(d)  Reports. 
(1)  Within forty-five (45) days of the end of each calendar quarter, a franchisee shall submit a report to the city containing the following information: 
a.  The number of service calls (calls requiring a truck roll) received by type during the prior quarter, and the percentage of service calls compared to the subscriber base by type of complaint; and 
b.  The number and type of outages known by the franchisee for the prior quarter, identifying separately the following: 
(i)  Each planned outage, the time it occurred, its duration, and the estimated area and number of subscribers affected; 
(ii)  Each known unplanned outage, the time it occurred, its estimated duration and the estimated area and number of subscribers affected, and if known, the cause; and 
(iii)  The total estimated hours of known outages as a percentage of total hours of cable system operation. An outage is a service interruption affecting two (2) or more subscribers. 
(2)  No later than ninety (90) days after the end of its fiscal year, a franchisee shall submit a written report to the city manager containing such information as may be required from time to time by the city, and at least the following: 
a.  A summary of the previous year's activities in the development of the cable system, including descriptions of services begun or discontinued, and the number of subscribers gained or lost for each category of cable service; 
b.  A summary of complaints for which records are required under section 7.5-12(e)(1), identifying both the number and nature of the complaints received and an explanation of their dispositions; 
c.  A statistical report showing that the franchisee has complied with the telephone answering requirements set forth in section 7.5-9(b)(2) of this chapter; 
d.  A fully audited revenue report from the previous calendar year for the cable system prepared according to generally accepted auditing standards by an independent certified public accountant, and a reconciliation between previously projected estimates and actual audited figures; 
e.  Information related to a capital program and a description of projected new services for the next two (2) years; 
f.  An ownership report, indicating all persons who at the time of filing control or own an interest in the franchisee of five (5) or more; 
g.  A list of officers and members of the board of directors of the franchisee and any affiliates directly involved in the operation or the maintenance of the cable system; 
h.  An organizational chart showing all persons with more than a five (5) percent ownership interest in the franchisee, and the nature of that ownership interest (whether limited partner, general partner, preferred shareholder, or other person); and showing the same information for each corporation or partnership that holds such an interest in the corporations or partnerships so identified, and so on, until the ultimate corporate and partnership interests are identified; 
i.  An annual report for each entity identified in section 7.5-12(d)(2)f. which issues an annual report; and 
j.  A complete report on the franchisee's plant. This plant report shall state the physical miles of plant construction and plant in operation during the prior calendar year (categorized as aerial and underground, and as fiber optic, including the fiber count, and coaxial); identify any cases where subscribers contributed to plant extension; and report the results of appropriate electronic measurements to show conformity with FCC technical standards. Each franchisee shall annually provide a citywide map of cable facilities located in public rights-of-way or on city-owned property, or private property. The map shall be referenced to Virginia State Plane Coordinates, or any subsequent system adopted by the city, and shall be in both digital and paper formats. The annual map shall have an interlinked data base table of addresses of subscribers, which may be displayed upon the digital map. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the above, once the information required by sections 7.5-12(d)(2)e.-7.5-12(d)(2)g. has been filed once, it need only be refiled if it changes. 
(e)  Records required. A franchisee shall at all times maintain: 
(1)  Records of all complaints received with information sufficient to allow a franchisee to prepare the reports required in this section 7.5-12. The term "complaints" as used herein and throughout this chapter refers to written and oral complaints about any aspect of the cable system or a franchisee's operations, including, without limitation, complaints requiring service calls, and complaints about employee courtesy, billing, prices, programming, outages and signal quality; 
(2)  Records of outages known to a franchisee, with information sufficient to allow a franchisee to prepare the reports required in this section 7.5-12; 
(3)  Records of service calls for repairs and maintenance indicating the date and time service was requested, the date of acknowledgment and date and time service was scheduled (if it was scheduled), and the date and time service was provided, and (if different) the date and time the problem was solved; 
(4)  Records of installation/reconnection and requests for service extension, indicating the date of request, the date of acknowledgment, and the date and time service was extended; and 
(5)  System financial records prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(f)  Additional records and reports. The city may require franchisees to maintain records, and to prepare reports relevant to determining a franchisee's compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter and a franchise. 
(g)  Maps. 
(1)  Each franchisee shall maintain accurate as-built maps and improvement plans which show the location, size, and a general description of all facilities installed in the public rights-of-way, or on city-owned or private property, and any power supply sources (including voltages and connections). Maps shall be based upon post-construction inspection to verify location. Each franchisee shall provide a map to the city showing the location of its facilities, in such detail and scale as may be directed by the city manager. New as built maps shall be promptly submitted to the city when a cable system expands or is relocated. Copies of maps shall be provided on disk, in a format specified by the city manager. 
(2)  Each franchisee shall establish a network of permanent monumentation on at least a two-mile interval throughout the city which ties with existing Metro monuments and monumentation of neighboring jurisdictions, to insure citywide mapping of cable installation within the Virginia State Plane Coordinate system, or any subsequent mapping system adopted by the city. 
(3)  During specific project construction, each franchisee shall submit permit plans in digital format compatible with ESRI ArcInfo 8.0 software, or other software as required by the city, tied to Virginia State Plane Coordinates, along with fifty (50) scale paper copies. 
(h)  Performance evaluation. 
(1)  The city may, at its discretion, hold performance evaluation sessions. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public. A franchisee may be required by the city to notify subscribers of all such evaluation sessions by announcement on a designated local channel on the system between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five (5) consecutive days preceding each session. 
(2)  Topics that may be discussed at any evaluation session may include, but not be limited to, system performance and construction, a franchisee's compliance with this chapter and its franchise agreement, customer service and complaint response, subscriber privacy, services provided, programming offered, service rate structures, franchise fees, penalties, free or discounted services, applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and line extensions. 
(3)  During the evaluation process, a franchisee shall fully cooperate with the city and shall provide such information and documents as the city may need to reasonably perform its review, including information which may be deemed proprietary. 
(i)  Waiver of reporting requirements. The governing body may, at its discretion, waive in writing the requirement of any particular report specified in this section 7.5-12. 
(j)  Principal office. Every franchisee shall maintain its principal office in the city at a place to be determined in the franchise agreement, for as long as the franchisee continues to operate the system or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-13. - Indemnification of the city and residents. 
(a)  Indemnification and hold harmless. 
(1)  No franchise or other authorization to use the public rights-of-way, or any independent permission to use city-owned property granted to a franchisee shall be valid or effective until and unless the city obtains adequate indemnity from such franchisee. The indemnity shall, at a minimum: 
a.  Release, indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city and its elected and appointed officials, officers, councils, commissions, commissioners, employees, agents, and volunteers from and against any and all liability, costs, expenses, claims, fees, and responsibility in or arising out of: the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system; copyright infringements or a failure by a franchisee, its affiliates or any other person to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or franchisees of programs to be delivered by the system; the conduct or presence of the franchisee's business in the city; or liability or responsibility in any way arising out of a franchisee's enjoyment or exercise of the privileges granted by a franchise, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or a franchise. Each franchisee shall further agree not to sue or seek any money or damages from the city in connection with the above-mentioned matters; 
b.  Indemnify and hold harmless the city, and its elected and appointed officials, officers, councils, commissions, commissioners, employees, agents, and volunteers from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, or causes of action of any kind or nature, and the resulting losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys' fees, liabilities, damages, orders, judgments, or decrees sustained by the city or any third party arising out of, or by reason of, or resulting from or of the acts, errors, or omissions of the franchisee, or its agents, independent contractors, or employees related to or in any way arising out of the construction, operation or repair of the system; 
c.  Provide that the covenants and representations relating to the indemnification and hold harmless provisions shall survive the term of any franchise and continue in full force and effect as to the party's responsibility to indemnify; and 
d.  Provide that, to the extent permitted by applicable rules of civil, criminal and appellate procedure, a franchisee shall not implead or join the governing body, the city, its elected and appointed officers, officials, councils, commissions, commissioners, employees, agents and volunteers in any cause of action against the franchisee arising out of the exercise of any rights the franchisee has under its franchise. 
(2)  Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the city shall be construed to limit the liability of a franchisee for damages to the city, its elected and appointed officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees, agents, and volunteers, and any other person or persons, under the franchise. 
(b)  Insurance. No franchise to use the public rights-of-way issued to a franchisee shall be valid or effective until and unless the city obtains assurance that the franchisee (and those acting on its behalf) have adequate insurance. At a minimum, the following insurance requirements shall be satisfied by a franchisee: 
(1)  A franchisee shall not commence construction or operation of a cable system without obtaining all insurance required under this section and approval of such insurance by the city, nor shall a franchise allow any contractor or subcontractor to commence work on its contract or subcontract, until all similar such insurance required of the same has been obtained and approved. The required insurance shall be obtained and maintained for the entire period the franchisee has facilities in the public rights-of-way, or on city-owned or private property, and for a period thereafter as specified in the minimum coverages described below. If the franchisee, its contractors or subcontractors do not have the required insurance, then the city may order such entities to stop operations until the insurance is obtained and approved. 
(2)  Certificates of insurance, reflecting evidence of the required insurance, shall be filed with the city. For entities that are entering the market, the certificates shall be filed prior to the commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse in coverage. For entities that have facilities in the public rights-of-way, or on city-owned or private property as of the effective date of this chapter, the certificate shall be filed within sixty (60) days of the date of this chapter, annually thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse in coverage, unless a pre-existing franchise agreement provides for filing of certificates in a different manner. 
(3)  These certificates shall contain a provision that coverages afforded under these policies will not be canceled, suspended, or amended until at least thirty (30) days prior written notice has been delivered to the city manager. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Financial ratings shall be no less than "A" in the latest edition of "Best's Key Rating Guide," published by A.M. Best Guide. 
(4)  In the event that the insurance certificate provided indicates that the insurance shall terminate or lapse during the term of a franchise, then in that event, the franchisee shall furnish, at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the date of such insurance, a renewed certificate of insurance as proof that equal and like coverage will be in force for the balance of the period of the franchise under which the cable system operates. In the event of a claim against the city, any city employee or official, or the franchisee, that is in any way related to the presence of the system in the city or the operations of the franchisee, copies of the required policies will be provided by the franchisee to the city upon request. 
(5)  A franchisee and its contractors or subcontractors engaged in work on the franchisee's behalf in, on, under or over public rights-of-way, city-owned property or private property, shall maintain the following minimum insurance: 
a.  Comprehensive general liability insurance to cover liability for bodily injury and property damage. Exposures to be covered are: premises, operations, products/completed operations, and certain contracts. Coverage shall be written on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of liability: 
1.  Bodily injury: 
(i)  Each occurrence ..... $1,000,000.00 
(ii)  Annual aggregate ..... 3,000,000.00 
2.  Property damage 
(i)  Each occurrence ..... 1,000,000.00 
(ii)  Annual aggregate ..... 3,000,000.00 
3.  Personal injury 
(i)  Each occurrence ..... 1,000,000.00 
(ii)  Annual aggregate ..... 3,000,000.00 
4.  Completed operations and products liability insurance shall be maintained for two (2) years after the termination of a franchise (in the case of the system owner or operator) or completion of the work for the system owner or operator (in the case of a contractor or subcontractor). 
5.  Property damage liability insurance shall include coverage for the following hazards: X-explosion, C-collapse, U-underground. 
b.  Workers' compensation insurance shall be maintained to comply with statutory limits for all employees, and in the case any work is sublet, each franchisee shall require the subcontractors similarly to provide workers' compensation insurance for all the latter's employees unless such employees are covered by the protection afforded by each franchisee. Each franchisee and its contractors and subcontractors shall maintain during the life of this policy employer's liability insurance. The following limits shall be maintained: 
1.  Workers' Compensation-Statutory 
2.  Employer's Liability-$500,000.00 per occurrence 
c.  Comprehensive auto liability 
1.  Bodily injury: 
(i)  Each occurrence ..... $1,000,000.00 
(ii)  Annual aggregate ..... 3,000,000.00 
2.  Property damage: 
(i)  Each occurrence ..... 1,000,000.00 
(ii)  Annual aggregate ..... 3,000,000.00 
Coverage shall include owned, hired and non-owned vehicles. 
(6)  All insurance policies, excluding the Workers' Compensation insurance policy, shall name the city, its elected and appointed officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees, agents and volunteers as additional insureds. In the event of a claim under any of the above insurance policies, the franchisee shall pay all deductibles. 
(7)  Each franchisee shall hold the city, and the persons and entities described in subsection (6) above, harmless on account of claims for damages to persons, property or premises arising out of each franchisee's construction, operation or repair of its cable system. 
(8)  In every franchise agreement, the city shall reserve the right to require any other insurance coverage it deems necessary depending upon the exposures. 
(9)  Failure to comply with the insurance requirements set forth in this section shall constitute a material violation of a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-14. - Performance bond, security fund, revocation and termination due to bankruptcy. 
(a)  Performance bond. Every franchise agreement shall require the franchisee to post a performance bond in an amount acceptable to the city to secure the performance of the franchisee's obligations to repair and restore the public rights-of-way in accordance with this Code. 
(b)  Security fund. 
(1)  Every franchisee shall establish a security fund to secure the payment of fees owed, to secure any other performance promised in a franchise agreement or required by this Code, and to pay any taxes, fees or liens owed to the city. The governing body, or its designee, shall set the amount of the security fund in a franchise agreement. Any letter of credit provided to satisfy this requirement shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney and with an institution acceptable to the city manager. Should the city draw upon the security fund, it shall promptly notify the franchisee, and the franchisee shall promptly restore the security fund to the full required amount. This security fund may be reduced by the governing body for a franchisee where the governing body determines, in its discretion, that a particular franchisee's operations are sufficiently limited that a security fund is not necessary to secure the required performance. The governing body may from time to time increase the amount of the required security fund to reflect increased risks to the city and to the public. 
(2)  The following procedures shall apply to drawing on the security fund: 
a.  If a franchisee fails to make timely payment to the city of any amount due under its franchise agreement, this chapter, or other applicable law, or fails to compensate the city within ten (10) days of written notification that such compensation is due, for any damages, costs, or expenses the city suffers or incurs by reason of any act or omission of the franchisee in connection with this agreement or its enforcement, or fails within ten (10) days to pay the amount of any penalty imposed pursuant to section 7.5-14(a), or fails, after ten (10) days' written notice, to comply with any provision of its franchise agreement or this chapter that the city manager determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security, the city may withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund. 
b.  Within three (3) days of a withdrawal from the security fund, the city shall mail to a franchisee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the amount, date, and purpose of such withdrawal to the franchisee. 
c.  If at the time of a withdrawal from the security fund by the city, the amounts available are insufficient to provide the total payment towards which the withdrawal is directed, the balance of such payment shall continue as the obligation of the franchisee to the city until it is paid. 
d.  No later than thirty (30) days after mailing of notification to the franchisee by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a withdrawal under the security fund, the franchisee shall restore the security fund to the total amount specified herein. 
e.  Upon termination of the franchise under conditions other than those stipulating forfeiture of the security fund, the balance then remaining in the security fund shall be returned to the franchisee within ninety (90) days of such termination, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the franchisee. 
(c)  Failure constitutes material violation. Failure to maintain or restore the security fund or a performance bond shall constitute a material violation of this chapter and a franchise agreement. 
(d)  Revocation, reduction of term, or forfeiture of franchise. 
(1)  Where, after notice and providing a franchisee with an opportunity to be heard (if such opportunity is timely requested by a franchisee), the governing body finds that a system is being maintained or operated in violation of this chapter or in substantial violation of the terms of a franchise, the governing body may make an appropriate reduction in the remaining term of a franchise or revoke a franchise. Before a franchise is revoked or shortened, the city manager shall establish and conduct a compliance proceeding. At the conclusion of the compliance proceeding, the city manager shall transmit a recommended decision to the governing body. A franchisee may appeal the city manager's recommendation to the governing body, but any such appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the decision of the city manager or it shall be deemed waived. If no appeal is filed, the governing body may immediately determine whether to revoke or shorten the term of a franchise in accordance with the requirements of this provision. However, if an appeal is filed by a franchisee, the governing body shall not revoke or shorten the term of the franchise until the appeal has been decided. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a franchise may not be revoked unless a franchisee (1) was given notice of the default; (2) thirty (30) days to cure the default; and (3) the franchisee failed to cure the default, or to propose a schedule for curing the default acceptable to the city where it is impossible to cure the default in thirty (30) days. The required notice may be given before the city manager conducts the proceeding required by this paragraph. No opportunity to cure is required for repeated violations, and fraud may be deemed incurable. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the governing body may declare a franchise forfeited where the franchisee (i) fails to begin to exercise its rights under the franchise within a period specified in the franchise; (ii) without the prior consent of the city, transfers the franchise; (iii) fails to pay the fees owed hereunder; or (iv) defrauds or attempts to defraud the city or its customers. 
(3)  The city shall give a franchisee thirty (30) days notice of an intent to declare a franchise forfeited, and shall provide the franchisee with an opportunity to show cause why the franchise should not be forfeited. 
(4)  Upon termination or forfeiture of a franchise, whether by action of the governing body as provided above, or by passage of time, a franchisee shall be obligated to cease using its system for the purposes authorized by the franchise. The city may either take possession of some or all of the franchisee's facilities in the public rights-of-way or on city-owned property, or require the franchisee or its surety to remove some or all of the franchisee's facilities from the public rights-of-way or city-owned property and to restore the public rights-of-way and city-owned property to their proper condition. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, should a franchisee fail, refuse, or neglect to remove such facility, the city may remove the facility at the expense of the franchisee. Regardless of the existence or amount of any security fund or performance bond, the obligation of a franchisee to remove shall survive the termination of the franchise. This provision does not authorize the city to take possession of, or require a franchisee to remove, any facilities that are used to provide another service for which the franchisee holds a valid franchise issued by the governing body. 
(e)  Termination due to bankruptcy. 
(1)  Any franchise may, at the option of the city following a public hearing, be revoked by the governing body one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding, unless within that one hundred twenty (120) day period: 
a.  Such assignment, receivership, or trusteeship has been vacated; or 
b.  Such assignee, receiver, or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement and has executed an agreement, approved by a court of competent jurisdiction, under which it assumes and agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement, and such other conditions as may be established or as are required under section 7.5-13 of this chapter. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment, or property of a franchisee, the governing body may revoke the franchise, following a public hearing, by serving notice on the franchisee and the successful bidder, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise will be revoked and will terminate thirty (30) calendar days after serving such notice, unless: 
a.  The governing body has approved the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder; and 
b.  The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the city to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and this chapter, and such other conditions as may be established or as are required pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement. 
(f)  Purchase or transfer of a cable system by the city. 
(1)  If a franchise granted under this chapter expires and it's not renewed, the city may acquire ownership of or effect a transfer of the cable system at fair market value. 
(2)  If the governing body revokes or terminates a franchise for cause, the city may acquire ownership of or effect a transfer of the cable system at an equitable price. 
(g)  Remedies cumulative. All remedies under this chapter and any franchise agreement are cumulative unless otherwise expressly stated. The exercise of one remedy shall not foreclose use of another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy or the payment of liquidated damages or penalties relieve a franchisee of its obligations to comply with its franchise. Remedies may be used singly or in combination; in addition, the city may exercise any rights it has at law or equity. 
(h)  Relation to insurance and indemnity requirements. Recovery by the city of any amounts under insurance, a security fund, a performance bond, or otherwise does not limit a franchisee's duty to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its elected and appointed officers, officials, boards, commission, employees, agents and volunteers in any way; nor shall such recovery relieve a franchisee of its obligations under a franchise, limit the amounts owed to the city, or in any respect prevent the city from exercising any other right or remedy it may have. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the double-recovery of damages. 
(i)  Effects of litigation. Pending litigation or any appeal to any regulatory body or court having jurisdiction over a franchisee shall not excuse the franchisee from the performance of its obligations under this chapter or its franchise agreement unless a stay specifically applicable to the performance of the obligation is obtained from a court or regulatory body of competent jurisdiction. Failure of the franchisee to perform such obligations because of pending litigation or a petition, in the absence of a stay issued by a court or regulatory body of competent jurisdiction, may result in forfeiture or revocation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or a franchise agreement. 
(j)  Theft-of-service. It shall be unlawful for any person to defraud or attempt to defraud a franchisee by attempting to obtain cable service, or any other service offered by the franchisee, without payment as described in Section 18.2-187.1 of the Code of Virginia. Any person who violates this provision, if the value of service, credit or benefit procured is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more, shall be guilty of a Class 6 felony; or if the value is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and subject to the penalties provided in the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-15. - Transfers. 
(a)  Governing body approval required. 
(1)  A franchise shall be a privilege that is in the public trust and personal to the franchisee. A franchisee's obligations under its franchise involve personal services whose performance involves personal credit, trust, and confidence in the franchisee. 
(2)  No transfer (including, but not limited to, transfer as a result of forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, or any other means) shall occur unless prior application is made by the franchisee to the city and the governing body's prior written consent is obtained, pursuant to this chapter and a franchise agreement, and only then upon such terms and conditions as the governing body deems necessary and proper. Any such transfer without the prior written consent of the governing body shall be considered to impair the city's assurance of due performance. The granting of approval for a transfer in one instance shall not render unnecessary approval of any subsequent transfer. 
(3)  Application. 
a.  A franchisee shall promptly notify the city manager of any proposed transfer. If any transfer should take place without prior notice to the city manager, the franchisee will promptly notify the city that such a transfer has occurred. 
b.  At least one hundred-twenty (120) calendar days prior to the contemplated effective date of a transfer, the franchisee shall submit to the city manager an application for approval of the transfer. Such an application shall provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including details of the legal, financial, technical, and other qualifications of the transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service. At a minimum, the following information shall be included in the application, provided that, a franchisee is not required to duplicate information that it submits to the city manager to comply with its obligations under federal or state law: 
(i)  All information and forms required under federal law or the equivalent of such forms if no longer required by federal law; 
(ii)  All information required in sections 7.5-4(c)(1) to 7.5-4(c)(5), 7.5-4(c)(11) and 7.5-4(c)(14) of this chapter; 
(iii)  Any contracts or other documents that relate to the proposed transaction, and all documents, schedules, exhibits, or the like referred to therein; 
(iv)  Any shareholder reports or filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission that discuss the transaction; 
(v)  Other information necessary to provide a complete and accurate understanding of the financial position of the cable system before and after the proposed transfer; 
(vi)  Complete information regarding any potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service; 
(vii)  A brief summary of the proposed transferee's plans for at least the next five (5) years regarding line extension, plant and equipment upgrades, channel capacity, expansion or elimination of services, and any other changes affecting or enhancing the performance of the cable system; and 
(viii)  A list of all the proposed transferor's obligations under the franchise, and a statement given under oath identifying which obligations have been met and in what manner they have been met. 
c.  For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a transfer, the city or its agents may inquire into all qualifications of the prospective transferee and such other matters as the city may deem necessary to determine whether the transfer is in the public interest and should be approved, denied, or conditioned as provided under section 7.5-15(b). A franchisee and any prospective transferees shall assist the city in any such inquiry, and if they fail to do so, the request for a transfer may be denied. 
(b)  Determination by city. In making a determination as to whether to grant, deny, or grant subject to conditions, an application for a transfer of a franchise, the city may consider, without limitation, the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the cable system; the proposed purchase price and consideration to be paid for a franchise; any potential effects of the transfer on subscriber rates or services; whether a franchisee is in compliance with its franchise, and this chapter and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such noncompliance; whether the transferee owns or controls any other cable system in the city, and whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery of cable service in the city; and whether operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer would adversely affect subscribers, the public, or the city's interest under this chapter, a franchise, or other applicable law. 
(c)  Transferee's agreement. No application for a transfer of a franchise shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this chapter and the franchise and that it will assume the obligations, liabilities, and responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown, of the previous franchisee under this chapter and the franchise, for all purposes, including renewal. 
(d)  Approval does not constitute waiver. Approval by the governing body of a transfer does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under this chapter or a franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. 
Sec. 7.5-16. - Open video systems. 
(a)  Applicability of chapter. 
(1)  This chapter shall apply to open video systems that comply with 47 U.S.C. § 573, to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(2)  In applying this chapter to an open video system, "franchisee" shall be taken to refer to the open video system operator, "cable system" to the open video system, and similar terms shall apply similarly. 
(b)  Fee in lieu of franchise fee. An open video system operator shall pay to the city a fee in lieu of the franchise fee required in section 7.5-11 of this chapter, pursuant to the procedures and conditions specified in applicable law, including FCC regulations, section 7.5-11, and generally herein. 
(c)  Public, educational, and governmental access obligations. An open video system operator shall be subject to obligations pertaining to public, educational, and governmental access pursuant to applicable law and to the requirements herein. 
(d)  Right-of-way usage. An open video system operator shall be subject to all requirements of state and local law regarding authorization to use or occupy public rights-of-way or city-owned property, except to the extent specifically prohibited by federal law. FCC approval of an open video system operator's certification pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 573 shall not be taken to confer upon such operator any authority to use or occupy public rights-of-way or city-owned property that such operator would not otherwise possess. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-17. - Rights of individuals protected. 
(a)  Discriminatory practices prohibited. 
(1)  A franchisee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, programmers, or residents of the city on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, condition of physical handicap, creed, ethnic background, marital status or sexual orientation. 
(2)  A franchisee shall not discriminate among persons or the city, or take any retaliatory action against a person or the city because of that entity's exercise of any right it may have under federal, state, or local law, nor may the franchisee require a person or the city to waive such rights as a condition of taking service. 
(3)  Except as federal law prohibits enforcement of this provision, a franchisee shall not deny access or levy different rates and charges on any group of potential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. 
(4)  Subject to applicable law and except to the extent that a franchisee is relieved of such a requirement, a franchisee is prohibited from discriminating in its rates or charges or from granting undue preferences to any subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of subscribers or potential subscribers; provided, however, that a franchisee may offer temporary, bona fide promotional discounts in order to attract or maintain subscribers, so long as such discounts are offered on a non-discriminatory basis to similar classes of subscribers throughout the city; and a franchisee may offer discounts for the elderly, the handicapped, non-for-profit persons or organizations, or the economically disadvantaged, and such other discounts as it is entitled to provide under federal law, if such discounts are applied in a uniform and consistent manner. A franchisee shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state, and city laws, and all executive and administrative orders relating to non-discrimination. 
(5)  Information accessibility: Each document required to be maintained, filed or submitted under the provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement, except those specifically designated as confidential by a franchisee and not required to be disclosed by the city under applicable law, is a public document, available for public inspection and copying at the requestor's expense, at the office(s) of the franchisee or the city during normal business hours. 
(b)  Equal employment opportunity. A franchisee shall not refuse to employ, discharge from employment, or discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, age, disability, or marital status. A franchisee shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing equal employment opportunities, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Subscriber privacy. 
(1)  A franchisee shall at all times protect the privacy rights of all subscribers, including but not limited to those rights secured by the provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551. 
(2)  A franchisee shall not permit the transmission of any signal (aural, visual or digital, including "polling" the channel selection) from any subscriber's premises without first obtaining such subscriber's valid authorization. Neither a franchisee nor any other person shall initiate in any form the discovery of any information on or about an individual subscriber's premises without prior valid authorization from the subscriber potentially affected. This provision is not intended to prohibit the transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement of system performance. 
(3)  A franchisee shall not permit the installation of any special terminal equipment in any subscriber's premises that will permit transmission from such subscriber's premises of two-way services utilizing aural, visual or digital signals without such subscriber's prior valid authorization. 
(4)  As used in this section 7.5-17(c), "valid authorization" shall mean written permission from a subscriber for a period of time not to exceed one (1) year. 
(5)  A franchisee shall strictly observe and protect the privacy rights and property rights of subscribers and users at all times. Individual subscriber preferences of any kind, viewing habits, political, social or economic philosophies, beliefs, creeds, religions, or names, addresses or telephone numbers shall not be revealed to any person, governmental unit, police department or investigating agency unless upon the authority of a court of law or upon prior voluntary valid authorization of a subscriber. 
(6)  A franchisee may release the number of its subscribers, but only as a total number and as a percentage of the potential subscribers throughout the city or served by the system. When indicating the number of subscribers viewing a particular channel at a particular time, a franchisee shall indicate only the total number of subscribers viewing during the relevant time and the percentage of all subscribers which they represent, but never the identity of a particular subscriber. 
(7)  A franchisee may maintain such information as is necessary to bill subscribers for any system service. 
(8)  No monitoring of any subscriber terminal shall take place without specific prior valid authorization by the subscriber in question; provided, however, that a franchisee may conduct system-wide or individually addressed "sweeps" for the purpose of verifying system integrity. In no event shall aural or visual monitoring of any kind take place without a clear indication to the subscriber that such monitoring is taking place. Prior to initiating a subscriber response mechanism, a franchisee shall submit to the city documentation demonstrating that the system can operate effectively and yet give reasonable protection against any invasion of privacy. 
(9)  A franchisee shall not tabulate any test results that would reveal the commercial product preferences or opinions of individual subscribers, members or their families or their invitees, licensees or employees, nor permit the use of the system for such tabulation, without a subscriber's prior valid authorization. 
(10)  A subscriber may at any time revoke any authorization to release information by delivering to a franchisee in writing, by mail or otherwise, the subscriber's decision to revoke the authorization. Any such revocation shall be effective upon receipt by the franchisee. 
(11)  A franchisee shall not condition subscriber service on the subscriber's valid authorization or denial of permission to collect, maintain or disclose personally identifiable information, except to the extent that such information is necessary for credit check or billing purposes. 
(12)  Each compilation, publication, tabulation or other dissemination of information made or permitted to be made in violation of this section 7.5-17(c) shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-18. - Administration. 
(a)  Duties of the city manager. The city manager, either directly or through a duly appointed designee or designees, shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-to-day administration of this chapter, any franchise, and related agreements. The city manager shall be empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the city, except for those actions specified in this chapter that are reserved to the governing body. The city manager may recommend that the governing body take certain actions with respect to a franchise. The city manager shall keep the governing body apprised of developments in cable and provide the governing body with assistance, advice and recommendations as appropriate. 
(b)  Duties of the governing body. The governing body shall have the sole authority to regulate rates for cable service; grant franchises; authorize the entering into of franchise agreements; modify franchise agreements; renew franchises; revoke franchises; and authorize the transfer of a franchise. 
(c)  Transfer of authority. If at any time the powers of the governing body, or any agency or official of the city or the governing body are transferred by law to any other board, agency, authority or official, then such other board, agency, authority or official shall have the powers, rights and duties previously vested under this chapter or by law in the governing body, or any agency or official of the city or the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Sec. 7.5-19. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Compliance with laws. Each franchisee shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations heretofore and hereafter adopted or established during the entire term of the franchise granted to the franchisee. 
(b)  Captions. The captions and headings of sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. 
(c)  No recourse against the city. Without limiting such immunities as the city or other persons may have under applicable law, a franchisee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city or its elected and appointed officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees, agents, or volunteers for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or because of the enforcement of this chapter or the city's exercise of its authority pursuant to this chapter, a franchise agreement, or other applicable law, unless the same shall be caused by criminal acts. 
(d)  Rights and remedies. 
(1)  The rights and remedies reserved to the governing body and the city by this chapter are cumulative and shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other rights and remedies which the governing body or the city may have with respect to the subject matter of this chapter. 
(2)  The city hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving any provision of this chapter or a franchise agreement. 
(3)  Specific mention of the materiality of any of the provisions herein is not intended to be exclusive of any others for the purpose of determining whether any failure of compliance hereunder is material and substantial. 
(4)  No franchisee shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement by reason of any failure of the city, the governing body or the city manager to enforce prompt compliance. No inaction by the city, the governing body or the city manager be deemed to waive or void any provision of this chapter or a franchise agreement. 
(e)  Amendments to this chapter. In order to fulfill the public interest goals of this chapter, to provide additional communications services to the city through the use of cable systems, and thereby to ensure the benefits which will result from such services, the governing body specifically reserves the right to amend this chapter to effectuate the public interest in the operation of a cable system. 
(f)  Public emergency. In the event of a major public emergency or disaster, as determined by the city or declared by the Governor of Virginia, a franchisee shall immediately make its entire cable system, employees, and property, as may be necessary, available for use by the city or any other civil defense or governmental agency designated by the city to operate the system for the term of such emergency or disaster for the emergency purposes. In the event of such use, a franchisee shall waive any claim that such use by the city constitutes a use of eminent domain, provided that the city shall return use of the entire system, employees, and property to the franchisee after the emergency or disaster has ended or has been dealt with. 
(g)  Connections to system; use of antennae. 
(1)  To the extent consistent with federal law, subscribers shall have the right to attach devices to a franchisee's system to allow subscribers to transmit signals or services for which they have paid to VCRs, receivers, and other terminal equipment, so long as such devices do not interfere with the operation of the cable system, or the reception of any cable subscriber, nor serve to circumvent a franchisee's security procedures, nor for any purpose to obtain services illegally. Subscribers also shall have the right to use their own remote control devices and converters, and other similar equipment, and a franchisee shall provide information to consumers which will allow them to adjust such devices so that they may be used with the franchisee's system. 
(2)  A franchisee shall not, as a condition of providing service, require a subscriber or potential subscriber to remove any existing antenna or disconnect an antenna, or prohibit or discourage a subscriber from installing an antenna switch, provided that such equipment and installations are consistent with applicable codes and technically able to shield the cable system from any interference. 
(h)  Calculation of time. Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, or payment is required under this chapter or any franchise agreement, and a period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of duration time. 
(i)  Severability. If any term, condition, or provision of this chapter shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable by a valid order of any court or regulatory agency, the remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects and continue to be effective. In the event of a subsequent change in applicable law, so that the provision which had been held invalid is no longer invalid, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect without further action by the city or the governing body and shall thereafter be binding on the franchisee and the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-1700-600, § 1, 3-2-99) 
Chapter 8 - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL; STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, adopted July 15, 2014, amended Ch. 8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8, §§ 8-1-8-8, 8-11-8-30, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 06-1700-811, adopted September 19, 2007; Ord. No. 10-1700-894, adopted Aug. 5, 2010. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; subdivision of land, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 31. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY 

Sec. 8-1. - Title, purpose and authority. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Manassas Park and protect the quality and quantity of state waters from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater, including protection from a land-disturbing activity causing unreasonable degradation of properties, water quality, stream channels, and other natural resources, to establish requirements for the control of soil erosion, sediment deposition and nonagricultural runoff, and to establish procedures whereby erosion and sediment control requirements and stormwater requirements related to water quality and quantity shall be administered and enforced. 
(b)  This chapter is issued under the authority of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act (Va. Code § 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) and the attendant regulations as adopted by the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board. Authority to protect water quality is also provided by § 15.2-2283 of the Code of Virginia. Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:27 specifically requires the city to adopt a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
ARTICLE II. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 8-2. - Title, purpose, and authority. 
    This article shall be known as the "Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia". The purpose of this article is to prevent degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources of the city by establishing requirements for the control of soil erosion, sediment deposition and nonagricultural runoff and by establishing procedures whereby these requirements shall be administered and enforced. 
    This article is authorized by the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law (Va. Code § 62.1-44.15:51 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-983[A], § 1, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
    Agreement in lieu of a plan means a contract between the plan-approving authority and the owner that specifies conservation measures that must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence; this contract may be executed by the plan-approving authority in lieu of a formal site plan. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan for approval or requesting the issuance of a permit, when required, authorizing land-disturbing activities to commence. 
    Board means the State Water Control Board. 
    Certified inspector means an employee or agent of a program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of project inspection or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one (1) year after enrollment. 
    Certified plan reviewer means an employee or agent of a program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of plan review, (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for plan review and successfully completes such program within one (1) year after enrollment, or (iii) is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Certified program administrator means an employee or agent of a VESCP program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of program administration or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for program administration and successfully completes such program within one (1) year after enrollment. 
    City means the City of Manassas Park. 
    Clearing means any activity which removes the vegetative ground cover including, but not limited to, root mat removal or top soil removal. 
    Department means the Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Development means a tract of land developed or to be developed as a single unit under single ownership or unified control which is to be used for any business or industrial purpose or is to contain three (3) or more residential dwelling units. 
    Director means the director of the city department designated as the plan-approving authority. 
    District or soil and water conservation district means the Prince William County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan or ESC plan means a document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water plan inventory, and management information with needed interpretations and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major conservation decisions and all information deemed necessary by the VESCP plan approving authority to assure that the entire unit or units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives. 
    Erosion impact area means an area of land not associated with current land-disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less used for residential purposes. 
    Excavating means any digging, scooping or other methods of removing earth materials. 
    Filling means any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
    Grading means any excavating or filling of earth material or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled conditions. 
    Land-disturbing activity means any man-made land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the commonwealth, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, except that the term shall not include: 
(1)  Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work; 
(2)  Individual service connections; 
(3)  Installation, maintenance, or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surfaced road, street or sidewalk provided such land-disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced; 
(4)  Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land-disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system; 
(5)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted pursuant to Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(6)  Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, or livestock feedlot operations; including engineering operations and agricultural engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Dam Safety Act (Va. Code § 10.1-604 et seq.), ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Subsection 10.1-1163B of the Code of Virginia; 
(7)  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company; 
(8)  Disturbed land areas of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size; 
(9)  Installation of fence and sign posts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; 
(10)  Shoreline erosion control projects on tidal waters when all of the land-disturbing activities are within the regulatory authority of and approved by local wetlands boards, the Marine Resources Commission or the United States Army Corps of Engineers; however, any associated land that is disturbed outside of this exempted area shall remain subject to this chapter; 
(11)  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and emergency repairs; provided that if the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of the plan-approving authority. 
(12)  Agricultural engineering operations, including but not limited to the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the provisions of the Dam Safety Act (Va. Code § 10.1-604 et seq.), ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation. 
    Land-disturbing permit means a permit issued by the city for the clearing, filling, excavating, grading, transporting of land or for any combination thereof or for any other land-disturbing activity. 
    Natural channel design concepts means the utilization of engineering analysis and fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its bank and allows larger flows to access its bankfull bench and its floodplain. 
    Owner means the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
    Peak flow rate means the instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a particular location. 
    Permittee means the person to whom the permit authorizing land-disturbing activities is issued or the person who certifies that the approved erosion and sediment control plan will be followed. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
    PFM means the city's Public Facilities Manual as adopted by the governing body and amended as provided therein. 
    Plan-approving authority means the city department responsible for determining the adequacy of a plan submitted for land-disturbing activities on a unit or units of lands and for approving plans. 
    Program authority or VESCP authority means the City of Manassas Park, which has adopted a soil erosion and sediment control program approved by the board. 
    Responsible land disturber or RLD means an individual holding a certificate issued by the department who is responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity in accordance with the approved ESC plan. The RLD may be the owner, applicant, permittee, designer, superintendent, project manager, contractor, or any other project development team member. The RLD must be designated on the ESC plan or permit as a prerequisite for engaging in land disturbance. 
    Runoff volume means the volume of water that runs off the land development project from a prescribed storm event. 
    Single-family residence means a noncommercial dwelling that is occupied exclusively by one (1) family. 
    State waters means all waters on the surface and under the ground wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdictions. 
    Transporting means any moving of earth materials from one place to another place other than such movement incidental to grading, when such movement results in destroying the vegetative ground cover either by tracking or the buildup of earth materials to the extent that erosion and sedimentation will result from the soil or earth materials over which such transporting occurs. 
    Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Program or VESCP means a program approved by the board that has been established by the program authority for the effective control of soil erosion, sediment deposition, and non-agricultural runoff associated with a land-disturbing activity to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters, and other natural resources and shall include such items where applicable as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement where authorized in this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and its associated regulations. 
    Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations means the regulations (9VAC25-840-20 et seq.) approved by the board to form the basis for the administration, implementation, and enforcement of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law (Va. Code § 62.1-44.15:51 et seq.). 
    Water quality volume means the volume equal to the first one-half inch of runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-983[A], § 1, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-4. - Local erosion and sediment control program. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 62.1-44.15:54 of the Code of Virginia, the city hereby establishes a VESCP and adopts the regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications promulgated by the board for the effective control of soil erosion and sediment deposition to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources. Said regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications for erosion and sediment control are included in but not limited to the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended. 
(b)  In accordance with § 62.1-44.15:52 of the Code of Virginia, any plan approved prior to July 1, 2014 that provides for stormwater management that addresses any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels shall satisfy the flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels if the practices are designed to: 
(1)  Detain the water quality volume and to release it over forty-eight (48) hours; 
(2)  Detain and release over a 24-hour period the expected rainfall resulting from the one year, 24-four storm; 
(3)  Reduce the allowable peak flow rate resulting from the 1.5-year, 2-year, and 10-year, 24-hour storms to a level that is less than or equal to the peak flow rate from the site assuming it was in good forested condition, achieved through multiplication of the forested peak flow rate by a reduction factor that is equal to the runoff volume from the site when it was in a good forested condition divided by the runoff volume from the site in its proposed condition, and shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements from natural or man-made channels. 
(c)  For plans approved on and after July 1, 2014, the flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural and man-made channels shall be satisfied by compliance with water quantity requirements specified in section 62.1-44.15:28 of the Stormwater Management Act (Va. Code § 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) and attendant regulations, unless such land-disturbing activities are in accordance with the grandfathering provisions of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit Regulations or exempt pursuant to Subsection 62.1-44.15:34 C.7. of the Code of Virginia. 
(d)  Before adopting or revising regulations, the program authority shall give due notice and conduct a public hearing on the proposed or revised regulations, except that a public hearing shall not be required when the city is amending its program to conform to revisions in the state program. However, a public hearing shall be held if the city proposes or revises regulations that are more stringent than the state program. 
(e)  Pursuant to Section 62.1-44.15:52 of the Code of Virginia, an erosion and sediment control plan shall not be approved until it has been reviewed by a certified plan reviewer. Inspections of land-disturbing activities shall be conducted by a certified inspector. The city's VESCP shall contain a certified program administrator, a certified plan reviewer, and a certified inspector, who may be the same person. 
(f)  The city hereby designates the department of community development as the plan-approving authority. 
(g)  The program and regulations provided for in this article shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the department of community development. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-983[A], § 1, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-5. - Submission and approval of plans; content of plans. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until he or she has submitted an application to the plan-approving authority for an erosion and sediment control plan for the land-disturbing activity and such plan has been approved by the plan-approving authority. No approval to begin a land-disturbing activity will be issued unless evidence of state permit coverage is obtained where it is required. Where land-disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one (1) local control program, an erosion and sediment control plan, at the option of the applicant, may be submitted to the board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned. Where the land-disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence, an agreement in lieu of a plan may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan if executed by the plan-approving authority. 
(b)  The standards are contained within the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook and are to be used by the applicant when making a submittal under the provisions of this chapter and in the preparation of an erosion and sediment control plan. The plan-approving authority, in considering the adequacy of a submitted plan, shall be guided by the same standards, regulations and guidelines. 
(c)  The plan-approving authority shall review conservation plans submitted to it and grant written approval within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the plan if it determines that the plan meets the requirements of the board's regulations and if the person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he will properly perform the conservation measures included in the plan and will conform to the provisions of this article. In addition, as a prerequisite to engaging in the land-disturbing activities shown on the approved plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall provide to the program authority the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, as provided by Section 62.1-44.15:52 of the Code of Virginia, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity. Failure to provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence prior to engaging in land-disturbing activities may result in revocation of the approval of the plan and the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. However, the VESCP authority may waive the certificate of competence requirement for an agreement in lieu of a plan for construction of a single-family residence. If a violation occurs during the land-disturbing activity, then the person responsible for carrying out the agreement in lieu of a plan shall correct the violation and provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, as provided by Section 62.1-44.15:52 of the Code of Virginia. Failure to provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  The plan-approving authority shall act upon the plan within forty-five (45) days from receipt thereof by either approving said plan in writing or by disapproving said plan in writing and giving specific reasons for its disapproval. When the plan is determined to be inadequate, the plan-approving authority shall specify such modifications, terms and conditions that will permit approval of the plan. If no action is taken within forty-five (45) days, the plan shall be deemed approved and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(e)  The VESCP authority shall act on any erosion and sediment control plan that has been previously disapproved within forty-five (45) days after the plan has been revised, resubmitted for approval, and deemed adequate. 
(f)  The VESCP authority may require changes to an approved plan when: 
(1)  The inspection reveals that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable regulations; or 
(2)  The person responsible for carrying out the plan finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this article, are agreed to by the plan-approving authority and the person responsible for carrying out the plans. 
(g)  The plan-approving authority may waive or modify any of the standards that are deemed to be inappropriate or too restrictive for site conditions by granting a variance. A variance may be granted under the following conditions: 
(1)  At the time of plan submission, an applicant may request a variance to become part of the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall explain, in writing, the reasons for requesting a variance. Specific variances which are allowed by the plan-approving authority shall be documented in the plan. 
(2)  During construction, the person responsible for implementing the approved plan may request, in writing, a variance from the plan-approving authority. The plan-approving authority shall respond, in writing, either approving or disapproving the request. If the plan-approving authority does not approve a variance within ten (10) days following receipt of the request, the request shall be considered disapproved. Following disapproval, the applicant may resubmit a variance request with additional documentation. 
(3)  The VESCP authority shall consider variance requests judiciously, keeping in mind both the need of the applicant to maximize cost effectiveness and the need to protect off-site properties and resources from damage. 
(h)  In order to prevent further erosion, the director or designee may require approval of a plan for any land identified in the city's VESCP as an erosion impact area. 
(i)  When land-disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission, and approval of an erosion and sediment control plan shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(j)  In accordance with the procedure set forth in Subsection 62.1-44.15:55 E of the Code of Virginia, any person engaging in more than one jurisdiction, in the creation and operation of wetland mitigation or stream restoration banks, which has been approved and are operated in accordance with applicable federal and state guidance, laws or regulations for the establishment, use, and operation of wetland mitigation, or stream restoration banks, pursuant to a mitigation banking instrument signed by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, the Marine Resources Commission, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, may, at the option of that person, file general erosion and sediment control specifications for wetland mitigation or stream for wetland mitigation or stream restoration banks annually with the board for review and approval consistent with guidelines established by the board. Approval of general erosion and sediment control specifications does not relieve the owner or operator from compliance with any other local ordinances and regulations including requirements to submit plans and obtain permits as may be required by such ordinances and regulations. 
(k)  State agency projects are exempt from the provisions of this article except as provided for in Section 62.1-44.15:56 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-983[A], § 1, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-6. - Permits; fees; security for performance. 
(a)  Agencies authorized under any other law to issue grading, building, or other permits for activities involving land-disturbing activities shall not issue any such permit unless the applicant submits with his application an approved erosion and sediment control plan certification that the plan will be followed, and evidence of state permit coverage where it is required. 
(b)  No person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until he has acquired a land-disturbing permit, unless the proposed land-disturbing activity is specifically exempt from the provisions of this article, and has paid the fees and posted the required bond. 
(c)  An administrative fee shall be paid to the city in accordance with the fee schedule (supplement "A") of the PFM at the time of submission of the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(d)  No land-disturbing permit shall be issued until the applicant submits with his application an approved erosion and sediment control plan and certification that the plan will be followed. 
(e)  All applicants for permits shall provide to the City of Manassas Park a performance bond, cash escrow, or an irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the director or designee, to ensure that measures could be taken by the city at the applicant's expense should the applicant fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation measures required of him as a result of his land-disturbing activity. The amount of the bond or other security for performance shall not exceed the total of the estimated cost to initiate and maintain appropriate conservation action based on unit price for new public or private sector construction in the locality and a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs and inflation which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the cost of the conservation action. Should it be necessary for the city to take such conservation action, the city may collect from the applicant any costs in excess of the amount of the surety held. Within sixty (60) days of adequate stabilization, as determined by the director in any project or section of a project, such bond, cash escrow or letter of credit, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be either refunded to the applicant or terminated, based upon the percentage of stabilization accomplished in the project or project section. 
    These requirements are in addition to all other provisions relating to the issuance of permits and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements of such permits. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-983[A], § 1, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-7. - Monitoring, reports, and inspections. 
(a)  The responsible land disturber, as provided by Section 62.1-44.15:52 of the Code of Virginia, shall be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity and provide for periodic inspections of the land-disturbing activity. The city may require the person responsible for carrying out the plan to monitor the land-disturbing activity. The person responsible for carrying out the plan will maintain records of these inspections and maintenance, to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(b)  The director or designee shall periodically inspect the land-disturbing activity in accordance with Section 9VAC25-840-60 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. The owner, permittee, or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be given notice of the inspection. If the director or designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the land-disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the specified time, the permit may be revoked and the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties provided by this article. 
(c)  Upon issuance of an inspection report denoting a violation of Sections 62.1-44.15:55 or 62.1-44.15:56 of the Code of Virginia, the director or designee may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in this article, issue an order requiring that all or part of the land-disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. If land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan, the director or designee may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in this article, issue an order requiring that all of the land-disturbing activities be stopped until an approved plan or any required permits are obtained. 
(1)  Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, or where the land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan or any required permits, such an order may be issued without regard to whether the permittee has been issued a notice to comply as specified in this article. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the permittee has failed to comply with such a notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for a period of seven (7) days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority or permit holder for appropriate relief to the Circuit Court of Prince William County. The city shall serve such order for disturbance without an approved plan or permits upon the owner by mailing with confirmation of delivery to the address specified in the land records. If the alleged violator has not obtained an approved plan or any required permits within seven (7) days from the date of service of the order, the director or designee may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures, be stopped until an approved plan and any required permits have been obtained. Such an order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records of the city. 
(2)  The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the Circuit Court of Prince William County. 
(3)  Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey an order issued by director or designee may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the Circuit Court of Prince William County to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion and approval of corrective action or obtaining an approved plan or any required permits, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the director or designee from taking any other action authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-983[A], § 1, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-8. - Penalties, injunctions, and other legal actions. 
(a)  Violators of this article shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon a finding of the District Court of Prince William County, be assessed a civil penalty. The civil penalty for any one (1) violation shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), except that the civil penalty for commencement of land-disturbing activities without an approved plan shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), except that a series of violations arising from the commencement of land-disturbing activities without an approved plan for any site shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Note: The adoption of civil penalties according to this schedule shall be in lieu of criminal sanctions and shall preclude the prosecution of such violation as a misdemeanor under subsection (a) of this section. Refer to Section 62.1-44.15:63 A. of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  The director or designee, or the owner of property which has sustained damage or which is in imminent danger of being damaged, may apply to the Circuit Court of Prince William County to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this article, without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. However, an owner of property shall not apply for injunctive relief unless (i) he has notified in writing the person who has violated the local program, and the program authority, that a violation of the local program has caused, or creates a probability of causing, damage to his property, and (ii) neither the person who has violated the local program nor the program authority has taken corrective action within fifteen (15) days to eliminate the conditions which have caused, or create the probability of causing, damage to his property. 
(d)  In addition to any criminal penalties provided under this article, any person who violates any provision of this article may be liable to the city in a civil action for damages. 
(e)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. A civil action for such violation or failure may be brought by the director or designee. Any civil penalties assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the city, except that where the violator is the city itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(f)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation or condition of a permit or any provision of this article, the director may provide for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified in subsection (e) of this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsection (e). 
(g)  The commonwealth's attorney shall, upon request of the city, take legal action to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(h)  Compliance with the provisions of this article shall be prima facie evidence in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion, siltation or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met, and the complaining party must show negligence in order to recover any damages. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-983[A], § 1, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-9. - Appeals and judicial review. 
(a)  Any applicant under the provision of this article who is aggrieved by any action of the city or its agent in disapproving plans submitted pursuant to this article shall have the right to apply for and receive a review of such action by the governing body provided an appeal is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the action. 
(b)  Any applicant who seeks an appeal hearing before the governing body shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled governing body public meeting provided that the governing body and other involved parties have at least thirty (30) days prior notice. In reviewing the agent's actions, the governing body shall consider evidence and opinions presented by the aggrieved applicant and agent. After considering the evidence and opinions, the governing body may affirm, reverse or modify the action. The governing body's decision shall be final, subject only to review by the Circuit Court of Prince William. 
(c)  Final decisions of the city under this article shall be subject to review by the Prince William Circuit Court, provided an appeal is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties, or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-983[A], § 1, 4-5-16) 
Secs. 8-10, 8-11. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL 
[DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY] 

Sec. 8-12. - Generally. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the stormwater management and control ordinance for the City of Manassas Park. Hereafter referred to as the ordinance. 
(b)  The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Manassas Park and protect the quality and quantity of state waters from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater, including protection from a land-disturbing activity causing unreasonable degradation of properties, water quality, stream channels, and other natural resources, and to establish procedures whereby stormwater requirements related to water quality and quantity shall be administered and enforced. 
(c)  This ordinance is issued under the authority of § 62.1-44.15:24 et seq. of the Code of Virginia (the Virginia Stormwater Management Act), and their attendant regulations as adopted by the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board. Authority to protect water quality is also provided by § 15.2-2283 of the Code of Virginia. Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:27 specifically requires the city to adopt a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(d)  The City of Manassas Park (the "city") requires the design, development, improvement, operation, maintenance, and monitoring of a system of manmade and natural components of stormwater management infrastructure to both limit and manage the volume of stormwater, thereby controlling flood events and preventing degradation of the city's waterways and erosion of the city's lands through stormwater quality and quantity management. 
(e)  The city is subject to the Federal Clean Water Act's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program for stormwater discharges. In order to comply with NPDES requirements, the city must develop a stormwater management program to reduce stormwater pollution from the drainage system. 
(f)  Stormwater runoff is associated with all developed properties in the city, whether residential or nonresidential, and the individual property impacts of runoff are directly related to the amount of impervious surface on the property. 
(g)  Stormwater management infrastructure provides benefits and services to properties within the city that have impervious areas by directly protecting such properties through the control of flooding, and reduces the impact of stormwater flow on the city's natural environment. 
(h)  The costs of designing, developing, improving, maintaining, operating, and monitoring the stormwater system required in the city, both to meet federal, state and local laws and regulations and to address identified flood event needs, should be allocated, to the extent practicable, to all property owners based on the impact to the stormwater management system of runoff from the impervious areas of owners' respective properties. 
(i)  The city's governing body is required by state law to adopt a program for long range stormwater management and control and is authorized to set fees to fund that program. Establishment of the stormwater management and control program and its funding pursuant to this article is necessary to provide for the general health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents. 
(j)  The provisions of this article shall be deemed severable and, if any of the provisions hereof are adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining portions of this article shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 2, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-13. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the definitions set forth in 9VAC25-870-10 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations, as amended, which are expressly adopted and incorporated herein by reference, the following words and terms used in this article have the following meanings unless otherwise specified herein. Where definitions differ, those incorporated herein shall have precedence. 
    Administrator means the VSMP authority including the City of Manassas Park City Manager or his/her designee. 
    Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan means a contract between the VSMP authority and the owner or permittee that specifies methods that shall be implemented to comply with the requirements of a VSMP for the construction of a single-family residence; such contract may be executed by the VSMP authority in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit under this ordinance. 
    Best management practice or BMP means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
    City, the city or this city means the City of Manassas Park, Virginia, a municipal corporation of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Governing body means governing body of the city. 
    Channel means a natural or manmade waterway. 
    Code or "the Code" means the Code of the City of Manassas Park. 
    Common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on difference schedules. 
    Control measure means any best management practice or stormwater management facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
    Clean Water Act or CWA means the federal Clean Water Act (33 USC § 1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
    Department means the Department of Environmental Quality or DEQ. 
    Development means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
    Discharge means to dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, dumped, leaked or placed by any means. 
    Flood means a volume of water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of the stream, water body or conveyance system and that overflows onto adjacent lands, thereby causing or threatening damage. 
    Floodplain means the area adjacent to a channel, river, stream, or other water body that is susceptible to being inundated by water normally associated with the 100-year flood or storm event. This includes, but is not limited to any floodplain designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    General permit means the state permit titled General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities found in Part XIV (9VAC25-880-1 et seq.) of the regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Act within a geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Inspection means an on-site review of the project's compliance with the permit or the state permit, the City of Manassas Park stormwater management program, and any applicable design criteria; or an on-site review to obtain information or conduct surveys or investigations necessary in the implementation or enforcement of the ordinance. 
    Land disturbance or land-disturbing activity means a manmade change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including any clearing, grading, or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in section 58-99 [8-14] of this article. 
    Layout means a conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
    Minor modification means an amendment to an existing permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit modification or amendment does not substantially alter general permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
    Operator means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this ordinance and this chapter. 
    Permit or VSMP authority permit means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in accordance with this ordinance, and which may only be issued after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided by the department. 
    Permittee means the person to whom the VSMP authority permit is issued, including any owner or operator whose construction site is covered under a state construction general permit. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including federal, state, or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    PFM means the Public Facilities Manual as adopted by the governing body and amended as provided therein. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 USC § 2011 et seq.)), heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. It does not mean: 
(1)  Sewage from vessels; or 
(2)  Water, gas, or other material that is injected into a well to facilitate production of oil or gas, or water derived in association with oil and gas production and disposed of in a well if the well is used either to facilitate production or for disposal purposes is approved by the state water control board and if the state water control board determines that the injection or disposal will not result in the degradation of ground or surface water resources. 
    Pollution means such alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any state waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters (a) harmful or detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or to the health of animals, fish or aquatic life; (b) unsuitable with reasonable treatment for use as present or possible future sources of public water supply; or (c) unsuitable for recreational, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or other reasonable uses, provided that (i) an alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological property of state waters, or a discharge or deposit of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to state waters by any owner which by itself is not sufficient to cause pollution, but which, in combination with such alteration of or discharge or deposit to state waters by other owners, is sufficient to cause pollution; (ii) the discharge of untreated sewage by any owner into state waters; and (iii) contributing to the contravention of standards of water quality duly established by the state water control board, are "pollution" for the terms and purposes of this ordinance. 
    Postdevelopment refers to conditions that reasonably may be expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity on a specific site. 
    Predevelopment refers to the conditions that exist at the time that plans for the land development of a tract of land are submitted to the City of Manassas Park. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, demolition of existing structures, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being submitted shall establish predevelopment conditions. 
    Regulations means the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit Regulations 9VAC25-870-10, as amended. 
    Site means the land or water area where any facility or land-disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land-disturbing activity. Areas channelward of mean low water in tidal Virginia shall not be considered part of a site. 
    State means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    State board means the state water control board. 
    State permit means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the state water control board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the state board for stormwater discharges from an MS4. Under these state permits, the Commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations, the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the Regulations. 
    State water control board or SWCB means the Virginia State Water Control Board. 
    State Water Control Law means Chapter 3.1 (§ 62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    State waters means all water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
    Stormwater means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater management facility means a control measure that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
    Stormwater management plan means a document(s) containing material for describing methods for complying with the requirements of section 58-103 [8-18] of this article. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan or SWPPP means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this ordinance. In addition the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
    Subdivision means the same as defined in section 106-1 of the City of Manassas Park Subdivision Ordinance. 
    Total maximum daily load or TMDL means the sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source trade-offs. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Act or Act means Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website means a state sponsored website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Program or VSMP means a program approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Program authority or VSMP authority means an authority approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
    Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-14. - Stormwater permit requirement; exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until a VSMP authority permit has been issued by the administrator in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, the following activities are exempt, unless otherwise required by federal law: 
(1)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(2)  Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the state board in regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Subsection B of § 10.1-1163 of Article 9 of Chapter 11 of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(3)  Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one (1) acre and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, including additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures; 
(4)  Land-disturbing activities that disturb less than one (1) acre of land area and are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale; that is, one (1) acre or greater of disturbance; 
(5)  Discharges to a sanitary sewer or a combined sewer system; 
(6)  Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use; 
(7)  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this subsection; and 
(8)  Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the administrator shall be advised of the disturbance within seven (7) days of commencing the land-disturbing activity and compliance with the administrative requirements of subsection (a) is required within thirty (30) days of commencing the land-disturbing activity. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-15. - Stormwater management program established; submission and approval of plans; prohibitions. 
(a)  Pursuant to § 10.1-603.3 of the Code of Virginia, the City of Manassas Park hereby establishes a Virginia Stormwater Management Program for land-disturbing activities and adopts the applicable regulations that specify standards and specifications for VSMPs promulgated by the state board for the purposes set out in section 8-12 of this article. The governing body for the City of Manassas Park hereby designates the city manager or his/her designee as the administrator of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(b)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued by the administrator, until the following items have been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed herein: 
(1)  A permit application that includes a general permit registration statement, if such statement is required; 
(i)  A registration statement is not required for detached, single-family home construction within or outside of a common plan of development or sale. However, such projects must adhere to the requirements of the general permit. 
(2)  An erosion and sediment control plan approved in accordance with the City of Manassas Park Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance chapter 8, article I; 
(3)  A stormwater management plan that meets the requirements of section 8-18 of this article, or an executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan for single-family residences outside of a common plan of development or sale; 
(4)  A pollution prevention plan that meets the requirements of section 8-19 of this article; 
(5)  Long-term maintenance agreements in accordance with section 8-38; 
(6)  Water quality design criteria in section 8-22 shall be applied to the site; 
(7)  Water quantity compliance shall be achieved in accordance with section 8-23; 
(8)  Channel protection and flood protection shall be achieved in accordance with section 8-23; 
(9)  Such land-disturbing activities shall be subject to the design storm and hydrologic methods set out in section 8-26, linear development controls in section 8-28, and criteria associated with stormwater impoundment structures or facilities in the PFM. 
(c)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until evidence of general permit coverage is obtained. 
(d)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until the fees required to be paid are received, and a reasonable performance bond required pursuant to section 8-44 of this chapter has been submitted. 
(e)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued unless and until the permit application and attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land clearing construction, disturbance, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved permit. 
(f)  No grading, building or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless a VSMP authority permit has been issued by the administrator. 
(g)  Approved stormwater management plans for residential, commercial or industrial subdivisions shall govern the development of individual parcels within that plan, throughout the development life even if ownership changes. 
(h)  Exceptions may be requested in accordance with section 8-14. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-16. - Grandfathering. 
(a)  Any land-disturbing activity shall be considered grandfathered by the city and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation provided: 
(1)  A proffered or conditional zoning plan, zoning with a plan of development, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan, or any document determined by the locality to be equivalent thereto (i) was approved by the locality prior to July 1, 2012, (ii) provided a layout as defined in 9VAC25-870-10, (iii) will comply with the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation, and (iv) has not been subsequently modified or amended in a manner resulting in an increase in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge, and such that there is no increase in the volume or rate of runoff; 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
(3)  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(b)  Locality, state, and federal projects shall be considered grandfathered by the city and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation provided: 
(1)  There has been an obligation of locality, state, or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012; 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
(3)  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(c)  Land-disturbing activities grandfathered under subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall remain subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation for one additional state permit cycle. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the board. 
(d)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at his discretion. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-17. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan; content of plans. 
(a)  The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall include the content specified by Section 9VAC25-870-54, which includes but is not limited to, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, a pollution prevention plan for regulated land-disturbing activities, and a description of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(b)  The SWPPP must also comply with the requirements and general information set forth in Section 9VAC25-880-70, Section II [stormwater pollution prevention plan] of the general permit. 
(c)  The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP. 
(d)  The SWPPP must be maintained at a central location onsite. If an onsite location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-18. - Stormwater management plan; content of plan; exceptions. 
(a)  A stormwater management plan shall be developed and submitted to the city. The stormwater management plan shall be implemented as approved or modified by the city and shall be developed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  A stormwater management plan for a land-disturbing activity shall apply the stormwater management technical criteria set forth in this part to the entire land-disturbing activity. Individual lots in new residential, commercial, or industrial developments shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities. 
(2)  A stormwater management plan shall consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to surface runoff. 
(3)  Exception: The administrator may execute an agreement in lieu of a stormwater management control plan with the owner or permittee to comply with the requirements of this article for the construction of a single-family residence outside of a plan of common development or sale. Any such executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan shall be considered a stormwater management plan for the purposes of implementing and enforcing this article. 
(b)  A complete stormwater management plan shall include the following elements: 
(1)  Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges; information on the features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters or karst features if present, and the predevelopment and postdevelopment drainage areas; 
(2)  Contact information including the name, address, and telephone number of the owner and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected; 
(3)  A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions, final site conditions and any proffers or conditions relating to stormwater management; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete; 
(5)  Information on the proposed stormwater management facilities, including: 
(i)  The type of facilities; 
(ii)  Location, including geographic coordinates; 
(iii)  Acres treated; and 
(iv)  The surface waters or karst features, if present, into which the facility will discharge. 
(6)  Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics; 
(7)  Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the water quality and quantity requirements of section 8-21 through 8-23 of this article; 
(8)  A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes: 
(i)  All contributing drainage areas; 
(ii)  Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies, and floodplains; 
(iii)  Soil types, geologic formations if karst features are present in the area, forest cover, and other vegetative areas; 
(iv)  Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of known utilities and easements; 
(v)  Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels; 
(vi)  The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on the site; 
(vii)  Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater management facilities; and 
(viii)  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of utilities, roads, and easements. 
(c)  If an operator intends to meet the water quality and/or quantity requirements established in 9VAC25-870-63 et seq. through the use of off-site compliance options, where applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the applicant's land-disturbing activity. 
(d)  Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated under Chapter 4 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(e)  A construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities shall be submitted to the administrator. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-19. - Pollution prevention plan; content of plans. 
(a)  A pollution prevention plan, required by 9VAC25-870-56, shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to: 
(1)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and 
(3)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
(b)  The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
(1)  Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control; 
(2)  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
(3)  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and 
(4)  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
(c)  Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-20. - Review of stormwater management plan. 
(a)  The administrator of any duly authorized agent of the administrator shall review stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove a stormwater management plan according to the following: 
(1)  The administrator shall determine the completeness to review a plan in accordance with section 8-18 of this article, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such determination, within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the above written notification shall contain the reasons the plan is deemed incomplete. Where available to the applicant, electronic communication may be considered communication in writing. 
(2)  The administrator shall have an additional sixty (60) calendar days from the date of the communication of completeness to review the plan, except that if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subsection (1), then the plan shall be deemed complete and the administrator shall have sixty (60) calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan. 
(3)  The administrator shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved, within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date of resubmission. 
(4)  During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision communicated in writing to the person responsible for the land-disturbing activity or his designated agent. If the plan is not approved, the reasons for not approving the plan shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and all applicable codes, regulations, and policies, as determined by the administrator. 
(5)  If a plan meeting all requirements of this ordinance and all applicable codes, regulations, and policies, as determined by the administrator, is submitted and no action is taken within the time provided above in subsection (2) for review, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
(b)  Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows: 
(1)  Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the administrator. The administrator shall have sixty (60) calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. 
(2)  The administrator may require that an approved stormwater management plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the administrator, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection. 
(c)  The administrator shall require the submission of a construction record drawing or as-built plans for permanent stormwater management facilities. Construction record drawings shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Design and Construction Standards Manual. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
DIVISION 2. - TECHNICAL CRITERIA FOR REGULATED LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 8-21. - Water quality design criteria requirements. 
(a)  In order to protect the quality of state waters and to control the discharge of stormwater pollutants from regulated activities, the following minimum design criteria and statewide standards for stormwater management shall be applied to the site. 
(1)  New development. The total phosphorus load of new development projects shall not exceed 0.41 pounds per acre per year, as calculated pursuant to section 8-22. 
(2)  Development on prior developed lands. 
(i)  For land-disturbing activities disturbing greater than or equal to one (1) acre that result in no net increase in impervious cover from the predevelopment condition, the total phosphorus load shall be reduced at least twenty (20) percent below the predevelopment total phosphorus load. 
(ii)  For regulated land-disturbing activities disturbing less than one (1) acre that result in no net increase in impervious cover from the predevelopment condition, the total phosphorus load shall be reduced at least ten (10) percent below the predevelopment total phosphorus load. 
(iii)  For land-disturbing activities that result in a net increase in impervious cover over the predevelopment condition, the design criteria for new development shall be applied to the increased impervious area. Depending on the area of disturbance, the criteria of subdivisions (i) or (ii) above, shall be applied to the remainder of the site. 
(iv)  In lieu of subdivision (iii) of this subsection, the total phosphorus load of a linear development project occurring on prior developed lands shall be reduced twenty (20) percent below the predevelopment total phosphorus load. 
(b)  Compliance with subsection (a) of this section shall be determined in accordance with section 8-22. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the administrator from establishing more stringent requirements to comply with the city's MS4 permit or TMDL requirements. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-22. - Water quality compliance. 
(a)  Compliance with the water quality design criteria set out in Subdivisions A1 and A2 of 9VAC25-870-63 shall be determined by utilizing the Virginia Runoff Reduction Method or another equivalent methodology that is approved by the state water control board. 
(b)  The BMPs listed in 9VAC25-870-65.B are approved for use as necessary to effectively reduce the phosphorus load and runoff volume in accordance with the Virginia Runoff Reduction Method. Other approved BMPs found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website may also be utilized. Design specifications and the pollutant removal efficiencies for all approved BMPs are found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website. 
(c)  BMPs differing from those listed in subsection (b) of this section shall be reviewed by the Department in accordance with procedures established by Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse, and approved by the department. 
(d)  The administrator may establish limitations on the use of specific BMPs in accordance with § 62.1-44.15:33 of the Code of Virginia. 
(e)  The VSMP authority shall have the discretion to allow for application of the design criteria to each drainage area of the site. However, where a site drains to more than one HUC, the pollutant load reduction requirements shall be applied independently within each HUC unless reductions are achieved in accordance with a comprehensive watershed stormwater management plan in accordance with 9VAC25-870-92. 
(f)  Offsite alternatives where allowed in accordance with 9VAC25-870-69 may be utilized to meet the design criteria of subsection A of 9VAC25-870-63. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-23. - Water quantity. 
(a)  Channel protection and flood protection shall be addressed in accordance with the minimum standards set out in this section and other applicable regulations. Compliance with the minimum standards set out in this section shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of subdivision 19 of 9VAC25-840-40 (Minimum standards; Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations). 
(b)  Channel protection. Concentrated stormwater flow shall be released into a stormwater conveyance system and shall meet the criteria in subdivision (1), (2), or (3) of this subsection, where applicable, from the point of discharge to a point to the limits of analysis in subdivision (4) of this subsection. 
(1)  Manmade stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a manmade stormwater conveyance system, following the land-disturbing activity, either: 
(i)  The manmade stormwater conveyance system shall convey the postdevelopment peak flow rate from the two-year 24-hour storm event without causing erosion of the system. Detention of stormwater or downstream improvements may be incorporated into the approved land-disturbing activity to meet this criterion, at the discretion of the VSMP authority; or 
(ii)  The peak discharge requirements for concentrated stormwater flow to natural stormwater conveyance systems in subdivision (3) of this subsection shall be met. 
(2)  Restored stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a restored stormwater conveyance system that has been restored using natural design concepts, following the land-disturbing activity, either: 
(i)  The development shall be consistent, in combination with other stormwater runoff, with the design parameters of the restored stormwater conveyance system that is functioning in accordance with the design objectives; or 
(ii)  The peak discharge requirements for concentrated stormwater flow to natural stormwater conveyance systems in subdivision (3) of this subsection shall be met. 
(3)  Natural stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a natural stormwater conveyance system, the maximum peak flow rate from the one-year 24-hour storm following the land-disturbing activity shall be calculated either: 
(i)  In accordance with the following methodology: 
Q Developed = I.F.*(Q Pre-developed * RV Pre-Developed )/RV Developed 
Under no condition shall Q Developed be greater than Q Pre-Developed nor shall Q Developed be required to be less than that calculated in the equation (Q Forest * RV Forest )/RV Developed ; where: 
I.F. (Improvement Factor) equals 0.8 for sites > 1 acre or 0.9 for sites = 1 acre. 
Q Developed = The allowable peak flow rate of runoff from the developed site. 
RV Developed = The volume of runoff from the site in the developed condition. 
Q Pre-Developed = The peak flow rate of runoff from the site in the pre-developed condition. 
RV Pre-Developed = The volume of runoff from the site in pre-developed condition. 
Q Forest = The peak flow rate of runoff from the site in a forested condition. 
RV Forest = The volume of runoff from the site in a forested condition; or 
(ii)  In accordance with another methodology that is demonstrated by the administrator to achieve equivalent results and is approved by the state water control board. 
(4)  Limits of analysis. Unless subdivision (3) of this subsection is utilized to show compliance with the channel protection criteria, stormwater conveyance systems shall be analyzed for compliance with channel protection criteria to a point where either: 
(i)  Based on land area, the site's contributing drainage area is less than or equal to 1.0% of the total watershed area; or 
(ii)  Based on peak flow rate, the site's peak flow rate from the one-year 24-hour storm is less than or equal to 1.0% of the existing peak flow rate from the one-year 24-hour storm prior to the implementation of any stormwater quantity control measures. 
(c)  Flood protection. Concentrated stormwater flow shall be released into a stormwater conveyance system and shall meet one of the following criteria as demonstrated by use of acceptable hydrologic and hydraulic methodologies: 
(1)  Concentrated stormwater flow to stormwater conveyance systems that currently do not experience localized flooding during the 10-year 24-hour storm event: The point of discharge releases stormwater into a stormwater conveyance system that, following the land-disturbing activity, confines the postdevelopment peak flow rate from the 10-year 24-hour storm event within the stormwater conveyance system. Detention of stormwater or downstream improvements may be incorporated into the approved land-disturbing activity to meet this criterion, at the discretion of the administrator. 
(2)  Concentrated stormwater flow to stormwater conveyance systems that currently experience localized flooding during the 10-year 24-hour storm event: The point of discharge either: 
(i)  Confines the postdevelopment peak flow rate from the 10-year 24-hour storm event within the stormwater conveyance system to avoid the localized flooding. Detention of stormwater or downstream improvements may be incorporated into the approved land-disturbing activity to meet this criterion, at the discretion of the administrator; or 
(ii)  Releases a postdevelopment peak flow rate for the 10-year 24-hour storm event that is less than the predevelopment peak flow rate from the 10-year 24-hour storm event. Unless required by the administrator, downstream stormwater conveyance systems do not require any additional analysis to show compliance with flood protection criteria if this option is utilized. 
(3)  Limits of analysis. Unless subdivision (2)(ii) of this subsection is utilized to comply with the flood protection criteria, stormwater conveyance systems shall be analyzed for compliance with flood protection criteria to a point where: 
(i)  The site's contributing drainage area is less than or equal to 1.0% of the total watershed area draining to a point of analysis in the downstream stormwater conveyance system; 
(ii)  Based on peak flow rate, the site's peak flow rate from the 10-year 24-hour storm event is less than or equal to 1.0% of the existing peak flow rate from the 10-year 24-hour storm event prior to the implementation of any stormwater quantity control measures; or 
(iii)  The stormwater conveyance system enters a mapped floodplain or other flood-prone area, adopted by ordinance, or any locality. 
(d)  The post development peak flow for the 2-year 24-hour storm event shall be released at a rate that is equal to or less than the predevelopment peak flow rate from the 2-year 24-hour storm event and the post development peak flow for the 10-year 24-hour storm event shall be released at a rate that is less than or equal to the predevelopment peak flow rate from the 10-year 24-hour storm event. 
(e)  Increased volumes of sheet flow resulting from pervious or disconnected impervious areas, or from physical spreading of concentrated flow through level spreaders, must be identified and evaluated for potential impacts on down-gradient properties or resources. Increased volumes of sheet flow that will cause or contribute to erosion, sedimentation, or flooding of down gradient properties or resources shall be diverted to a stormwater management facility or a stormwater conveyance system that conveys the runoff without causing down-gradient erosion, sedimentation, or flooding. If all runoff from the site is sheet flow and the conditions of this subsection are met, no further water quantity controls are required. 
(f)  For purposes of computing predevelopment runoff, all pervious lands on the site shall be assumed to be in good hydrologic condition in accordance with the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) standards, regardless of conditions existing at the time of computation. Predevelopment runoff calculations utilizing other hydrologic conditions may be utilized provided that it is demonstrated to and approved by the administrator that actual site conditions warrant such considerations. 
(g)  Predevelopment and post development runoff characteristics and site hydrology shall be verified by site inspections, topographic surveys, available soil mapping or studies, and calculations consistent with good engineering practices. Guidance provided in the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website shall be considered appropriate practices. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-24. - Offsite compliance options. 
(a)  Offsite compliance options that the administrator may allow an operator to use to meet required phosphorus nutrient reductions include the following: 
(1)  Offsite controls utilized in accordance with a comprehensive stormwater management plan adopted pursuant to 9VAC25-870-92 for the local watershed within which a project is located; 
(2)  A locality pollutant loading pro rata share program established pursuant to § 15.2-2243 of the Code of Virginia or similar local funding mechanism; 
(3)  The nonpoint nutrient offset program established pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:35 of the Code of Virginia; 
(4)  Any other offsite options approved by an applicable state agency or state board; and 
(5)  When an operator has additional properties available within the same HUC or upstream HUC that the land-disturbing activity directly discharges to or within the same watershed as determined by the administrator, offsite stormwater management facilities on those properties may be utilized to meet the required phosphorus nutrient reductions from the land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, and pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:35 of the Code of Virginia, operators shall be allowed to utilize offsite options identified in subsection (a) of this section under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Less than five (5) acres of land will be disturbed; 
(2)  The post-construction phosphorus control requirement is less than ten (10) pounds per year; or 
(3)  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions are achieved on-site. If at least seventy-five (75) percent of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions cannot be met on-site, and the operator can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the VSMP authority that (i) alternative site designs have been considered that may accommodate on-site best management practices, (ii) on-site best management practices have been considered in alternative site designs to the maximum extent practicable, (iii) appropriate on-site best management practices will be implemented, and (iv) full compliance with postdevelopment nonpoint nutrient runoff compliance requirements cannot practicably be met on-site, then the required phosphorus nutrient reductions may be achieved, in whole or in part, through the use of off-site compliance options. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, offsite options shall not be allowed: 
(1)  Unless the selected offsite option achieves the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the operator's land-disturbing activity. In the case of a phased project, the operator may acquire or achieve offsite nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of each phase of land-disturbing activity in an amount sufficient for each phase. 
(2)  In contravention of local water quality-based limitations at the point of discharge that are (i) consistent with the determinations made pursuant to subsection B of § 62.1-44.19:7 of the Code of Virginia, (ii) contained in a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) program plan accepted by the department, or (iii) as otherwise may be established or approved by the state water control board. 
(d)  In order to meet the requirements of 9VAC25-870-66, offsite options described in subdivisions (1) and (2) of subsection (a) of this section may be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-25. - Design storms and hydrologic methods. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified, the prescribed design storms are the one-year, two-year, and 10-year 24-hour storms using the site-specific rainfall precipitation frequency data recommended by the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14. Partial duration time series shall be used for the precipitation data. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified, all hydrologic analyses shall be based on the existing watershed characteristics and how the ultimate development condition of the subject project will be addressed. 
(c)  The U.S. Department of Agriculture's Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) synthetic 24-hour rainfall distribution and models, including, but not limited to TR-55 and TR-20; hydrologic and hydraulic methods developed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; or other standard hydrologic and hydraulic methods, shall be used to conduct the analyses described in this part. 
(d)  For drainage areas of two hundred (200) acres or less, the VSMP authority may allow for the use of the Rational Method for evaluating peak discharges. 
(e)  For drainage areas of two hundred (200) acres or less, the VSMP authority may allow for the use of the Modified Rational Method for evaluating volumetric flows to stormwater conveyances. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-26. - Stormwater harvesting. 
    In accordance with § 62.1-44.15:28 of the Code of Virginia, stormwater harvesting is encouraged for the purposes of landscape irrigation systems, fire protection systems, flushing water closets and urinals, and other water handling systems to the extent such systems are consistent with federal, state, and city regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-27. - Linear development projects. 
    Linear development projects shall control postdevelopment stormwater runoff in accordance with a site-specific stormwater management plan or a comprehensive watershed stormwater management plan developed in accordance with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-28. - Comprehensive stormwater management plans. 
(a)  The city may develop comprehensive stormwater management plans to be approved by the department that meet the water quality objectives, quantity objectives, or both of this ordinance: 
(1)  Such plans shall ensure that offsite reductions equal to or greater than those that would be required on each contributing site are achieved within the same HUC or within another locally designated watershed. Pertaining to water quantity objectives, the plan may provide for implementation of a combination of channel improvement, stormwater detention, or other measures that are satisfactory to the city to prevent downstream erosion and flooding. 
(2)  If the land use assumptions upon which the plan was based change or if any other amendments are deemed necessary by the city, the city shall provide plan amendments to the department for review and approval. 
(3)  During the plan's implementation, the city shall document nutrient reductions accredited to the BMPs specified in the plan. 
(4)  State and federal agencies may develop comprehensive stormwater management plans, and may participate in locality-developed comprehensive stormwater management plans where practicable and permitted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-29. - Exceptions to the technical requirements for regulated land-disturbing activities. 
    The administrator may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of division 2 of this article, provided the exception meets the provisions contained in division 4 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
DIVISION 3. - TECHNICAL CRITERIA FOR REGULATED LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES FOR GRANDFATHERED PROJECTS 

Sec. 8-30. - Conditions under which grandfathering of projects may occur. 
(a)  Any land-disturbing activity shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation provided: 
(1)  A proffered or conditional zoning plan, zoning with a plan of development, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan, or any document determined by the locality to be equivalent thereto (i) was approved by the locality prior to July 1, 2012, (ii) provided a layout as defined in 9VAC25-870-10, (iii) will comply with the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation, and (iv) has not been subsequently modified or amended in a manner resulting in an increase in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge, and such that there is no increase in the volume or rate of runoff; 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
(3)  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(b)  Locality, state and federal projects shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation provided: 
(1)  There has been an obligation of locality, state or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012; 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
(3)  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(c)  Land-disturbing activities grandfathered under subsections A and B of this section shall remain subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation for one additional state permit cycle. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the board. 
(d)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at his discretion. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-31. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of division 3 only, the following words and terms have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Adequate channel means a channel that will convey the designated frequency storm event without overtopping the channel bank nor causing erosive damage to the channel bed or banks. 
    Aquatic bench means a 10-foot to 15-foot wide bench around the inside perimeter of a permanent pool that ranges in depth from zero (0) to twelve (12) inches. Vegetated with emergent plants, the bench augments pollutant removal, provides habitats, conceals trash and water level fluctuations, and enhances safety. 
    Average land cover condition means a measure of the average amount of impervious surfaces within a watershed, assumed to be sixteen (16) percent or a calculated watershed-specific value for the average land cover condition as approved by the Chesapeake Bay Local Assistance Board prior to September 13, 2011. 
    Bioretention basin means a water quality BMP engineered to filter the water quality volume (i) through an engineered planting bed consisting of a vegetated surface layer (vegetation, mulch, ground cover), planting soil, and sand bed and (ii) into the in-situ material. 
    Bioretention filter means a bioretention basin with the addition of a sand filter collector pipe system beneath the planting bed. 
    Constructed wetlands means areas intentionally designed and created to emulate the water quality improvement function of wetlands for the primary purpose of removing pollutants from stormwater. 
    Development means a tract of land developed or to be developed as a unit under single ownership or unified control which is to be used for any business or industrial purpose or is to contain three (3) or more residential dwelling units. 
    Grassed swale means an earthen conveyance system which is broad and shallow with erosion resistant grasses and check dams, engineered to remove pollutants from stormwater runoff by filtration through grass and infiltration into the soil. 
    Infiltration facility means a stormwater management facility that temporarily impounds runoff and discharges it via infiltration through the surrounding soil. While an infiltration facility may also be equipped with an outlet structure to discharge impounded runoff, such discharge is normally reserved for overflow and other emergency conditions. Since an infiltration facility impounds runoff only temporarily, it is normally dry during nonrainfall periods. Infiltration basin, infiltration trench, infiltration dry well, and porous pavement shall be considered infiltration facilities. 
    Nonpoint source pollutant runoff load or pollutant discharge means the average amount of a particular pollutant measured in pounds per year, delivered in a diffuse manner by stormwater runoff. 
    Planning area means a designated portion of the parcel on which the land development project is located. Planning areas shall be established by delineation on a master plan. Once established, planning areas shall be applied consistently for all future projects. 
    Sand filter means a contained bed of sand that acts to filter the first flush of runoff. The runoff is then collected beneath the sand bed and conveyed to an adequate discharge point or infiltrated into the in-situ soils. 
    Shallow marsh means a zone within a stormwater extended detention basin that exists from the surface of the normal pool to a depth of six (6) to eighteen (18) inches, and has a large surface area and, therefore, requires a reliable source of baseflow, groundwater supply, or a sizeable drainage area to maintain the desired water surface elevations to support emergent vegetation. 
    Stormwater detention basin or detention basin means a stormwater management facility that temporarily impounds runoff and discharges it through a hydraulic outlet structure to a downstream conveyance system. While a certain amount of outflow may also occur via infiltration through the surrounding soil, such amounts are negligible when compared to the outlet structure discharge rates and are, therefore, not considered in the facility's design. Since a detention facility impounds runoff only temporarily, it is normally dry during nonrainfall periods. 
    Stormwater extended detention basin or extended detention basin means a stormwater management facility that temporarily impounds runoff and discharges it through a hydraulic outlet structure over a specified period of time to a downstream conveyance system for the purpose of water quality enhancement or stream channel erosion control. While a certain amount of outflow may also occur via infiltration through the surrounding soil, such amounts are negligible when compared to the outlet structure discharge rates and, therefore, are not considered in the facility's design. Since an extended detention basin impounds runoff only temporarily, it is normally dry during nonrainfall periods. 
    Stormwater extended detention basin-enhanced or extended detention basin-enhanced means an extended detention basin modified to increase pollutant removal by providing a shallow marsh in the lower stage of the basin. 
    Stormwater retention basin or retention basin means a stormwater management facility that includes a permanent impoundment, or normal pool of water, for the purpose of enhancing water quality and, therefore, is normally wet even during nonrainfall periods. Storm runoff inflows may be temporarily stored above this permanent impoundment for the purpose of reducing flooding or stream channel erosion. 
    Stormwater retention basin I or retention basin I means a retention basin with the volume of the permanent pool equal to three (3) times the water quality volume. 
    Stormwater retention basin II or retention basin II means a retention basin with the volume of the permanent pool equal to four (4) times the water quality volume. 
    Stormwater retention basin III or retention basin III means a retention basin with the volume of the permanent pool equal to four (4) times the water quality volume with the addition of an aquatic bench. 
    Vegetated filter strip means a densely vegetated section of land engineered to accept runoff as overland sheet flow from upstream development. It shall adopt any natural vegetated form, from grassy meadow to small forest. The vegetative cover facilitates pollutant removal through filtration, sediment deposition, infiltration, and absorption, and is dedicated for that purpose. 
    Water quality volume means the volume equal to the first one-half (1/2) inch of runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-32. - Applicability. 
    This part specifies the technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities that are not subject to the technical criteria of division 2 in accordance with section 8-16. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-33. - General. 
(a)  Determination of flooding and channel erosion impacts to receiving streams due to land-disturbing activities shall be measured at each point of discharge from the land disturbance and such determination shall include any runoff from the balance of the watershed that also contributes to that point of discharge. 
(b)  The specified design storms shall be defined as either a 24-hour storm using the rainfall distribution recommended by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) when using NRCS methods or as the storm of critical duration that produces the greatest required storage volume at the site when using a design method such as the Modified Rational Method. 
(c)  For purposes of computing runoff, all pervious lands in the site shall be assumed prior to development to be in good condition (if the lands are pastures, lawns, or parks), with good cover (if the lands are woods), or with conservation treatment (if the lands are cultivated); regardless of conditions existing at the time of computation. 
(d)  Construction of stormwater management facilities or modifications to channels shall comply with all applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. Evidence of approval of all necessary permits shall be presented. 
(e)  Stormwater management wet ponds and extended detention ponds that are not covered by the Impounding Structure Regulations (4VAC50-20) shall, at a minimum, be engineered for structural integrity for the 100-year storm event. 
(f)  Predevelopment and postdevelopment runoff rates shall be verified by calculations that are consistent with good engineering practices. 
(g)  Outflows from a stormwater management facility or stormwater conveyance system shall be discharged to an adequate channel. 
(h)  Proposed residential, commercial, or industrial subdivisions shall apply these stormwater management criteria to the land disturbance as a whole. Individual lots in new subdivisions shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities, but rather the entire subdivision shall be considered a single land development project. Hydrologic parameters shall reflect the ultimate land disturbance and shall be used in all engineering calculations. 
(i)  All stormwater management facilities shall have an inspection and maintenance plan that identifies the owner and the responsible party for carrying out the inspection and maintenance plan. 
(j)  Construction of stormwater management impoundment structures within a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) designated 100-year floodplain shall be avoided whenever possible. When this is unavoidable, all stormwater management facility construction shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations under the National Flood Insurance Program, 44 CFR Part 59. 
(k)  Natural channel characteristics shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
(l)  Land-disturbing activities shall comply with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law and attendant regulations. 
(m)  Flood control and stormwater management facilities that drain or treat water from multiple development projects or from a significant portion of a watershed may be allowed in resource protection areas defined in the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act provided such facilities are allowed and constructed in accordance with the Stormwater Management Act and this chapter, and provided that (i) the local government has conclusively established that the location of the facility within the resource protection area is the optimum location; (ii) the size of the facility is the minimum necessary to provide necessary flood control, stormwater treatment, or both; (iii) the facility must be consistent with a comprehensive stormwater management plan developed and approved in accordance with 9VAC25-870-92 or with a VSMP that has been approved prior to July 1, 2012, by the board, the Chesapeake Bay Local Assistance Board prior to its abolishment on July 1, 2012, or the Board of Conservation and Recreation; (iv) all applicable permits for construction in state or federal waters must be obtained from the appropriate state and federal agencies, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the department, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission; (v) approval must be received from the local government prior to construction; and (vi) routine maintenance is allowed to be performed on such facilities to assure that they continue to function as designed. 
(n)  It is not the intent of this subdivision to allow a best management practice that collects and treats runoff from only an individual lot or some portion of the lot to be located within a resource protection area. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-34. - Water quality. 
(a)  Compliance with the water quality criteria may be achieved by applying the performance-based criteria or the technology-based criteria to either the site or a planning area. 
(b)  Performance-based criteria. For land-disturbing activities, the calculated postdevelopment nonpoint source pollutant runoff load shall be compared to the calculated predevelopment load based upon the average land cover condition or the existing site condition. A BMP shall be located, designed, and maintained to achieve the target pollutant removal efficiencies specified in Table 1 of this section to effectively reduce the pollutant load to the required level based upon the following four applicable land development situations for which the performance criteria apply: 
(1)  Situation 1 consists of land-disturbing activities where the existing percent impervious cover is less than or equal to the average land cover condition and the proposed improvements will create a total percent impervious cover that is less than the average land cover condition. 
Requirement: No reduction in the after disturbance pollutant discharge is required. 
(2)  Situation 2 consists of land-disturbing activities where the existing percent impervious cover is less than or equal to the average land cover condition and the proposed improvements will create a total percent impervious cover that is greater than the average land cover condition. 
Requirement: The pollutant discharge after disturbance shall not exceed the existing pollutant discharge based on the average land cover condition. 
(3)  Situation 3 consists of land-disturbing activities where the existing percent impervious cover is greater than the average land cover condition. 
Requirement: The pollutant discharge after disturbance shall not exceed (i) the pollutant discharge based on existing conditions less ten (10) percent or (ii) the pollutant discharge based on the average land cover condition, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Situation 4 consists of land-disturbing activities where the existing percent impervious cover is served by an existing stormwater management BMP that addresses water quality. 
Requirement: The pollutant discharge after disturbance shall not exceed the existing pollutant discharge based on the existing percent impervious cover while served by the existing BMP. The existing BMP shall be shown to have been designed and constructed in accordance with proper design standards and specifications, and to be in proper functioning condition. 
(c)  Technology-based criteria. For land-disturbing activities, the postdeveloped stormwater runoff from the impervious cover shall be treated by an appropriate BMP as required by the postdeveloped condition percent impervious cover as specified in Table 1 of this section. The selected BMP shall be located, designed, and maintained to perform at the target pollutant removal efficiency specified in Table 1 or those found in 9VAC25-870-65. Design standards and specifications for the BMPs in Table 1 that meet the required target pollutant removal efficiency are available in the 1999 Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook. Other approved BMPs available on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website may also be utilized. 
Table 1* Water Quality BMP* Target 
Phosphorus 
Removal 
Efficiency Percent 
Impervious 
Cover Vegetated filter strip 10% 16-21% Grassed swale 15% Constructed wetlands 20% 22-37% Extended detention (2 × WQ Vol) 35% Retention basin I (3 × WQ Vol) 40% Bioretention basin 50% 38-66% Bioretention filter 50% Extended detention-enhanced 50% Retention basin II (4 × WQ Vol) 50% Infiltration (1 × WQ Vol) 50% Sand filter 65% 67-100% Infiltration (2 × WQ Vol) 65% Retention basin III (4 × WQ Vol with aquatic bench) 65% *Innovative or alternate BMPs not included in this table may be allowed at the discretion of the local program administrator or the department. Innovative or alternate BMPs not included in this table that target appropriate nonpoint source pollution other than phosphorous may be allowed at the discretion of the local program administrator or the department.  
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-35. - Stream channel erosion. 
(a)  Properties and receiving waterways downstream of any land-disturbing activity shall be protected from erosion and damage due to changes in runoff rate of flow and hydrologic characteristics, including, but not limited to, changes in volume, velocity, frequency, duration, and peak flow rate of stormwater runoff in accordance with the minimum design standards set out in this section. 
(b)  Land-disturbing activity shall comply with subdivision 19 of 9VAC25-840-40 of the Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations, promulgated pursuant to the Erosion and Sediment Control Law. 
(c)  The locality's VSMP authority may determine that some watersheds or receiving stream systems require enhanced criteria in order to address the increased frequency of bankfull flow conditions (top of bank) brought on by land-disturbing activities or where more stringent requirements are necessary to address total maximum daily load requirements or to protect exceptional waters. Therefore, in lieu of the reduction of the two-year postdeveloped peak rate of runoff as required in subsection B of this section, the land development project being considered shall provide 24-hour extended detention of the runoff generated by the one-year, 24-hour duration storm. 
(d)  In addition to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, a locality's VSMP authority by local ordinance may in accordance with § 62.1-44.15:33 of the Code of Virginia, or the board by state regulation may, adopt more stringent channel analysis criteria or design standards to ensure that the natural level of channel erosion, to the maximum extent practicable, will not increase due to the land-disturbing activities. These criteria may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Criteria and procedures for channel analysis and classification. 
(2)  Procedures for channel data collection. 
(3)  Criteria and procedures for the determination of the magnitude and frequency of natural sediment transport loads. 
(4)  Criteria for the selection of proposed natural or manmade channel linings. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-36. - Flooding. 
(a)  Downstream properties and waterways shall be protected from damages from localized flooding due to changes in runoff rate of flow and hydrologic characteristics, including, but not limited to, changes in volume, velocity, frequency, duration, and peak flow rate of stormwater runoff in accordance with the minimum design standards set out in this section. 
(b)  The 10-year post-developed peak rate of runoff from the development site shall not exceed the 10-year pre-developed peak rate of runoff. 
(c)  Land-disturbing activity shall comply with the requirements of Articles V and VI of the PFM and article I of this chapter. 
(d)  Linear development projects shall not be required to control post-developed stormwater runoff for flooding, except in accordance with a watershed or regional stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-37. - Regional (watershed-wide) stormwater management plans. 
    Water quality requirements and where allowed, water quantity requirements, may be achieved in accordance with section 8-24 and 8-28 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
DIVISION 4. - EXCEPTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 

[Sec. 8-37.5. - Exceptions to the requirements.] 
(a)  The administrator may grant exceptions to the requirements of divisions 2 and 3 of this chapter. An exception may be granted provided that (i) the exception is the minimum necessary to afford relief, (ii) reasonable and appropriate conditions shall be imposed as necessary upon any exception granted so that the intent of the Act and this chapter are preserved, (iii) granting the exception will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and (iv) exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created. 
(b)  Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Under no circumstance shall the administrator grant an exception to the requirement that the land-disturbing activity obtain required state permits, nor approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website, nor approve any other control measure not duly approved by the department. 
(d)  Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed unless offsite options available through section 8-24 of this chapter have been considered and found not available. 
(e)  A record of all exceptions granted shall be maintained by the VSMP authority in accordance with 9VAC25-870-126. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at their discretion. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
DIVISION 5. - MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 8-38. - Long-term maintenance of permanent stormwater. 
(a)  The administrator shall require the provision of long-term responsibility for and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other techniques specified to manage the quality and quantity of runoff. Such requirements shall be set forth in a private maintenance agreement recorded in the city land records prior to obtaining any land disturbance related permits and shall at a minimum: 
(1)  Be submitted to the administrator for review and approval prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan; 
(2)  Be stated to run with the land; 
(3)  Provide for all necessary access to the property for purposes of maintenance and regulatory inspections; 
(4)  Provide for inspections and maintenance and the submission of inspection and maintenance reports to the administrator on an annual basis. Details related to the inspection are found on the Virginia BMP Clearinghouse website and PFM; 
(5)  Provide inspection reports certified by a professional engineer licensed in Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1; 
(6)  Provision for the all lands where nutrients are applied to a contiguous area of greater than one (1) acre to develop and submit a nutrient management plan developed by a certified turf and landscape nutrient management planner in accordance with § 10.1-104.2 of the Code of Virginia; 
(7)  Provision for additional maintenance required by the administrator is completed within thirty (30) days of notification; 
(8)  Ensure that measures could be taken by the city to maintain the stormwater management facilities or perform inspections at the owner's expense should the owner fail to maintain the stormwater management facilities in good working order in accordance with the maintenance specifications in the agreement or perform the periodic inspections required by the agreement; 
(9)  Provide that in the event the city, pursuant to the agreement, performs work of any nature or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the owner will reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city; 
(10)  Provide for liens to be placed on the property should the owner fail to reimburse the city for costs incurred by the city; and 
(11)  Be enforceable by all appropriate governmental parties. 
(b)  At the discretion of the administrator, such recorded instruments need not be required for stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot on which they are located, provided it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the administrator that future maintenance of such facilities will be addressed through an enforceable mechanism at the discretion of the administrator. 
(c)  If a recorded instrument is not required pursuant to section 58-122(b) [8-38(b)], the administrator shall develop a strategy for addressing maintenance of stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot. Such a strategy may include periodic inspections, homeowner outreach and education, or other method targeted at promoting the long-term maintenance of such facilities. Such facilities may not be subject to the requirement for an inspection to be conducted by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-39. - Monitoring and inspections. 
(a)  The permittee shall notify the administrator before the commencement of construction. 
(b)  The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator shall inspect the land-disturbing activity during construction for: 
(1)  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(2)  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and 
(4)  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(c)  The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the administrator may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
(e)  Pursuant to § 10.1-603.12:2 of the Code of Virginia, the administrator may require every VSMP authority permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to VSMP authority permit requirements under this ordinance, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this ordinance. 
(f)  Post-construction inspections of stormwater maintenance facilities required by the provisions of this ordinance shall be conducted by the administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator pursuant to the city's adopted and state water control board approved inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five (5) years except as may otherwise be provided for in section 8-37. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
DIVISION 6. - HEARINGS AND APPEALS 

Sec. 8-40. - Hearings. 
(a)  Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to ordinance requirements, aggrieved by any action of the city taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction of the city, may demand in writing a formal hearing by the governing body causing such grievance, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the administrator within thirty (30) days after notice of such action is given by the administrator 
(b)  The hearings held under this section shall be conducted by the governing body at a regular or special meeting of the governing body, or by at least one member of the governing body designated by the governing body to conduct such hearings on behalf of the governing body at any other time and place authorized by the governing body. 
(c)  A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings shall be taken and filed with the governing body. Depositions may be taken and read as in actions at law. 
(d)  The governing body or its designated member, as the case may be, shall have power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, and at the request of any party shall issue such subpoenas. The failure of a witness without legal excuse to appear or to testify or to produce documents shall be acted upon by the governing body, or its designated member, whose action may include the procurement of an order of enforcement from the circuit court. Witnesses who are subpoenaed shall receive the same fees and reimbursement for mileage as in civil actions. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-41. - Appeals. 
(a)  Final decisions of the administrator under this article shall be subject to review by the governing body, provided an appeal is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of any written decision by the administrator which adversely affects the rights, duties or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land-disturbing activities. 
(b)  Final decisions of the city under this article shall be subject to judicial review by the Prince William Circuit Court, provided that an appeal is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
DIVISION 7. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-42. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the VSMP authority permit conditions or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the permit conditions by any of the following: verbal warnings and inspection reports, notices of corrective action, consent special orders, and notices to comply. Written notices shall be served by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application, or by delivery at the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. 
(1)  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in accordance with subsection (b) or the permit may be revoked by the administrator. 
(2)  If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this section within the time specified, the administrator may issue an order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land-disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land-disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed. 
Such orders shall be issued in accordance with the city's procedures. Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to his address specified in the land records of the locality, or by personal delivery by an agent of the administrator. However, if the administrator finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth or otherwise substantially impacting water quality, it may issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all land-disturbing activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not complying with the terms thereof, the administrator may institute a proceeding for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with subsection 8-41(c). 
(b)  In addition to any other remedy provided by this ordinance, if the administrator or his or her designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance, they may initiate such informal and/or formal administrative enforcement procedures in a manner that is consistent with the PFM. 
(c)  Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation, ordinance, order, or any permit condition issued by the administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in any appropriate court by the locality to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any order of the administrator shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) for each violation within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1)  Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this subsection shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(i)  No permit registration; 
(ii)  No SWPPP; 
(iii)  Incomplete SWPPP; 
(iv)  SWPPP not available for review; 
(v)  No approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(vi)  Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls; 
(vii)  Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained; 
(viii)  Operational deficiencies; 
(ix)  Failure to conduct required inspections; 
(x)  Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and 
(xi)  Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of Section 9VAC25-880-70 of the general permit. 
(2)  The administrator may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court. 
(3)  In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection, the court may consider the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator from noncompliance. 
(4)  Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the city shall be paid into the treasury of the city to be used for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the city and abating environmental pollution therein in such manner as the court may, by order, direct. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this section or by law, any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this ordinance, any order of the administrator, any condition of a permit, or any order of a court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months or a fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) nor more than thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00), or both. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
DIVISION 8. - FEES 

Sec. 8-43. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for coverage under the general permit shall be imposed in accordance with a fee schedule established within the state Code of Virginia 9VAC25-870-825 and 9VAC25-870-830 as amended. When a site or sites has been purchased for development within a previously permitted common plan of development or sale, the applicant shall be subject to fees in accordance with the disturbed acreage of their site or sites according to the fee schedule. 
(b)  Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements from the general permit issued by the state water control board shall be imposed in accordance with the fee schedule. If the general permit modifications result in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the city, such reviews shall be subject to the fees set out in the fee schedule. The fee assessed shall be based on the total disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the general permit modification fee, modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed acreage shall pay the difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have applied for the total disturbed acreage in the fee schedule. 
(c)  Annual permit maintenance shall be imposed in accordance with the fee schedule, including fees imposed on expired permits that have been administratively continued. With respect to the general permit, these fees shall apply until the permit coverage is terminated. General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be paid annually to the city, by the anniversary date of general permit coverage. No permit will be reissued or automatically continued without payment of the required fee. General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be applied until a notice of termination is effective. 
(d)  The fees set forth in this section above shall apply to: 
(1)  All persons seeking coverage under the general permit. 
(2)  All permittees who request modifications to or transfers of their existing registration statement for coverage under a general permit. 
(3)  Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to the department for an individual permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities. 
(e)  No permit application fees will be assessed to: 
(1)  Permittees who request minor modifications to permits as defined in section 58-98 [8-13] of this chapter. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the administrator shall not be exempt pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Permittees whose permits are modified or amended at the initiative of the department, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the administrator or errors related to the acreage of the site. 
(f)  All incomplete payments will be deemed as nonpayments, and the applicant shall be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest may be charged for late payments at the underpayment rate set forth in § 58.1-15 of the Code of Virginia and is calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A ten (10) percent late payment fee shall be charged to any delinquent (over ninety (90) days past due) account. The city shall be entitled to all remedies available under the Code of Virginia in collecting any past due amount. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-44. - Performance. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of any permit, the applicant may be required to submit a reasonable performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the city attorney, to ensure that measures could be taken by the city at the applicant's expense should he fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be required of him by the permit conditions as a result of his land-disturbing activity. If the city takes such action upon should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held, if any. Within sixty (60) days of the completion of the requirements of the permit conditions, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
DIVISION 9. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FUND 

Sec. 8-45. - Establishment of stormwater management fund. 
(a)  The program is established and the stormwater management system is provided to protect the waterways and land in the city by controlling flooding and to protect the city's natural environment. The costs of designing, developing, improving, operating, maintaining, repairing and monitoring the stormwater system required in the city should, therefore, be allocated, to the extent practicable, to each property owner based on the property's impact on the stormwater system. In order to provide revenue to fund those costs and to fairly allocate those costs, the city's governing body has established the fund. 
(b)  All revenues collected from the stormwater management fee or otherwise received by the city pursuant to this article shall be deposited to the fund. The city's governing body may make additional appropriations to the fund. All disbursements from the fund shall be for the purposes of the fund as set forth in section 8-46 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-46. - Purposes of the fund. 
    The fund shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(a)  The acquisition by gift, purchase or condemnation of real and personal property, and interest therein, necessary to construct, operate and maintain stormwater control facilities. 
(b)  All costs of administration and implementation of the program, to including the establishment of reasonable operating and capital reserves to meet unanticipated or emergency stormwater management requirements. 
(c)  Engineering and design, debt retirement, construction costs for new facilities and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities. 
(d)  Facility maintenance. 
(e)  Monitoring of stormwater control devices. 
(f)  Pollution control and abatement, consistent with state and federal regulations for water pollution control and abatement. 
(g)  Planning, design, land acquisition, construction, operation and maintenance activities. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-47. - Administration of the fund. 
(a)  The city's governing body shall budget and appropriate for the fund annually. 
(b)  The fund shall be managed in accordance with the purposes set forth in this article. 
(c)  All revenues collected from fees imposed pursuant to section 8-48 of this article shall be deposited into the fund. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-48. - Stormwater management fee. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a service charge on property in the city on the basis set forth in this article to fund the costs of operating the stormwater management program as set forth in section 8-49 of this article. This service charge shall be known as the stormwater management fee (the "fee"). 
(b)  The fee shall be paid by the owner of each parcel of developed property in the city. 
(c)  The base rate will be established annually by the city's governing body. The base rate shall be calculated to insure adequate revenues to provide for a balanced operation, maintenance, repair and capital improvements budget for the program. 
(d)  The fee is based on: 
(1)  The extent to which each property creates a need for the stormwater management system. 
(2)  The amount of impervious area on each property. 
(3)  The costs of implementing the program. 
The fee shall be imposed effective November 1, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-49. - Classification of property for purposes of determination of the stormwater management fee. 
(a)  For purposes of determining the stormwater management fee, all properties in the city are classified into one (1) of the following classes: 
(1)  Developed residential property, 
(2)  Developed nonresidential property, or 
(3)  Undeveloped property. 
(b)  Single-family detached residential properties will be charged the base rate for each dwelling unit, regardless of the size of the parcel or the improvements. Townhouses and condominium units will be charged a flat rate of seventy-five (75) percent of the base rate for each dwelling unit. 
(c)  The annual fee for developed nonresidential property shall be the base rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of the property by one (1) base unit (two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet). The numerical factor will be rounded to the nearest tenth of a unit. The minimum stormwater management fee for any developed property shall equal the base rate. 
(d)  The annual fee for vacant developed property, both residential and nonresidential, shall be the same as that for occupied property of the same class. 
(e)  Commercially owned apartment property shall be treated as developed nonresidential property for the purpose of assessing the annual fee. 
(f)  Undeveloped property shall be exempt from the fee. 
(g)  The fee shall not be billed for properties owned by the city, including public roads, or by a federal, state or local government agency when that agency owns and provides for maintenance of storm drainage and stormwater control facilities. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-50. - Adjustments. 
(a)  Adjustments or reductions of the fee can be made upon application of the owner of developed property to the director and upon certification by the director that the owner or the property meets the criteria of one (1) of the following subsections and an adjustment in the amount certified by the director is therefore appropriate. 
(b)  For the first year in which a stormwater management fee is applied to property, adjustments certified by the director during that year shall be applied retroactively to the date on which the fee was first applied, if the director is satisfied that the circumstances under which the adjustment is certified existed on the date the fee is first applied to the property. In subsequent years, the date on which an adjustment is certified as appropriate by the director shall be the date on which the adjustment takes effect; the adjustment shall be prorated from that date for the balance of that year. 
(c)  Once certified, an adjustment shall be effective for as long as the conditions and circumstances under which the adjustment was granted continue, but shall not be effective for the upcoming year without renewal on or before the previous December 31. Renewals of adjustments may be granted upon reapplication by the owner of the property to the director and upon the director's determination that the property owner is in full compliance with the terms of any existing stormwater management agreement. If an adjustment lapses for any reason, the property owner must reapply to the director in order to re-institute the adjustment. 
(d)  Whenever the director becomes aware, through investigation upon complaint, through random inspection, or through any other means, that the owner has failed to maintain the conditions and circumstances under which an adjustment has been given, has failed to perform under a required stormwater management agreement or has failed to comply with the requirements of an approved program listed in paragraph (2), below, the director may immediately revoke an adjustment by sending written notice of the revocation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property. The director's revocation may be appealed by the owner in the same manner as a director's determination under section 8-53 of this article is appealed. The director shall notify the city's director of finance of the revocation of an adjustment, and the revocation shall be effective ten (10) working days after the date of the written notification, if the owner has not filed an appeal. If the owner files an appeal and the city's governing body upholds the director's revocation, then the revocation shall become effective on the date of the decision affirming the revocation. 
(1)  Developed nonresidential and residential property, where stormwater management is provided by the owner on-site, and where the owner has entered into an appropriate stormwater maintenance agreement with the director, may be eligible for the following adjustments under the following circumstances: 
a.  Where on-site stormwater management is provided for the property to standards which protect against a 2-year 24-hour flood, the owner may receive an adjustment to reduce the fee for that property by ten (10) percent. 
b.  Where on-site stormwater management is provided for the property to standards which protect against a 10-year 24-hour flood, the owner may receive an adjustment to reduce the fee for that property by ten (10) percent. 
c.  Where on-site stormwater management is provided for the property to standards which protect against a 25-year 24-hour flood, the owner may receive an adjustment to reduce the fee for that property by ten (10) percent. 
d.  Where on-site stormwater management is provided for the property to standards which protect against a 100-year 24-hour flood, the owner may receive an adjustment to reduce the fee for that property by ten (10) percent. 
e.  Where best management practices are provided in accordance with city standards for water quality protection, the owner may receive an adjustment to reduce the fee for that property by ten (10) percent. 
f.  Adjustments granted for supplying on-site stormwater management as described in paragraphs a. through e. above may be combined, so long as the maximum adjustment granted under this subsection does not exceed fifty (50) percent. 
(2)  Developed nonresidential property where no adjustment under paragraphs a. through f. of subsection (1) above is applicable may be eligible for the following fee adjustments under the following circumstances: 
a.  Where the owner has agreed to participate in a stormwater management or stormwater quality protection project approved by the city's governing body for use in granting fee adjustments, such as an adopt-a-pond project, a volunteer lawn program, and other pollution prevention programs, the owner may receive an adjustment to reduce the fee for that property by ten (10) percent. 
b.  If the owner participates in more than one (1) project described in paragraph a. above, adjustments granted for participating in those projects may be combined, so long as the maximum adjustment granted under this subsection does not exceed thirty (30) percent. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-51. - Notification of determination of impervious area on developed nonresidential property. 
    The director shall notify each owner of developed nonresidential property of the amount of impervious area on that property. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-52. - Stormwater management fee data; collection of fees. 
(a)  Before or at the time of preparation of the land book for real estate taxation purposes, the director shall prepare and forward to the city's director of finance all necessary data for the billing of the stormwater management fee. This data shall include the identification of every parcel to be charged the fee and the amount of the fee to be charged, including all adjustments. The director of finance may coordinate with the commissioner of the revenue to cause the fee to appear on the real property tax bill for each property for which a fee is charged, as a separate line item. The treasurer shall collect the fees and deposit them to the fund. In his discretion the director of finance may determine to send bills for the stormwater management fee separate from real property tax bills. 
(b)  In the event that the fees are not paid when due, interest thereon shall commence on the first day of the month following the month of the due date, at a rate equal to the interest rate charged for delinquent real estate taxes, until such time as the overdue payment and interest are paid. Unpaid fees and interest accrued shall constitute a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes. 
(c)  When developed properties first receive an occupancy permit, the fee will commence, and the director will forward the data concerning the fee to the city's director of finance so that the charge will be issued with the next bill. The director shall prorate the fee from the date the occupancy permit was issued. 
(d)  In the event of alterations or additions to the property which change the amount of impervious surface area, the director will modify the fees upon receipt of the final building inspection of the alterations and/or additions. The director will forward this data to the director of finance so that the next bill will reflect the modification of the fee. Increases or decreases in the fee resulting from alterations or additions to the property shall be prorated by the director from the date of the final building inspection. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-53. - Request for correction by the director. 
(a)  The owner of developed property may request a correction of the determination of impervious area on the property by submitting the request in writing to the director within twenty (20) days after receipt of notification of the amount of impervious area. The owner of developed property may request a reconsideration of the denial of some or all of a requested adjustment by submitting the request in writing to the director within twenty (20) days after the date of any written determination by the director denying some or all of a requested adjustment. The owner of developed property may request the correction of mathematical errors in calculating the fee to be applied to the property by submitting the request in writing to the director within twenty (20) days after receipt of the first bill containing the mathematical error. 
(b)  The director shall conduct a hearing, if requested, on the determination of impervious area on the property, or the granting of a requested adjustment, or the accuracy of the calculation of the fee, and shall make a determination within ten (10) working days after the hearing. If the owner does not request a hearing, the director shall make a determination within ten (10) working days after receipt of the owner's written request for correction. 
(c)  No issues other than those set forth in subsection (a) can be addressed by the director in a request for correction. If a request for correction raises issues other than those set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the director shall notify the owner within five (5) working days that the request raises issues that are not properly the subject of a request for correction. The director's decision under this subsection shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-54. - The city's governing body to hear appeals. 
    The city's governing body shall hear appeals from determinations of the director made under sections 8-50 and 8-53 of this article. If the owner of developed real property is aggrieved by a determination of the director on an issue listed in subsection 8-50(d) or 8-53(a) of this article, the owner may appeal that determination in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-55. - Appeals to the city's governing body. 
(a)  An appeal may be filed with the director by a property owner, who has paid his fees, within ten (10) working days of the determination of the director on an issue listed in subsection 8-50(d) or 8-53(a) of this article. The director shall forward the petition to the city's governing body. The petition for appeal shall be in writing setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. The city's governing body shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days of the filing and render a decision within sixty (60) days of its receipt of the appeal. 
(b)  The owner must comply with all rules and procedures adopted by the city's governing body when submitting an appeal petition. Failure to comply with all rules and procedures shall be grounds for denial of the petition. 
(c)  If the owner is appealing the director's determination as to the amount of impervious area on the property, the city's governing body shall have full authority to affirm, modify, reverse, or set aside the director's determination of issues under subsection 8-53(a) of this article. In evaluating the appeal, the city's governing body shall determine whether the decision of the director was issued in compliance with the standards, policies and criteria of the program. 
(d)  All decisions of the city's governing body shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, 7-15-14) 
Sec. 8-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 1, adopted April 5, 2016, repealed § 8-56, which pertained to severability and derived from Ord. No. 14-1700-957, § 1, adopted July 15, 2014. 
DIVISION 10. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION 

Sec. 8-57. - Generally. 
(a)  This division shall be known as the "Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Ordinance of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia". 
(b)  The purpose of this division is to ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Manassas Park and the Commonwealth of Virginia and to prevent water from being rendered dangerous to the health of persons living in Manassas Park. This division regulates non-stormwater discharges entering the city's municipal separate storm sewer system and establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into such system in order to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System's General Permit For Dischargers of Stormwater From Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems permit issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(c)  This division shall apply to all activities that cause or allow direct or indirect illicit discharges or illicit connections into the city's municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 3, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-58. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the definitions set forth in 9VAC25-870-10 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations, as amended, which are expressly adopted and incorporated herein by reference, and in section 8-13, above, the following words and terms used in this division have the following meanings unless otherwise specified herein. Where definitions differ, those incorporated herein shall have precedence. 
    Illicit connection means any connection, in any manner whatsoever, to the city's MS4 that is not authorized by applicable state law or city ordinance, and which has not been approved by the city in accordance with applicable city ordinances. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to the city's MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to a separate VPDES or state permit (other than the state permit for discharges from the city's MS4), discharges resulting from firefighting activities, and discharges identified by and in compliance with this division. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to storm drain systems that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
    MS4 means a municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    VPDES means the Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 3, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-59. - Control of pollutant contributions from interconnected MS4s. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer systems not owned or operated by the city, but which are interconnected with the city's MS4, shall be controlled so that they do not impair the operation of or contribute to the failure of the city's MS4 or of any interconnected MS4s to meet any applicable local, state, or federal law or regulation or permit. Owners of interconnected MS4s shall be responsible for the quality within their systems and shall coordinate with the owners of the downstream MS4s. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 3, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-60. - Discharges to the MS4. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division to: 
(1)  Cause or allow any illicit discharge to the MS4. 
(2)  Cause or allow any illicit connection to the MS4. 
(3)  Violate any condition or provision of this division or any permit or approval granted to allow any stormwater discharges to the MS4. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of this division, the following activities shall not be considered unlawful illicit discharges: 
(1)  Discharges resulting from firefighting and other public safety activities. 
(2)  Discharges associated with the maintenance or repair of public water, sanitary, and storm sewer lines, and public drinking water reservoirs and drinking water treatment or distributions systems conducted in accordance with applicable federal and state regulations and standards. 
(3)  Discharges associated with any activity by the city, its employees or designees, in the maintenance of any component of a city-maintained stormwater management facility conducted in accordance with applicable federal and state regulations and standards. 
(4)  Discharges specified in writing by the program authority or his/her designee as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(5)  Water line flushing. 
(6)  Landscape irrigation. 
(7)  Diverted stream flows or rising ground waters. 
(8)  Infiltration of uncontaminated groundwater (as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005). 
(9)  Pumping of uncontaminated groundwater. 
(10)  Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, irrigation water, springs, and water from crawl spaces or footing drains. 
(11)  Air conditioning condensation. 
(12)  Lawn watering. 
(13)  House washing and individual car washing on residential lots. 
(14)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges with pH between 6.0 to 8.0 standard units, at ambient water temperature, and with less than 0.10 milligrams per liter or parts per million. 
(15)  Water from street, sidewalk or parking lot washing to remove algae or oil buildup. 
(16)  Application of salts or other de-icing substances to streets, sidewalks and parking lots. 
(17)  Discharges associated with dye testing, provided that the program authority is notified in writing before the test. 
(c)  If any activity listed in subsection (b), above, is found by the city manager or his/her designee to be a source of pollutants to the city's MS4, the city manager or his/her designee shall serve a written notice to the party responsible for the activity ordering that the activity be ceased or conducted in a manner that will avoid the discharge of pollutants to the city's MS4. The notice shall state the deadline by which the activity shall cease or be conducted without pollution. Failure to comply with such order within the time stated in the notice shall result in the revocation of the exemption listed in subsection (a), above, and shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 3, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-61. - Compliance monitoring. 
    In order to assure compliance with the provisions of this division, and all applicable city ordinances and state and federal laws, orders and regulations, the city manager or his/her designee shall have the right to inspect any property, public or private, within the city at any reasonable time. 
(1)  Right of entry. Facility operators shall allow the city manager or his/her designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, examination, and copying of records that must be kept under the condition of a VPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by federal or state law. 
(2)  Inspection warrant. In the event the city manager or his/her designee is denied access to property, he/she may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction. If such sworn testimony establishes probable cause that a violation of this division has occurred, the city manager or his/her designee may request that the magistrate or court grant him/her an inspection warrant to enter the property for the purpose of determining whether a violation exists. The city manager or his/her designee shall make a reasonable effort to obtain consent from the owner or occupant of the subject property prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant pursuant to this section. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to deny the city manager or his/her designee access to any property after the city manager or his/her designee has obtained an inspection warrant from a magistrate or court for such property. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 3, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-62. - Emergency conditions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, whenever the city determines that conditions or activities require immediate action to help protect public health, safety or welfare or to provide for compliance with this division, rules promulgated hereunder or city-approved construction plans, city personnel designated by the city manager are authorized to enter at a reasonable time in or upon any property for the purpose of testing, inspecting, investigating, measuring, sampling, and correcting such emergency conditions. failure to admit personnel responding to emergency conditions, as determined by the city, shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 3, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-63. - Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    The city may require the use of best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of the city's MS4. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at the expense of the owner or operator, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials and wastes into the city's MS4 through the use of structural and non-structural BMPs. Additionally, any individual responsible for a property or premises which is or could be the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at such individual's own expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs and/or implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to prevent further discharge of pollutants to the city's MS4. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 3, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-64. - Notification of spills. 
    Pursuant to Section II.B.3. of 9VAC25-890-40, the city prohibits illicit discharges to the city's MS4. Any person owning or occupying a premises or facility, who has knowledge of a discharge of pollutants from those premises or facilities which may violate the prohibitions found in section 8-60 shall immediately take action to abate the discharge and shall notify the city either in person or by phone within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the discharge. Observed discharges of hazardous materials or substances shall be immediately reported by calling "911". If the illicit discharge was emitted from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of said establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge as well as the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 3, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-65. - Violations, enforcement, and penalties. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city manager or his/her designee finds that a person or entity has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this division, the city manager or his/her designee may order compliance through written notice of violation to the responsible party. Such notice may require, without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting. 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges. 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist. 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property. 
(5)  Payment of the costs of administration and remediation. 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be performed by a designated governmental agency or a contractor procured by the governmental agency and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(b)  Any person or entity who commits any act prohibited by this division shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day that the violation continues. The court assessing such penalty may, at its discretion, order that the penalty be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
(c)  In addition to other remedies provided by this Code and the Code of Virginia, any costs or fees that may be charged pursuant to this division that remain unpaid for more than thirty (30) days after a bill or invoice was sent for such cost or fees, shall: 
(1)  Be referred to the city treasurer, who shall include those costs or fees in the next regular real estate tax bill sent to the owner of the real estate at which the cost or fees was incurred. All unpaid costs and fees shall then constitute a lien against such real estate, and shall be collected as other taxes and liens are collected; or 
(2)  Be referred to the city attorney for collection through appropriate civil action. 
(d)  A willful violation of the provisions of this division shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor; each day that a violation is maintained or permitted to remain shall constitute a separate offence. 
(e)  The city may elect to take any or all of the above remedies concurrently, and the pursuit of one (1) shall not preclude the pursuit of another. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 3, 4-5-16) 
Sec. 8-66. - No effect on existing ordinances. 
    This division is intended to supplement other provisions of this Code. Nothing in this division shall negatively affect any other provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to, the first nine divisions of this article III. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-983[B], § 3, 4-5-16) 
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-1700-743, § 1, adopted March 16, 2004, amended Ch. 9 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Ch. 9 derived from Code 1971, §§ 9-1, 9-8-9-25, 17-49; Ord. No. 82-1700-186, §§ 1-7, adopted Jan. 5, 1982; Ord. No. 85-1700-309, § 1, adopted Nov. 5, 1985; Ord. No. 87-1700-366, adopted Nov. 17, 1987; Ord. No. 88-1700-363, §§ 1-4, adopted March 15, 1988; and Ord. No. 99-1700-598, adopted Feb. 16, 1999. 
Cross reference- Fire protection plan required for outdoor musical or entertainment festivals, § 3-33(a)(8); building regulations, Ch. 5; drivers of firefighting vehicles exempt from certain traffic regulations, § 13-6; following fire apparatus, § 13-229; driving over fire hose, § 13-230; parking near scene of fire, § 13-324; calling firefighting apparatus without cause or malicious activation of fire alarm in public building, § 16-7; kindling of fires in parks, § 17-35; members of fire department entitled to benefits under Line of Duty Act, § 19-16; vehicles used by commercial refuse removers to be equipped with fire extinguishers, § 22-40; removal and disposition of explosive or highly combustible material by commercial refuse removers, § 22-44; incineration requirements at refuse disposal sites, § 22-98. 
State Law reference- Fire protection, Code of Virginia, Title 27. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Fire prevention code safety regulations adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by the governing body of the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations to safeguard life and property from the hazards of fire or explosion arising from the improper maintenance of life safety and fire prevention and protection materials, devices, systems and structures, and the unsafe storage, handling and use of substances, materials and devices, wherever located, that certain code known as the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 27-94 et seq. 
Sec. 9-2. - Enforcement of statewide fire prevention code. 
    Enforcing agency. The fire/building official is hereby designated to act as the enforcing agency for the enforcement of "the statewide fire prevention code" duly adopted by the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development under the authority of section 27-97, Code of Virginia. 
    Administration. The enforcement procedures of the statewide fire prevention code shall be instituted by the fire marshal and administered in accordance with the provisions set forth in the statewide fire prevention code and subsection (d) of this section. 
    Appeals. The city board of appeals is hereby designated as the appeals board to hear appeals arising from the application of the provisions of the statewide fire prevention code. 
    Additional administrative procedures. The fire marshal shall establish such procedures or requirements as may be necessary for administration and enforcement of this section. The procedures are to be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-3. - Establishment of fire lanes. 
    The fire chief or fire marshal, shall establish fire lanes around all public buildings within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-4. - Authority of fire department officers to maintain order, direct traffic, etc., at scene of fire. 
    While any fire department in the city is in the process of answering an alarm of fire or extinguishing a fire or returning to its station, the chief or other officer in charge of such fire department at that time shall have the authority to maintain order at the fire or its vicinity, direct the actions of the firefighters at the fire, keep bystanders or other persons at a safe distance from the fire and fire equipment, facilitate the speedy movement and operation of firefighting equipment and firefighters and, until the arrival of a police officer, direct and control traffic, in person or by deputy, and facilitate the movement of traffic. The fire chief or other officer in charge shall display his firefighter's badge or other proper means of identification badge. Any person refusing to obey the orders of the fire chief or his deputies or other officer in charge at that time shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. The fire chief or other officer in charge shall have the power to make arrests for the violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Cross reference- Tampering with vehicles, generally, § 16-39. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 27-15.1. 
Sec. 9-5. - Unlawful use of fire apparatus, equipment, etc. within city. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 2 misdemeanor for any person to operate or cause to be operated upon a public highway or street in the city any vehicle or equipment used, intended to be used, or designed to be used for the purpose of fighting fires, unless such vehicle or equipment is owned by a recognized firefighting company of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-6. - Damage or injury to fire department equipment or personnel. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or deface any fire department vehicle at any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire department personnel while such personnel are in the performance of departmental duties. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Cross reference- Damaging property, generally, § 16-38. 
Sec. 9-7. - Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person, without proper authorization from the fire department officer in charge of said vehicle, to cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department vehicle, whether such vehicle is in motion or at rest, or to sound any warning device thereon, or to manipulate, tamper with or destroy or attempt to manipulate, tamper with or destroy any lever, valve, switch, starting device, brake, pump or any equipment, protective clothing or tool, on or a part of such fire department vehicle. For the purpose of this section, a "recognized firefighting company of the city" shall be construed to mean one that has been recognized as such by resolution of the governing body. This section shall not apply to the operation of firefighting vehicles and equipment owned by any firefighting company outside of the city when such vehicle or equipment is traveling in or through the city for parade or other nonfirefighting purposes or in response to a call from the city fire alarm headquarters. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Cross reference- Traffic, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 9-8. - Design, construction and use of model rockets. 
(a)  The design, construction and use of model rockets used within the city shall be reasonably safe to persons and property. Evidence that the design, construction and use of model rockets is in accordance with NFPA 41L, as listed in appendix B of the fire prevention code adopted in article II of this chapter, shall he evidence that such design, construction and use provides reasonable safety to persons and property. Any type of rocketry, other than that described in the definition of "model rocketry," as set forth in said NFPA 41L, is prohibited. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-9. - Allowing fire to spread to land of another. 
    Any person who intentionally sets or procures another to set fire to any woods, brush, leaves, grass, straw or any other inflammable substance capable of spreading fire, and who intentionally allows the fire to escape to lands not his own, whereby the property of another is damaged or jeopardized, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor and shall be liable for the full amount of all expenses incurred in fighting the fire. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-87. 
Sec. 9-10. - Carelessly damaging property by fire. 
    If any person shall carelessly, negligently or intentionally set any woods or marshes on fire, or set fire to any stubble, brush, straw or any other substance capable of spreading fire on lands, whereby the property of another is damaged or jeopardized, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and shall be liable for the full amount of all expenses incurred in fighting the fire. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-88. 
Sec. 9-11. - Penalty for chapter violations. 
    Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the sections of this chapter or any provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by section 9-41, shall separately for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a violation of this chapter, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. A violation of this chapter shall be construed to be an infringement, breach, or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or any order made there under, or any act of building in violation of any detailed statement, specifications or plans submitted and approved there under or any certificate or permit issued there under, and from which no appeal has been taken, or any failure to comply with such an order within the time fixed therein. Each day that a violation continues after a service of notice as provided for in this Code shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Secs. 9-5-9-15. - Reserved 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Members of fire department and volunteer fire company designated as part of official safety program and entitled to benefits under Line of Duty Act, § 2-11; authority of fire department officials to direct traffic, § 24-4. 
State Law reference- Local fire departments and fire companies, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1 et seq. 

Sec. 9-16. - Fire department established 
    There is hereby established the city fire department which hereafter shall constitute a department of government of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-17. - The fire chief to be in charge of fire services. 
    The fire chief shall be in charge of all fire services within the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-18. - Composition of fire department; general duties of department chief. 
(a)  The head of the fire department shall be known as "the chief' and said department shall consist of as many other officers and employees to be employed by such department as shall be approved by the city council, as provided hereafter. Such other person likewise may hold the office of fire department chief, as the city council from time to time shall designate. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  The chief is the general manager of the fire department responsible to the city administration. 
(2)  He (or she) shall make appropriate recommendations regarding desirable fire protection and fire prevention measures. 
(3)  He shall be responsible for all fire department property including fire station, apparatus and equipment. 
(4)  He shall furnish all personnel with copies of the fire department rules and of any general written orders that may be issued regarding the operation of the department. 
(5)  He shall be responsible for the appointment and assignment of the personnel to their duties. He shall see that these duties are properly performed. 
(6)  He shall assign the training officer, the fire prevention officer and such other officers or employees as may be required. 
(7)  He shall see that order and discipline are maintained 
(8)  He shall be responsible for preparing the annual budget and for the proper expenditure of funds as prescribed in the fiscal policy of the city. 
(9)  He shall maintain a personnel roster of all officers, employees and volunteer firefighters providing essential information including age, address, date of appointment, assignments, injuries, training and fire attendance records. 
(10)  The chief shall be in overall charge of all firefighting and emergency operations assisted by such personnel, as he shall designate. When available, he shall respond to all alarms for structural fires and to other serious fires within the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-19. - Promulgation of department rules and regulations. 
    The fire department is hereby directed to draft, in conjunction with the city manager, rules and regulations as it may choose in order to promote its object of providing thorough fire and rescue protection to the residents of the city. Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the laws of the state and ordinances of this city and shall make provisions for the compensation of the officers and employees of the department. All such rules and regulations shall be submitted to and approved by the city manager. Thereafter, the same may be amended by the fire department from time to time with the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Secs. 9-22-9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS AND MODEL ROCKETRY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Design, construction and use of model rockets, § 9-6. 
State Law reference- Fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 27-97. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-51. - General. 
    The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the city. The display, sale or discharge of fireworks shall comply with the requirements of this article. These provisions shall expressly modify the fire code adopted by section 9-41 of this chapter, and are adopted pursuant to chapter 11, title 59.1, Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-52. - Definitions 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Approved means approved by the city fire marshal or designee. 
    Fireworks means and includes any article, device or any substances or combination of substances designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation regardless of its name or form of construction and shall include, but not be limited to, those items known as firecrackers, cherry bombs, Roman candles, torpedoes, skyrockets and any other substance or thing of whatever form of construction containing nitrates, chlorates, oxalates, sulfides of lead, barium, antimony, nitroglycerine, phosphorus or any other explosive or flammable compound or substance. 
    Retailer means any person selling fireworks or offering fireworks for sale at retail. 
    Wholesaler means a person offering fireworks for sale or selling fireworks to a retailer and shall include a manufacturer of fireworks, a representative of any such manufacturer, a distributor, a jobber and a middleman of any description dealing in fireworks, any of whom shall sell or offer to sell fireworks to a retailer within the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-53. - Sale, transportation, use, etc., generally 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to transport, manufacture, store, possess, sell, offer for sale, expose for sale or to buy, use, ignite or explode any fireworks within the city. This prohibition shall not apply to the following: Fireworks when such have been approved by the fire marshal, as outlined in section 9-53; sparklers; fountains; pharaoh's serpents; caps for pistols; pinwheels commonly known as whirligigs or spinning jennies; or other similar fireworks approved by the fire marshal; provided that, any fireworks which emit flame or sparks to a distance greater than twelve (12) feet or perform as a projectile or which, from outward appearances resemble firecrackers, cherry bombs, Roman candles, torpedoes or skyrockets are prohibited in the city. 
(b)  Fireworks, which are permissible under this section, shall be used only on private property with the approval of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-148 
Sec. 9-54. - Approval of fireworks sold by wholesaler. 
(a)  Persons engaged in the business of selling or offering to sell fireworks at wholesale shall submit to the city fire marshal for approval, at least three (3) samples of each fireworks proposed to be sold or delivered by such wholesaler, together with complete specifications including the manufacturer and trade name of such fireworks and a chemical analysis of each such fireworks so submitted. Said samples, specifications and chemical analysis shall be submitted to the fire marshal not later than thirty (30) days prior to the earliest proposed sale date in the city. No wholesaler shall sell or deliver in the city any fireworks other than those so approved. 
(b)  No wholesaler shall sell or deliver in the city any fireworks other than those approved by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-55. - Permit to transport, sell, etc. 
    No person shall transport, manufacture, store, possess, sell, offer for sale or expose for sale any fireworks within the city, unless he has a current permit so to do issued by the fire marshal. The fee for such permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); provided, however, that the fire marshal may waive the fee for charitable and benevolent organizations. Such permit shall be renewed annually. Such permit shall be issued and renewed only after a bond or evidence of liability insurance has been filed with the fire marshal's office, having the minimum limits set out in section 9-66, and all city requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 59.1-1442 
Sec. 9-56. - Permit required for sale or display of fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or expose for sale any fireworks within the city, whether at wholesale or retail, without a permit from the fire marshal's office. This permit shall be valid for the period June 1 to July 15 of each year, and shall be issued only after a bond, or evidence of liability insurance has been filed with the fire marshal's office. Such bond shall have the minimum limits set forth below. Retailing of fireworks shall be done only from a fixed location. Such locations shall comply with all the city rules and regulations applicable to such sites. 
(b)  The city fire marshal may issue permits, upon application in writing, for the display of unapproved fireworks as defined above for fair associations, amusement parks or by any individual, organization, or group of individuals proving such display is in general accord with the applicable section of N.F.P.A. 494L, as listed in appendix A of the city fire prevention code. After such permit has been issued, sales of fireworks may be made for use under such permit and the association, organization or group to which it is issued may make use of such fireworks under the terms and conditions of such permit. No permit shall be issued until the organization is under protection of an insurance policy providing minimum limits of at least twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for bodily injury or death of any one (1) person in any one (1) accident and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injury or death of more than (1) person in any one (1) accident, and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for damage to or destruction of property in any one (1) accident. Such insurance shall become available for the payment of any damage arising from neglect of the applicant or his agents or his employees. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention code adopted, § 9-1. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 59.1-1442 
Sec. 9-57. - Records to be kept by wholesaler and retailer. 
    Each wholesaler shall maintain full and complete records of all purchases and sales of fireworks and each retailer shall maintain full and complete records of all purchases of fireworks including the date of each transaction, the name and address of each person from whom sought or to whom sold, and the items and quantities bought or sold. The city fire marshal or his designated agent is authorized to examine the books and records of any wholesaler or retailer as they relate to the purchases and sales of fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-58. - Retail sale to be from fixed location. 
    The retail sale of fireworks within the city shall be done only from a fixed location. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-59. - Sale by minors. 
    No person below the age of eighteen (18) years shall engage in the business of selling, or offering for sale, any fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-60. - Sale to minors. 
    No person shall sell, or offer to sell, any fireworks to any person less than fifteen (15) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-61. - Records of purchases and sales. 
    Each wholesaler shall maintain full and complete records of all purchases and sales of fireworks and each retailer shall maintain full and complete records of all purchases of fireworks. The fire marshal or his designated agent may examine the books and records of any wholesaler and retailer as they relate to the purchase and sale of fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-62. - Seizure and destruction of certain fireworks. 
(a)  Any city law enforcement officer arresting any person for a violation of this division shall seize the fireworks in question in the possession or under control of any person so arrested and shall hold such fireworks until final disposition of any criminal proceedings against such person. If a judgment of conviction is entered against such person, the court shall order destruction of the fireworks in question upon expiration of the time allowed for appeal of such judgment of conviction. 
(b)  If the fire marshal encounters fireworks, which are in violation of this division, he shall seize such fireworks and shall hold them until final disposition of any criminal procedures related to the violation. If a judgment of conviction is entered against the person in question, the court shall order destruction of the fireworks in question upon expiration of the time allowed for appeal for such judgment of conviction. Where no criminal proceedings can be instituted due to lack of knowledge as to who owns or is responsible for the fireworks in question, such fireworks shall be destroyed after thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
State Law reference- Provisions similar to subsection (a), Code of Virginia, § 59.1-143. 
Sec. 9-63. - Model rocketry. 
(a)  The design, construction and use of model rockets shall be reasonably safe to persons and property. Evidence that the design, construction and use of model rockets is in accordance with N.F.P.A. 1122L as listed in appendix A of the city fire protection code shall be evidence that such design, construction and use provides reasonable safety to persons and property. 
(b)  Any type rocketry other than that described in the definition of model rocketry as set forth in N.F.P.A. 1122L as listed in appendix A of this Code is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention code adopted, § 9-1. 
Secs. 9-60-9-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC DISPLAYS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to issue permits for and regulate fireworks displays, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-144. 

Sec. 9-66. - Permit and insurance. 
(a)  The fire marshal may issue a permit for the display of fireworks by fair associations or amusement parks or by any organization or group of individuals, if the display in question is in general accord with this division. No fee shall be charged for such permit. Application for such permit shall be made in writing at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date of the display. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued under this section until the applicant therefore is under the protection of an insurance policy providing minimum limits of at least twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for bodily injury or death of any one (1) person in any one (1) accident and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injury or death of more than one (1) person in any one (1) accident, and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for damage to or destruction of property in any one accident. Such insurance shall be available for the payment of damages arising from the neglect of the applicant or his agents or his employees. 
(c)  After a permit has been issued under this section, sales of fireworks may be made for use under such permit and the association, organization or group to which it is issued may make use of such fireworks under the terms and conditions of such permit. 
(d)  A permit issued under this section shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-67. - Operator, location, etc. 
    Every display pursuant to permit issued under this division shall be handled by a competent operator and shall be of such composition, character and so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the fire marshal, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. 
    Operator shall comply with N.F.P.A. 1123 code for fireworks display. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-68. - Manner of sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for displays. 
    The sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for display purposes shall be conducted so as to be reasonably safe to persons and property. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-69. - Disposal of unfired fireworks. 
    Any fireworks that remain unfired after a display pursuant to a permit issued under this division is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in a way safe for the particular type of fireworks remaining. 
(a)  Operators shall comply with N.F.P.A. 1123 Aerial Fireworks Display. 
(b)  Operators shall comply with N.F.P.A. 1126. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Secs. 9-70, 9-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED. 

Secs. 9-72-9-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SMOKE DETECTORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Smoke detectors in certain buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.9. 

Sec. 9-80. - Definitions. 
    As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 
    Dwelling unit shall mean a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Owner shall mean one (1) or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested: 
(1)  All or part of the legal title to the property; or 
(2)  All or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises, and the term includes a mortgagee in possession. 
    Smoke detectors shall mean mechanical devices, powered by batteries or alternating current, capable of sensing visible or invisible products of combustion, that sound an audible alarm, and are approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-81. - Where required. 
    Smoke detectors shall be installed where required by applicable provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code or the applicable provisions of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-82. - Enforcement. 
    The fire marshal or his duly authorized representative is authorized to administer and enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-85. - Article not deemed exemption from compliance with building code. 
    Nothing in this article shall excuse any owner of the required buildings from compliance with all other applicable provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-86. - Penalty for violations. 
    A violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Secs. 9-87-9-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 9-100. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and operation of security and fire alarm systems in premises to which the fire department is expected to respond in order to reduce the number of false alarms and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-101. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply: 
(a)  Alarm board. The facility, located in the communications section of the fire department, which is designed to receive direct signals from authorized alarm systems. 
(b)  Automatic dialing device. A device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and to transmit, by prerecorded voice message or code signal, the existence of criminal activity or a fire at the protected premises. 
(c)  Bank. A financial institution which is required by regulations, issued pursuant to the Bank Protection Act of 1968, to maintain an alarm system or other appropriate device for promptly notifying a local police department that a robbery or burglary has occurred or is in progress. 
(d)  False alarm. Any communication generated by or as a result of a security or fire alarm system, which communication results in an investigation by the fire department, when the investigation reveals no evidence or indication of criminal activity or other actual hazard. False alarms include negligently or accidentally activated signals; signals, which are the result of faulty, malfunctioning, or improperly installed or maintained equipment; signals, which are purposely activated to summon the fire department in nonemergency situations; and signals for which the actual cause is not determined. False alarms shall not include signals activated by unusually severe weather conditions or by other causes, which are identified and determined by fire department to be beyond the control of the user. 
(e)  Hazard. An event requiring urgent attention and to which the fire department is expected to respond. 
(f)  Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, company, corporation or organization of any kind. 
(g)  Protected premises. The premises upon which a security or fire alarm system is located. 
(h)  Security or fire alarm system. Any assembly of equipment or a device designated to detect and signal the unauthorized intrusion into premises or to signal an attempted burglary, robbery, other criminal activity, or to signal a fire at the protected premises, to which the fire department is expected to respond. Such term, however, shall not include security alarm systems maintained by governmental agencies or departments. 
(i)  User. Any person using a security or fire alarm, regardless of whether the person owns the security or fire system or the premises on which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-102. - Intentional false alarms-Prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly and without just cause, to activate a security or fire alarm to summon the fire department in situations where there is no actual or threatened criminal or fire safety requiring immediate police or fire response. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall constitute a class I misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or not more than twelve (12) months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-103. - False alarm-Deactivation. 
    The police officer or fire and rescue official responding to a false alarm shall have the authority to deactivate an alarm system without liability when the alarm system is disturbing the peace and quiet of the community, if the user fails to deactivate the alarm system within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-104. - Systems not connected to alarm board. 
(a)  After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain an automatic dialing device which is programmed to transmit a prerecorded message or code signal directly from a residence or dwelling to a telephone number assigned to the fire department, or to install, operate or maintain an automatic dialing device or other security or fire alarm system in violation of the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Users of automatic dialing devices, which connect to the alarm board of the fire department, shall notify the fire department of the possession of such systems within thirty (30) days of the enactment of this article. 
(c)  Nonresidential users may connect or operate automatic dialing devices upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Notification of installation on forms to be provided by the fire marshal containing the following information: 
a.  Name and address of protected premises. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of person installing, maintaining and/or owning the automatic dialing device. 
c.  Name, address and telephone number of personnel to be contacted in case of alarm or malfunction. 
d.  Any additional relevant information required by the fire marshal. 
(2)  Installation by a licensed alarm business or licensed electrician certified to do business in the commonwealth, with the cost to be paid by the user. 
(3)  Monthly inspections and testing of the system by the user and reporting of the monthly inspection results to the fire marshal. 
(4)  Residential and nonresidential users may connect or operate security or fire alarm systems other than automatic dialing devices pursuant to the conditions set forth in subsections (c)(1) through (c)(3) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-105. - False alarm charges. 
(a)  No fee shall be charged for a false alarm if the fire department is notified of the false alarm, by the user's authorized agent/employee, prior to the dispatch of vehicles or personnel to the scene of the alarm. 
(b)  After three (3) false alarms at a single protected premises within the same one-month period, users shall be charged a service charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the fourth false alarm which results in a police department response and shall be charged a service charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each tactical unit which is dispatched for a fire and rescue response to the protected premises. 
(c)  After the occurrence of four (4) false alarms at a single protected premises within the same one-month period, the charge for responding to false alarms at the protected premises shall be increased by fifty dollars ($50.00) for each successive false alarm (e.g., one hundred dollars ($100.00) one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the fifth alarm, two hundred dollars ($200.00) and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the sixth alarm, etc.) 
(d)  In the event a user fails to pay the assessed service charge within thirty (30) days of billing, the user shall be charged interest at the judgment rate of interest from the date the charge was assessed. 
(e)  Charges shall be paid to the city treasurer. 
(f)  The city treasurer may obtain authorization from the governing body for the city attorney to institute appropriate legal proceeding against any bank or other user, to collect any delinquent service charge, including interest, which has been assessed. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-106. - Suspension of responses to alarms. 
    In the event of the occurrence of three (3) or more false alarms within a single one-month protected premises in any single one-month period or in the event the user fails to pay the assessed service charge for false alarms within thirty (30) days of billing the fire marshal may, by giving the user five (5) days' written notice, advise the user that after a specified date, the fire department shall not respond to alarms at the protected premises until all delinquent service charges, including interest have been paid and the user demonstrates to the fire marshal or his designated agent, that corrective action has been taken to prevent additional false alarms and that the system is functioning properly. 
    Unless otherwise required by law, a user who desires to suspend for a temporary period of time, fire department responses to alarms, due to malfunctions in the system or for any other reason, may so advise the fire marshal in writing, specifying the effective date of the suspension. Resumption of responses shall be effective after the user provides written notice to the fire marshal. Any charges assessed prior to the effective date of any suspension shall remain due and owing. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-107. - Appeal proceedings. 
    Any user may appeal an action by the fire marshal to assess a service charge for a false alarm. The appeal shall be made in writing to the city manager within ten (10) days after such action has been taken. A decision by the city manager is final. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
ARTICLE VII. - FIRE MARSHAL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Local fire marshals, Code of Virginia, § 27-30 et seq. 

Sec. 9-108. - Office created; deputies; appointments; compensation; term. 
    The office of the city fire marshal is hereby created. 
(a)  The governing body shall appoint a city fire marshal, deputy fire marshal(s) and assistant fire marshals, whose powers and duties shall be as set forth in this chapter and as authorized by the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall receive such annual salary as the governing body may allow. 
(c)  The city fire marshal shall not be appointed for a definite tenure, but shall continue contingent upon and subject to the personnel rules of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-109. - Oaths of office. 
    The city fire marshal, deputy fire marshal and members of the fire marshal's staff, before entering upon their duties, shall, respectively, take an oath, before any officer authorized to administer oaths, faithfully to discharge the duties of their offices. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-110. - General powers and duties. 
    The fire marshal and his deputies or assistants shall have such powers and duties, as are prescribed by state law and by this chapter and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-111. - Fire marshal to be summoned to scene of fire, explosion, etc. 
    The fire department officer in charge of any fire, explosion or incident to which fire apparatus or equipment responds shall immediately summons the fire marshal to the scene to investigate the circumstances involved, where such circumstances require investigation pursuant to § F-102.3 of the fire prevention code adopted by article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-112. - Reports to fire marshal as to fires, explosions, etc. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the fire department officer-in-charge or his designee to file with the fire marshal, in such form as he shall prescribe, a report if pursuant to § F-102.3 of the fire prevention code adopted by article III of this chapter, if there is sufficient evidence to warrant charges for arson, bombing or other offenses involving fire or the calling or summoning of fire or rescue equipment without just cause, in violation of the Code of Virginia or this Code. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Cross reference- Calling firefighting apparatus without cause, § 16-7. 
Sec. 9-113. - Impersonation. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any unauthorized person to use a badge, uniform or any other credentials, so as to gain access to any building, marine vessel, vehicle or premises, or to otherwise falsely identify himself as the fire marshal or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
ARTICLE VIII. - OPEN AIR BURNING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt ordinances governing open air burning, Code of Virginia, § 10-17.30(b). 

Sec. 9-114. - General. 
    A person shall not cause or allow open burning unless approved in accordance with this code and the Commonwealth of Virginia State Air Pollution Control Board's Regulations Concerning Emissions Standards for Open Burning, and Virginia Forestry Laws. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-115. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms shall, for the purpose of this section and as stated elsewhere in the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, have the meanings shown herein. 
    Bonfire means an outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes. 
    Land clearing refuse means brush, stumps, and other vegetation and similar matter generated from site clearing, and shall not include demolition material or refuse products from other sites. 
    Open burning means the burning of any material wherein products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. For the purpose of this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open. 
    Recreational fire means an outdoor fire utilized to cook food for human consumption. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-116. - Allowable burning. 
    Open burning shall be allowed without prior notification to the fire marshal only for recreational fires, campfires, highway safety flares, smudge pots and small warming fires for outside workers during winter months. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-117. - Permit required; applications; authorization; burning of land clearing refuse; open burning prohibited. 
(a)  Open burning shall be allowed after obtaining a permit or other proper authorization from the fire marshal for recognized agricultural, silvicultural or range, or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, a bonfire, and for land clearing refuse. 
(b)  Applications for open burning shall be submitted in writing at least seventy-two (72) hours before the fire is set and shall be in such form and contain such information as required by the fire marshal. Such application shall contain, as a minimum, information regarding: the purpose of the proposed burning, the nature and quantities of material to be burned, the date when such burning will take place, the location of the burning site, and the on-site fire extinguishing equipment to be provided. 
(c)  Open burning shall be permitted with prior notification to the fire marshal and in compliance with the Commonwealth of Virginia State Air Pollution Control Board regulations, provided that any conditions specified in the permission are followed for: 
(1)  Disposal of hazardous or toxic materials where the fire marshal and the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality determine that there is no practical alternative method of disposal. 
(2)  Instruction in the methods of fire fighting or for research in the control of fire, in emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose determined to be necessary by the fire marshal and as authorized by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
(3)  Disposal of debris or to remedy an emergency resulting from a disaster situation and when operating under an emergency declaration of the federal, state, or local government. 
(d)  Burning of land clearing refuse, other than agricultural, shall be conducted utilizing "special incineration devices" as defined in the State Air Pollution Control Board Regulations Concerning Emission Standards for Open Burning. A separate permit is required for each separate or new special incineration device on a site. 
(e)  The fire marshal shall prohibit open burning that will be offensive or objectionable due to smoke or odor emissions when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. The fire marshal shall order the extinguishment, by the permit holder or the fire department, of any open burning, which creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. Burning of land clearing refuse is prohibited in the months of June, July and August in accordance with Virginia Emissions Standards for Open Burning. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-118. - Location. 
    The location for any open burning shall not be less than fifty (50) feet from any structure, and provisions shall be made to preventing the fire from spreading to within fifty (50) feet of any structure. Fires in approved containers shall be permitted, provided that such fires are not less than fifteen (15) feet from any structure. The burning of land clearing refuse shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) feet from an occupied structure. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-119. - Materials. 
    Open burning shall not be utilized for waste disposal purposes, shall be of the minimum size for the intended purpose, and the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-120. - Attendance; safety fence. 
(a)  Any open burning shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. At least one (1) portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating, two (2) portable fire extinguishers with a minimum 2-A rating each, or other approved on site fire extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
(b)  Temporary fencing must be installed around any pit when not in use. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-121. - Bonfire size and duration; material; permits. 
(a)  A bonfire shall not be more than five (5) feet by five (5) feet by five (5) feet in dimension and shall not burn longer than three (3) hours. The maximum size and duration of a bonfire shall not be increased by the fire marshal unless it is determined that safety requirements of the situation and the desirable duration of the burn warrant the increase. 
(b)  Fuel for a bonfire shall consist only of seasoned dry firewood and shall be ignited with a small quantity of paper. The fire shall not be utilized for waste disposal purposes, and the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation of air contaminants. 
(c)  All permits shall be requested by and issued to the owner of the land upon which the bonfire is to be kindled. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-122. - Recreational fires prohibited; management responsibility. 
(a)  No charcoal cooker, smoker, grill, or any flammable liquid or liquefied petroleum gas-fired stove or similar devices shall be ignited or used on the balconies or spaces under balconies of multifamily dwellings, nor in a similar manner in any occupancy unless approved by the fire marshal. These devices can be used at ground level if greater than fifteen (15) feet from any structure. Exception: electric grills and other devices approved by the fire marshal. 
(b)  The management of apartment buildings which have balconies and patios shall notify their tenants in writing of this requirement at the time the tenant initially occupies the area, and from time to time thereafter as may be necessary to reasonably ensure conformity. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-123. - Penalties, other remedies. 
(a)  Any person who conducts open air burning or other act in violation of any requirement of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day upon which any such violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Nothing contained herein shall preclude the city from seeking such other relief at law or equity for violations of the provisions of this article, as may be deemed expedient, whether or not criminal charges have been or may be made. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 9-124. - Other permits still required. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall relieve any person of any requirement to obtain other permits relating to the conduct of open air burning, which may be established by law. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-743, 3-16-04) 
ARTICLE IX. - SERVICE FEE FOR TRANSPORT BY EMS VEHICLE 

Sec. 9-125. - Service charge. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by section 9-129, service fees for basic life support (BLS), advanced life support level 1 (ALS1) and advanced life support level 2 (ALS2) and a ground transport mileage fee are imposed on each person being transported by any emergency medical services vehicle that is operated or maintained by the city fire and rescue department or for which a permit has been issued to the city by the Virginia Office of Emergency Medical Services. The term "emergency medical services vehicle" has the definition specified in Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.1. 
(b)  The fee rates shall be established by resolution of the governing body. The rates shall be reviewed on a periodic basis as determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-832, § 1, 5-15-07) 
Sec. 9-126. - Disbursement of funds. 
    The funds received from the payment of fees established by this article shall be paid into the general fund of the city to aid in defraying the cost of providing such services. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-832, § 1, 5-15-07) 
Sec. 9-127. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to the fees established by this article: 
(a)  Basic life support (BLS) : medical treatment or procedures provided to a patient by an emergency medical technician-basic ("EMT-basic") as defined by the national emergency medicine services (EMS) education and practice blueprint. 
(b)  Advanced life support, level 1 (ALS1) : medical treatment or procedures provided to a patient beyond the scope of an EMT-basic. 
(c)  Advanced life support, level 2 (ALS2) : advanced life support (ALS) services provided to a patient including one (1) or more of the following medical procedures: 
(i)  Defibrillation/cardioversion; 
(ii)  Endotracheal intubation; 
(iii)  Cardiac pacing; 
(iv)  Chest decompression; 
(v)  Intraosseous line, and/or 
(vi)  The administration of three (3) or more medications. 
(d)  Ground transport mileage (GTM) : number of statute miles from the location of the incident to a hospital or other facility where a patient is transported. Only miles traveled with the patient on board shall be considered billable miles. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-832, § 1, 5-15-07) 
Sec. 9-128. - Authority. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish rules and regulations for the administration of the fees established by this article, including, but not limited to, payment standards for those persons who demonstrate economic hardship. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-832, § 1, 5-15-07) 
Sec. 9-129. - Exemptions. 
    No fee shall be imposed on persons in the following circumstances: 
(a)  Persons determined to be medically indigent by the city in accordance with administrative policies established by the city manager; or 
(b)  Persons transported pursuant to any no-charge mutual aid agreement with another jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 07-1700-832, § 1, 5-15-07) 
Chapter 10 - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License tax for restaurants, § 14-86. 
State Law reference- Food and drink generally, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-361 et seq.; restaurants and public eating places, Code of Virginia, § 35-25 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Street or itinerant vendors of ice cream limited to certain hours of operation. 
    Street or itinerant vendors of ice cream shall not operate within the city, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 1971, § 17-39) 
Cross reference- Limitation on stopping vehicles used for sale of ice cream on streets, § 20-6. 
Sec. 10-2. - Annual examination of food handlers in restaurants. 
    Each person engaged in the preparation, serving or handling of food or utensils used in the preparation, serving or handling of food in an establishment subject to a license tax as a restaurant, as provided in section 14-86 of this Code, shall be examined by a qualified physician, for contagious disease, annually. The record of such examination shall be available for inspection. The examination will be at the expense of the holder of the license pursuant to which the restaurant in question is operated. 
(Code 1971, § 11-1) 
Sec. 10-3. - Sale of food in Costello Park. 
(a)  No person shall enter Costello Park for the purpose of selling ice cream, lemonade, fruit, sandwiches or like products, unless authorized by the city council. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 79-1700-137, 1-5-79) 
Cross reference- License tax for sale of food on streets or other public places, § 14-94. 
Chapter 11 - FOR-HIRE VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 2004, amended Ch. 11 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Ch. 11 derived from Ord. No. 87-1700-365, adopted Nov. 4, 1987. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of taxicabs for hire within the city (the "city") in order to provide the citizens of the city with safe, economical, adequate and efficient taxicab service. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-2. - Violations. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-3. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    Agreement: A multijurisdictional agreement entered into by two (2) or more jurisdictions for the purpose of jointly regulating the operation of taxicabs within the boundaries of such jurisdictions. 
    Chief of police: The police chief for the city. 
    Driver: The individual who drives or physically operates a taxicab. 
    Governing body: The governing body for the city. 
    Independent: A person who owns a taxicab and operates under authority of another person's operator's certificate. 
    In service: Operating a taxicab upon the highways, roads, streets or other public ways and places in the city in search of, soliciting, or transporting prospective passengers for hire or responding to requests for transport. 
    Operator's certificate or certificate: The certificate of public convenience and necessity required by the provisions of this chapter to be obtained by any person to engage in the taxicab business upon the highways, roads, streets or public ways and places in the city. 
    Operator or certificate holder: One who holds a certificate. 
    Out of service: The period during which a driver is not in service. 
    Owner: Any person, association, company, corporation, partnership or organization holding title to, or having the right to possession of, any taxicab. 
    Passenger: A person carried or transported in consideration of a fare. 
    Permit: A driver's permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
    Police department: The city police department. 
    Regional review board: The taxicab board of review established pursuant to this chapter. 
    Service technician: A person, certified by the Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, who adjusts, installs, places in service, recommends for use, reconditions, repairs, or services a taximeter. 
    Taxicab: A vehicle for passenger conveyance held for public hire and carrying passengers to destinations without following fixed routes. 
    Taxicab inspector: The police officer, or officers, or other department personnel designated by the chief of police to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    Taximeter: A mechanical or electronic instrument by which the fare for hire of a taxicab is computed for mileage and for waiting time and upon which such fare is plainly visible to the passenger. 
(b)  Pursuant to the Code of Virginia, the city may enter into one (1) or more agreements. In the event the city enters into any such agreement the meaning of the aforementioned words and phrases may be amended therein to allow for joint regulation of taxicabs within the boundaries of the city and such neighboring jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-4. - Unlawful use of certificate or permit issued under chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to lend or knowingly permit the use of his permit or his operator's certificate by another. It shall be unlawful for any person to display or represent as his own any permit or operator's certificate not issued to or for the person or the vehicle displaying the same. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-5. - False statements or entries on records required by chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally make any false statement or entry on the records required to be kept by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-6. - General operating requirements. 
    Every taxicab shall be operated in accordance with the laws of Virginia and the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the city, with due regard to the safety, comfort and convenience of passengers and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-7. - Information to be kept on file with taxicab inspector. 
    Every certificate holder shall maintain on file with the taxicab inspector his name, his company's name, his business address and garage address, all business telephone numbers listed in his and his company's name and the names of all drivers driving under his certificate. He shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after he becomes aware of any change in the information required in this section, report same to the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-8. - Place of business or office with telephone service required. 
    All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city shall maintain a place of business or office with telephone service within the city. Any person engaged in the taxicab business in the city and maintaining a place of business or office with telephone service within the geographic boundaries of Prince William County (the "county") or the City of Manassas shall be deemed to be in compliance with this section, provided such person complies with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-9. - Twenty-four-hour service required. 
(a)  It is not necessary for the operator of a taxicab business in the city to have his place of business or office open twenty-four (24) hours per day, but the certificate holder or his employees must be on duty in the office and available by telephone to respond to requests for service twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
(b)  The taxicab inspector may, when a request is made in writing to the taxicab inspector by a certificate holder, allow the certificate holder to conduct dispatch operations (receiving telephone calls for requests for service and dispatching taxicabs in response to such calls) from another location other than the business office. Such written request shall be made at least five (5) working days prior to the requested date, unless there are emergency circumstances, and will be for a defined temporary time frame, as established and approved by the taxicab inspector. Such temporary dispatching services shall be in accordance with all zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-10. - Duty to respond to requests for service. 
    The operator of a taxicab business shall cause response to be made to all calls and requests for service within the boundaries of Manassas Park. The operator shall have the option of responding to the call for service or of referring the caller to another taxicab operator whose place of business is at a shorter distance in the city from the caller. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-11. - Use for unlawful purposes. 
    No owner or driver shall knowingly permit such vehicle to be used for unlawful purposes or to transport persons therein to places for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-12. - Transportation of animals. 
    While in service, only an animal in the company of a paying passenger shall be allowed in a taxicab. Transportation of a passenger's animal is at the discretion of the driver and only if the passenger agrees to keep the animal under control. This section shall not apply to animals assisting bona fide handicapped persons. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-13. - Maximum length of driver's working day. 
    No driver shall drive a taxicab, nor shall any certificate holder or his employees require or permit drivers to drive a taxicab, more than thirteen (13) hours in any consecutive twenty-four-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-14. - Driver to be clean and neat. 
    Every driver of a taxicab shall, while on duty, be hygienically clean, neat in appearance and suitably dressed. The term "suitably dressed" shall mean the wearing of trousers, slacks, shoes, and appropriate outer garments. In warm weather, the driver may wear, as an outer garment, a shirt with collar, with or without a tie, a blouse, or a sweater. In warm weather shorts are permitted, if tailored in appearance. Cutoffs are not suitable. Drivers shall not wear underwear, tank tops, body shirts, swimwear, jogging suits, or similar types of attire when worn as outer garments. Nor shall drivers wear any clothing with open tears, rents or other holes. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-15. - Use of tobacco and radio by driver/passenger. 
    No driver, while his taxicab is occupied by a passenger, shall smoke or play a radio, other than the one used for communications with his dispatcher, if his passenger requests that he not do so. passengers may not smoke in a taxicab if a "no smoking" sign is posted in such taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-16. - Use of drugs and alcohol by driver. 
(a)  At no time shall a driver use alcoholic beverages, narcotics or other scheduled drugs while in service or while otherwise operating a taxicab. 
(b)  The transportation of alcoholic beverages, other than alcoholic beverages carried in the possession of a paying passenger, is prohibited in taxicabs while the driver is in service. 
(c)  At no time shall any driver, independent or owner, or any employee or agent of the same, use any alcoholic beverages, narcotics, or other scheduled drugs within the business office while on duty. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-17. - Restrictions on loading and unloading. 
    No driver shall stop to load or unload passengers or their belongings on the traveled portion of any street, highway or other public way or any intersection or crosswalk thereof. No driver shall stop to load or unload in any manner that would in any way impede or interfere with the orderly flow of traffic or pedestrians or endanger the safety of his passenger. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-18. - General limitation on number of passengers. 
    No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab in the city at any one (1) time than the seating capacity of the taxicab, as rated by the automobile manufacturer, including the driver, but excluding children in arms. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-19. - Limitation on number of passengers on front seat. 
    At no time shall more than two (2) persons, in addition to the driver, ride on the front seat of any taxicab. A child in arms shall not be permitted to ride in the front seat of any taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-20. - Refusal of passengers. 
(a)  No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request, unless previously engaged or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so. 
(b)  A driver may refuse to convey an unaccompanied child less than five (5) years old. 
(c)  A driver, owner, independent or certificate holder may refuse to convey any person who has threatened, assaulted, robbed, or failed to pay the legal fare for any previous trip or service provided to such person by (i) such driver, or (ii) the owner, independent or certificate holder for whom such driver works. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-21. - Deception of passengers. 
    No driver shall deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger who may ride in his taxicab or who may desire to ride in such taxicab, as to his destination or the rate or fare to be charged, or convey any passenger or cause him to be conveyed to a place other than directed by the passenger. In no event, shall any driver take a longer route than necessary, unless so requested by the passenger. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-22. - Compliance with request of passenger as to speed and route. 
    Every driver shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of his passengers as to the speed of travel and the route to be taken. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-23. - Accident reports. 
    Every accident involving a taxicab governed by the provisions of this chapter shall be immediately reported to the police department by the driver involved. In addition, the taxicab inspector shall be notified, in writing, of such accident within five (5) business days of its occurrence by the driver involved. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-24. - Drivers' manifests. 
(a)  Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest, which shall be approved by the taxicab inspector, upon which shall be clearly and legibly recorded the following: 
(1)  The date and time the driver went in service and went out of service and the number of hours on duty. 
(2)  The taxicab number, the driver's name and his permit number. 
(3)  The odometer reading of the taxicab at the beginning and end of each working day. 
(4)  All trips made each day, showing the time and place of origin and destination, the number of passengers, the fare and any extra charges. This information shall be recorded at the beginning and end of each trip. 
(b)  No manifest required by this section shall be transferred from one (1) taxicab to another. If the driver changes taxicabs during a working day, a separate manifest shall be maintained for each such taxicab. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any driver to maintain an incomplete manifest. 
(d)  All completed manifests shall be returned to the operator by the driver as soon as is practicable after the end of the driver's working day, and in no event less frequently than once a week. 
(e)  All operators shall retain and preserve all manifests for a period of no less than three (3) months. Manifests shall be stored and preserved at the operator's place of business or office and shall be subject to inspection by the taxicab inspector or other police department personnel at all reasonable times. Moreover, operators shall provide specified manifests no later than eight (8) hours after such manifests have been requested by the taxicab inspector or other police department personnel. The taxicab inspector or any sworn police officer shall have the authority to remove any of the manifests from the operator's office for inspection purposes. The manifests shall be returned within two (2) weeks after such removal and the operator shall be given a receipt stating exactly which of such manifests have been removed. 
(f)  The certificate holder shall maintain an electronic database of all requests for service dispatched for a period of at least six (6) months. This electronic database should be capable of cross-referencing the driver's name, taxicab number, and time and date of a specified pick up request. This information shall be subject to inspection by the taxicab inspector or other police department personnel at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-25. - Disposition of articles left in vehicle. 
    Any article found in a taxicab shall be returned, with reasonable promptness, to its owner, if he is known, or such owner shall be promptly notified of the whereabouts of the article so that he may claim it. If the owner is not known, the driver shall note the article on the manifest referred to in section 11-24 and notify the certificate holder of the found article. The article shall be turned over to the certificate holder at the end of the driver's tour of duty. The operator shall maintain the lost article in a safe place for at least seven (7) days. If the article is not claimed by its owner within seven (7) days, the article shall be turned over to the taxicab inspector. The taxicab inspector shall hold the article until claimed by its owner. If no claim is received within ninety (90) days, the article shall be disposed of according to law. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-26. - Severability. 
    In the event any part or provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held to be illegal or invalid, such holdings shall not have the effect of making illegal or invalid any of the other parts or provisions thereof, or the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances. It shall be presumed that this chapter would have been adopted without such illegal or invalid part or provision, or application, if the determination of invalidity had been known at the time of adoption. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Secs. 11-27-11-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICAB REVIEW BOARD 

Sec. 11-36. - Created; composition. 
(a)  A taxicab review board has been created and established by the county. The county's review board consists of eight (8) members who are residents of the county and appointed by the board of county supervisors. In addition, during any period in which the county participates in an agreement with the cities of Manassas and Manassas Park for the enforcement of the county's and the cities' taxicab ordinances, the county's review board will also consist of one (1) member each from the City of Manassas and the City of Manassas Park, to be appointed by the cities' respective governing bodies, and will function as the regional review board for all three jurisdictions. 
(b)  During any period in which the City of Manassas Park does not participate in an agreement with Prince William County and the City of Manassas the governing body will serve as the city's taxicab review board, and any reference to the regional review board contained in this chapter shall, with the exception of those references found in sections 11-37 and 11-39, refer instead to the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-37. - Qualifications, appointment and terms of members. 
    The city's member of the regional review board shall be a city resident and shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body. No appointee shall be an owner, employee, member of a board of directors or a stockholder of a taxicab or taxicab company. Appointments shall be for terms not to exceed four (4) years. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-38. - General duties. 
    The regional review board created pursuant to this chapter shall, in addition to the performance of such other duties and responsibilities as may be imposed upon it, consider and act upon applications for certificates and appeals from actions of the taxicab inspector's office, in the manner more specifically set forth in other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-39. - Quorum; required vote for action. 
    Five (5) members of the regional review board shall constitute a quorum. When a quorum is established, actions of the regional review board shall be effective only upon a majority vote of the members thereof present; provided, however, that modification or reversal of an action of the taxicab inspector, on appeal, shall be effective only upon a concurring vote of at least four (4) members of the regional review board. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-40. - Hearings and decisions generally. 
    All hearings of the regional review board shall be open to the public and shall be, insofar as is reasonably practicable, informal and free of technical rules of law or evidence. Applicants and appellants shall be entitled to be heard in person and by counsel and shall be entitled to provide for the recording of the proceedings, in any manner which will not impede the orderly conduct of the hearing. Decisions of the regional review board shall be reduced to writing and a copy thereof shall be furnished to the taxicab inspector and to any applicant or appellant affected thereby. The regional review board may establish such rules of procedure for the conduct of its hearings as may be consistent with the provisions and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-41. - Appeals to regional review board. 
(a)  If the taxicab inspector denies, suspends, or revokes or denies renewal of any previously issued permit or revokes or suspends any certificate, any person affected thereby may appeal such decision to the regional review board. Upon making such appeal, any driver must submit a copy of its department of motor vehicles traffic record for consideration by the regional review board. Such appeal shall be filed by the appellant or his attorney with the secretary of the regional review board, or the secretary's designee. The appellant or his attorney shall file a written notice of appeal, signed by the appellant or his attorney, requesting a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the reasons thereof. Such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the regional review board shall set a time and place for a hearing and shall give the appellant, or his attorney, and the taxicab inspector reasonable notice thereof. All hearings on appeals shall be scheduled and determined as promptly as practicable and in no event more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice of appeal is filed. 
(c)  Upon the hearing of an appeal under this section, the regional review board shall consider the case record as well as any statement offered by any interested party and shall determine the matter de novo and shall, upon the basis of the record and evidence presented before it, affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the taxicab inspector. 
(d)  If the regional review board affirms the decision of the taxicab inspector to deny, suspend or revoke a permit or to suspend or revoke a certificate, the suspension or revocation shall be effective from the date of the board's order, or at such time as directed by majority vote of the regional review board, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. If the regional review board reverses the decision of the taxicab inspector, it shall direct the taxicab inspector to issue or restore the permit or certificate in accordance with its order. 
(e)  The appeal of the decision of the taxicab inspector to suspend or revoke a permit or to suspend or revoke or deny renewal of a certificate shall stay the effective date of the suspension, revocation or denial; provided, however, any suspension or revocation of any such certificate for the reasons listed in subsection 11-69(a)(4) shall take effect as provided in such section and shall remain in full force and effect until the regional review board has rendered its decision on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Secs. 11-42-11-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATOR'S CERTIFICATE 

Sec. 11-56. - Required; exceptions. 
    No person shall operate or permit to be operated a taxicab upon the highways, roads, streets or other public ways and places in the city without having first obtained an operator's certificate from the taxicab inspector's office; provided, however, an independent may operate a taxicab under another operator's certificate, so long as he operates only under one certificate at a particular time. A taxicab which is duly licensed as a taxicab in any other jurisdiction may be used to convey passengers into the city from its jurisdiction and to discharge them at their destinations, but the drivers of such taxicabs shall not otherwise convey, pick up or solicit a passenger or passengers within the city. An operator may hold only one (1) valid operator's certificate, with only the most recently issued certificate considered valid. Any previously issued certificate shall automatically become void upon the issuance of a new certificate. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-56.1. - Reciprocity. 
    If the governing body has entered into a reciprocal agreement with another entity responsible for regulating taxicabs, taxicabs licensed by such entity and covered by such agreement may operate in the city pursuant to the terms of such agreement, notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-57. - Application generally. 
(a)  Application for a certificate shall be made by the proposed operator or his duly authorized agent upon forms provided by the taxicab inspector's office and approved by the chief of police. Upon such forms, the applicant shall supply the following information, under oath: 
(1)  The full name, residence and business address of the applicant and any partners. If the applicant is a corporation, the name, residence and business address of every officer of the corporation and any stockholder holding ten (10) per cent or more of the outstanding shares of the corporation. 
(2)  The trade name and phone number under which the applicant does or proposes to do business. 
(3)  A financial statement of the applicant and any partners. If the applicant is a corporation, each stockholder holding ten (10) per cent or more of the outstanding shares of the corporation shall file a financial statement. 
(4)  The number of vehicles to be operated and the make; serial number, type, year of manufacture, manufacturer's rated seating capacity and the color scheme, insignia and cruising light design of each vehicle. A description of any vehicle replacement or vehicle addition shall be provided to the taxicab inspector and, upon written approval of such replacement or addition by the taxicab inspector, the operator's application shall be amended to reflect the same. Any new applicant will need a minimum of ten (10) vehicles that have been approved pursuant to section 11-117 hereof to obtain and maintain a certificate. 
(5)  The location and description of any depots and terminals used or to be used by the applicant. 
(6)  Each conviction of, or plea of guilty to, the violation of any criminal or traffic law, whether such violation be of a local ordinance, state law or federal law, by the applicant and his partners, and every officer or shareholder holding ten (10) per cent or more of the outstanding shares of the partnership or corporate applicant as the case may be. 
(7)  A resume of the experience, if any, of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire. 
(8)  All facts and circumstances upon which the applicant bases his belief that the public convenience and necessity of the city residents require the granting of his application. The chief of police or the regional review board may request such additional information from the applicant as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(9)  The applicant's proposed color scheme and insignia which shall be unique and readily distinguishable from color schemes and insignia of operators already certificated by the city. For purposes of this section, the regional review board will have the sole discretion to determine whether proposed schemes and insignias are unique and distinguishable. 
(10)  A description of the communications system to be used with specific reference to the applicant's plan to provide twenty-four-hour dispatch service to the public. If such dispatch is not to be furnished by the applicant, the name and address of the provider and the manner of providing such service shall be provided. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally make or cause to be made any false statement in an application filed pursuant to this section or to otherwise make any such statement for the purpose of procuring a certificate under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-58. - Fee for processing application. 
    The fee for the processing of each application for a certificate under the provisions of this chapter shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) and shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time of application. Such fee shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-59. - Fingerprinting and photographing of applicant. 
    Each applicant for a certificate shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the police department at the time the application is filed. If the applicant is a partnership, all partners therein shall comply with this section. If the applicant is a corporation, all officers thereof and all persons holding ten (10) per cent or more of the outstanding shares of stock therein shall comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-60. - Applicant's bond or insurance. 
(a)  No certificate shall be issued or continued in effect unless there is in full force and effect a public liability indemnity bond by an approved corporate surety or a public liability automobile insurance policy for each vehicle authorized in the amount required by the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles for bodily injury or death to any person, for injuries or death to more than one (1) person sustained in the same accident, and for property damage resulting from any one (1) accident. Such bond or insurance policy shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or to the estate of any person killed or to any person sustaining damage to property for which the driver of the taxicab or the certificate holder is liable. Such bond or evidence of such insurance shall be filed with the taxicab inspector prior to the issuance of any operator's certificate. 
(b)  Each bond or insurance policy required by this section must contain an endorsement by the surety or carrier providing for a thirty-day notice to the chief of police in the event of any change in coverage or cancellation of the policy or bond. 
(c)  In lieu of an indemnity bond or insurance policy, an applicant may satisfy the requirements of this section by qualifying as a self-insurer pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 56-299, in the amounts set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-61. - Investigation of applicant. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a certificate, the taxicab inspector's office shall make or cause to be made a thorough investigation of the character and traffic and criminal record of the applicant, including a review of any information on file with the Virginia Central Criminal Records Exchange. Upon completion of the investigation, the information obtained as a result thereof, together with all pertinent documents, shall be submitted to the regional review board. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-62. - Hearing on application; determination of public convenience and necessity. 
(a)  The taxicab inspector's office shall forthwith furnish the regional review board with a copy of each application for a certificate. Upon receipt of such copy, the regional review board shall hold a hearing as promptly as practical. In no event shall the hearing be held more than forty-five (45) days after the taxicab inspector's office has submitted to the regional review board all the information obtained as a result of the investigation provided for in section 11-61. The regional review board shall give the applicant notice of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date and shall cause such notice to be published once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper published and of general circulation in the city. 
(b)  The regional review board shall, upon holding the hearing provided for in this section and after such further investigation as it may deem advisable, determine whether the public convenience and necessity require the operation of the taxicabs for which application has been made pursuant to this article. In making this determination, the board shall consider the following: 
(1)  The adequacy of existing public vehicle service and other forms of passenger transportation. 
(2)  The kind, class and character of vehicles to be used and the adequacy and location of proposed depots and terminals. 
(3)  The probable permanence and quality of service offered by the applicant. 
(4)  The investigation report of the taxicab inspector's office and the character and responsibility of the applicant. 
(5)  Such other matters as may affect the public safety and welfare. 
(c)  The burden shall be upon the applicant in each case to establish the existence of public convenience and necessity for the operation of the taxicabs designated in his application and to establish all other facts required for granting a certificate under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-63. - Issuance. 
    Upon the granting of a certificate, the taxicab inspector's office shall issue the same in accordance with the action taken by the regional review board; provided, however, that no such certificate shall be issued nor be continued in effect until all fees and taxes imposed by this chapter or any other chapter of this Code are paid. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-64. - Contents. 
    A certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the company or individual and trade name, if any, and the business address and phone number of the operator. 
(2)  The total number of vehicles and the lettering, marks and color scheme to be used on each vehicle authorized to be operated by the certificate. 
(3)  The date of issuance. 
(4)  Such other information as, in the opinion of the taxicab inspector's office, may assist in the carrying out of the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-65. - Term. 
    A certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance until relinquished, suspended or revoked as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-66. - Not transferable. 
    A certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-67. - New certificate required upon change of ownership of stock in corporate holder. 
    In the event there is a transfer in the ownership of a majority of the outstanding shares of stock in a corporation holding a certificate, the corporation shall be required to submit a new application for a certificate and shall comply with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-68. - Amendment to reflect new vehicles or change of business address. 
    The certificate holder shall obtain the approval of the taxicab inspector prior to the replacement of any of the vehicles which are authorized on his certificate, or the addition of any vehicles not provided for on the certificate, and the certificate shall be amended to reflect the same. Any change in the business address and/or business phone number from that shown on the certificate shall be reported within five (5) business days to the taxicab inspector and the certificate shall be amended to reflect the same. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-69. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended by the taxicab inspector, upon finding that the public safety and welfare so demands, for a period of one (1) to thirty (30) days for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Operation of a taxicab for passenger conveyance which is not in good order and repair in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Failure to pay any fee lawfully assessed upon the ownership or operation of any vehicle under this chapter or failure to pay any fee and tax imposed by this chapter or any other chapter of this Code. 
(3)  Failure to supply information required under this chapter. 
(4)  Failure to maintain proper insurance or bond on any vehicle as required by this chapter. The operator's right to operate such vehicle shall be suspended for so long as the required amount of insurance or bond is not in effect and such suspension shall not be limited to thirty (30) days as provided above. 
(5)  The operator knows, or should have known, that one (1) or more of its drivers has solicited fares in an area which is governed by an entity with which the governing body has entered into a reciprocal agreement, in violation of the terms of such reciprocal agreement, and the operator fails to act in a reasonable manner to prevent or stop said offense from reoccurring. 
(b)  A certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the taxicab inspector, upon a finding that the public safety and welfare so demands, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The operator knowingly and intentionally makes or causes or allows to be made any false statement in writing for the purpose of procuring such certificate, or knowingly and intentionally makes or causes or allows to be made any false statement or entry on the records required to be kept by this chapter. 
(2)  Discontinuance of service for more than three (3) consecutive calendar days of the entire business of the certificate holder, except for discontinuance caused by severe weather, natural disaster or other circumstances beyond the control of a certificate holder. 
(3)  Two (2) or more violations by the operator of any of the provisions of this chapter within a twelve-month period. 
(4)  Failure to maintain a fleet of at least ten (10) taxicabs in accordance with subsection 11-57(4). 
(5)  Conviction for violating any law concerning solicitation for prostitution, the sale or use of narcotics, or the sale or transportation of alcohol. 
(c)  Written notice of any suspension or revocation pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) above shall be given to the operator by registered mail, at the operator's business address, as shown on the certificate, by the taxicab inspector. Such suspension or revocation shall be effective ten (10) days after deposit of the notice of such action in the mail; except that no delayed effective date shall be required for a suspension pursuant to subsection (a)(4) above. 
(d)  The taxicab inspector shall notify the regional review board within five (5) working days, of any revocation or suspension of a certificate under the provisions of this section. The regional review board, upon a determination that an operator is not operating the authorized taxicabs in such a manner as to serve the public adequately, may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the taxicab inspector in suspending or revoking the certificate. Such affirmation, modification or reversal shall only be taken upon a vote of the majority of the whole board and only after such operator has been notified of such proposed action and given an opportunity for a hearing. If an operator requests a hearing within ten (10) days of the notice provided for in subsection (c) above, except for action pursuant to subsection (a)(4) above, the action of the taxicab inspector shall be suspended until after such hearing has been held. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or permit to be operated a taxicab upon the highways, roads, streets or other public ways in the city when the certificate under which the taxicab was placed in service has been suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-70. - Limitation on reapplication following denial or revocation. 
    Upon action of the regional review board in denying or revoking a certificate applied for or issued under this article, no new application for such a certificate shall be filed by the same person or his agent within one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Secs. 11-71-11-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAXICAB DRIVER PERMITS 

Sec. 11-82. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to physically operate or drive a taxicab for hire upon the streets or highways of the city, unless he has obtained and has in his possession a valid permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the driver of a taxicab licensed in another jurisdiction while driving such taxicab in accordance with the provisions of section 11-56 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-83. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a permit, and for renewals thereof, shall be made in person on forms provided by the taxicab inspector and the applicant shall provide the following information under oath: 
(1)  His name, age, address, phone number and other pertinent personal data. 
(2)  A physical description. 
(3)  His traffic and criminal record. 
(4)  His experience in operating motor vehicles. 
(5)  His experience in operating taxicabs for hire, if any. 
(6)  The name of the operator for whom he will drive. 
(b)  The applicant will be required to pass a written examination 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally make or cause to be made any false statement in an application filed under this section or to otherwise make any such statement for the purpose of procuring a permit. 
(d)  A driver shall report any change of address or phone number within forty-eight (48) hours after such change. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-84. - Applicant's qualifications. 
    Each applicant for a permit shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and shall have held a valid motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state in the United States for at least one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-85. - Applicant to be fingerprinted or photographed. 
    Each applicant for a permit shall be required to be fingerprinted and photographed by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-86. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The taxicab inspector's office shall make or cause to be made a thorough investigation of the character and traffic and criminal record of the applicant, including a review of any information on file with the Virginia Central Criminal Records Exchange. The taxicab inspector shall have an investigation made of each applicant for a permit. A confidential record of the investigation shall be kept on file by the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-87. - Fee. 
    A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time of making such application for a permit and at the time of each renewal for such permit. Duplicate permits may be issued at a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for lost, stolen, or disfigured permits. Such fee will in no event be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-88. - Denial of applications and renewals. 
(a)  The taxicab inspector, on his finding that the public safety and welfare so demand, may refuse to issue a permit to any applicant for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Three (3) or more convictions, in the immediately preceding twenty-four-month period, of moving violations of the motor vehicle laws of this or any other state or similar ordinances of counties, cities or towns. 
(2)  Conviction; or completion of sentence imposed under such conviction, within the preceding five (5) years, of a felony, or of any law regulating the possession or use of narcotics or other controlled substances, as defined and referred to in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-247, or three (3) or more convictions, or completion of sentence imposed under such convictions, within the previous five (5) years, of any law regulating the possession or use of alcohol, except as provided in (6) below. 
(3)  Applicant does not meet the requirements of section 11-84. 
(4)  Applicant has had his state operator's license revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction within the preceding three (3) years; provided, however, that a financial responsibility revocation shall not be grounds for denial, if the applicant has present proof of financial responsibility in accordance with the motor vehicle laws of this state. 
(5)  Applicant has made a false statement of material and relevant facts on an application for a permit. 
(6)  Conviction, or completion of sentence imposed under such conviction, within the preceding five (5) years, of any of the offenses listed below: 
a.  One (1) conviction of hit and run. 
b.  One (1) conviction as a habitual offender. 
c.  Two (2) convictions of reckless driving in twelve (12) months. 
d.  One (1) conviction of driving while operator's license is revoked or suspended. 
e.  One (1) conviction of driving while intoxicated. 
f.  Any combination of the above offenses suggestive of unsafe vehicle operation. 
(7)  Applicant is suffering from mental illness or physical condition which may pose a substantial threat to the safety of the public. 
(8)  Conviction of soliciting for prostitution; any sex offense, including, without limitation those offenses identified in Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-61, 18.2-63, 18.2-67.1-67.5, 18.2-346, 18.2-348, 18.2-349, 18.2-370, 18.2-370.1, 18.2-371 and 18.2-371.1; or any crime of moral turpitude. 
(b)  In the event the taxicab inspector denies a permit application, the inspector shall notify the applicant, in writing, within five (5) working days, of the action taken. The regional review board shall receive a copy of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-89. - Issuance and contents. 
(a)  If the taxicab inspector determines that the applicant for a permit has complied with all applicable provisions of this chapter and, based upon the information supplied in the permit application and information obtained from the investigation provided for in section 11-86, the taxicab inspector further determines that there will be no danger to the public, the inspector shall issue a permit containing such information thereon as the inspector deems pertinent. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally disfigure or alter any information contained on the permit. 
(c)  The taxicab inspector, if he finds the application therefor to be in good order and that there will be no danger to the public, may issue an applicant a temporary permit, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, pending investigation and processing of the application. Each permit, temporary or otherwise, belongs to the city and not to the driver to whom it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-90. - Term. 
    A permit shall be valid until the last day of the month which is two (2) years from the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-91. - Change of company after issuance. 
    A permit shall only be valid while the holder thereof is driving for the taxicab company indicated on the front of the permit. Any driver who wishes to transfer from one company to another shall be required to pay a five-dollar transfer fee. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-92. - Posting. 
    Every person who obtains a permit under this article shall post his permit in such a place and manner as to be in full view of any passenger while within the taxicab he is driving for hire, whether or not occupied by a passenger. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-93. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended by the taxicab inspector, upon finding that the public safety and welfare so demands, until the reason for the suspension is resolved. In addition, the taxicab inspector may revoke a permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Driving a taxicab known to the driver not to be in a safe condition. 
(2)  One (1) or more violations of this chapter. 
(3)  Occurrence of any of the grounds listed in section 11-88 for refusal to issue a permit. 
(4)  One (1) conviction of reckless driving. 
(5)  A permit will automatically be revoked if a driver leaves a certificate holder, voluntarily or involuntarily, unless such driver applies to transfer the permit to another certificate holder within fourteen (14) days of such departure; such permit should be surrendered to the taxicab inspector's office within five (5) working days. 
(6)  If a driver is penalized for soliciting or loitering, in an area which is governed by an entity with which the governing body has entered into a reciprocal agreement, in violation of the terms of such reciprocal agreement. 
(b)  Written notice of any suspension or revocation under the provisions of this section shall be given by the taxicab inspector to the driver in person, or by certified mail at the driver's address as shown on the application for his permit. Such suspension or revocation shall be effective immediately, if given in person, or ten (10) days after the deposit of such notice in the mail; provided, however, that such permit shall immediately be suspended upon the effective date of any event described in subsections (2), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8) of subsection 11-88(a). 
(c)  Upon suspension or revocation of the operator's license issued by the state division of motor vehicles to the holder of a permit issued under this article, such permit shall be automatically suspended or revoked. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to physically operate a taxicab upon the highways, roads, streets, or other public ways of the city when his permit is under suspension or revocation. 
(e)  Every permit suspended or revoked under the provisions of this section shall be surrendered to the taxicab inspector. 
(f)  Every driver shall report to the taxicab inspector each arrest or summons issued for a traffic offense while operating a motor vehicle or any offense identified in section 11-88. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-94. - Limitation on reapplication following denial or revocation. 
    No application for a permit may be filed by an individual whose application for a permit has been denied for a period of six (6) months; no application for a permit may be filed by an individual whose permit has been revoked for a period of two (2) years after the effective date of such denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-95. - Requirement for reporting traffic and criminal convictions. 
    Every driver shall notify the taxicab inspector, in writing, of any traffic or criminal convictions or suspensions or revocations within ten (10) days of such convictions. Any driver who has been arrested or charged with a felony offense, shall notify the taxicab inspector within ten (10) days of arrest. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Secs. 11-96-11-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 11-106. - Vehicle type. 
    Every taxicab operated in the city shall be built for use as a taxicab or shall be of an approved type by the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-107. - General construction and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Every taxicab shall be so constructed and maintained as to provide for the safety of the public and for continuous and satisfactory operation and to reduce noise and vibration caused by operation. Every taxicab shall be structurally sound as to all of its parts and shall not have broken or cracked fenders or glass or be in need of body repair. 
(b)  Every taxicab shall be kept in such clean and sanitary condition as is reasonably possible considering existing weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-108. - Doors. 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with at least two (2) doors for the entrance and exit of passengers, in addition to the doors which give access to the driver's seat. All passenger doors shall be so constructed that they will remain securely fastened during normal operation, but may be easily opened by a passenger in an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-109. - Tires. 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with tires having at least two thirty-seconds ( 2/32 ) of an inch of tread and no taxicab shall be operated with unsafe tires. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a properly inflated spare tire, with the same tread as required above, mounted on an appropriate rim. Snow tires or tire chains shall be used when emergency snow plans are put into effect. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-110. - Speedometer. 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with a standard speedometer, properly installed, maintained in good working order and exposed to view. No taxicab shall be operated in a taxicab service while such speedometer is out of repair or disconnected. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-111. - Heater /air conditioner 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with a heater sufficient to heat the interior of the taxicab adequately in cold weather. Every taxicab shall be equipped with an air conditioner sufficient to cool the interior of the taxicab adequately in hot weather. Heat or air conditioning shall be used or adjusted at the request of the passenger. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-112. - Cruising lights. 
    Every taxicab shall have cruising lights mounted on the top of the taxicab in the forward portion thereof. Such lights shall be of such design as to identify the vehicle as a taxicab. Driver, when holding forth their cab for hire, shall have the cruising lights on from sundown to sunup. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-113. - Interior light. 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with a light capable of illuminating the interior of the taxicab and controlled by the operation of the doors or manually controlled by the driver. Such light shall be in use while passengers are entering or leaving the taxicab during hours of darkness. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-114. - Shades or curtains. 
    No taxicab shall be equipped with shades or curtains which can be manipulated in such a way as to shield the occupants or driver from observation from without the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-115. - Paint. 
    Every taxicab shall be painted in accordance with the operator's certificate color scheme and in such manner as to give a good appearance and reasonable protection, from all elements, to all exposed surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-116. - Identifying markings. 
    All identifying markings on taxicabs shall be plainly distinguishable in letters at least three (3) inches high permanently painted or otherwise permanently affixed to each of the two (2) sides of the taxicab and to the rear of the taxicab. The lettering shall show the vehicle number assigned to it by its owner or operator and the name of the company, individual or association by whom the taxicab is owned or operated. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-117. - Inspection and approval or condemnation. 
(a)  Prior to the use and operation of any taxicab under the provisions of this chapter, the taxicab shall be inspected by the taxicab inspector and found to comply with the provisions of this chapter and the current motor vehicle laws of the state. Every taxicab operating under this chapter shall be inspected semiannually (every six (6) months) by a licensed state inspection station and proof of such inspection shall be furnished to the taxicab inspector within ten (10) days of completion of inspection and at any other reasonable time requested by the taxicab inspector. Such inspections shall be at the time and place designated by the taxicab inspector. 
(b)  If the taxicab is found by the taxicab inspector not to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be condemned and a red tag stating "condemned" shall be affixed on the taximeter in clear view of the public. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove such tag or operate such taxicab for hire until the deficiencies have been corrected and the taxicab has been reinspected and approved by the taxicab inspector. 
(c)  If a vehicle cannot be made available for the designated inspection time, either the certificate holder or the driver shall be required to notify the taxicab inspector's office. Failure to notify may result in an imposed suspension to the driver and/or vehicle until such vehicle is inspected and approved by the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Secs. 11-118-11-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAXIMETERS 

Sec. 11-131. - Required; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab, or to cause a taxicab to be operated, for hire, or to accept any passenger for hire, or to carry any paying passenger within the city, unless such vehicle is equipped with a taximeter, which shall be in proper operation at all times while any person other than the operator is riding therein. This section shall not apply to taxicabs which are not on duty and in operation for hire and on which is posted a visible sign clearly marked "off-duty." Such sign shall be displayed on the right-hand sun visor, so it can be seen by the public. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-132. - Type to be used. 
    Taximeters required by this article shall be of a type approved, in writing, by the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-133. - Specifications. 
(a)  Taximeters required by this article shall be capable of computing fares on the basis of mileage and time. 
(b)  Every taximeter shall be equipped with a fare recording device, plainly visible to the passenger, and with a signal device, which shall be exhibited at all times while the taxicab is in operation. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-134. - Testing and approval. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any taximeter, until the same has been inspected and found to be accurate by a service technician and approved by him. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-135. - Sealing. 
(a)  When a taximeter is inspected and approved by a service technician it shall be sealed by the taxicab inspector. Every taximeter shall be capable of being completely sealed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab, unless the taximeter therein is sealed in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-136. - Cover and gear to be intact. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab, if the taximeter therein does not have its cover and gear intact. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-137. - Altering or tampering with meter or vehicle parts to which meter attached. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any changes or alterations in any taximeter without the approval of the taxicab inspector. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any taximeter required by this article, or to in any manner change or cause to be changed any part of any taximeter or any part of any vehicle to which such taximeter is attached, directly or indirectly, which may alter the accuracy of such meter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any change in the mechanical condition of the wheels, tires or gears of any taxicab, with intent to cause false registration by the taximeter of the fare to be charged any passenger. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-138. - Removal from vehicle to which assigned; transfer to another vehicle. 
    No taximeter shall be removed from the taxicab to which it is assigned and reinstalled or transferred to another taxicab, without inspection by a service technician or the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-139. - Repair of meter by approved repairman. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions contained elsewhere in this article, it shall be lawful for a service technician, approved pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, to perform repairs on a taximeter without prior notification having been given to the taxicab inspector, provided that notification of such repairs is given to the taxicab inspector in accordance with the policy in effect at the time of the repairs. A taximeter so repaired may be used without further inspection by the taxicab inspector, provided that the service technician tests the vehicle on an approved course if the taximeter seal is broken during any such repairs. 
(b)  The taxicab inspector shall maintain a list of all persons authorized to perform repairs on taximeters as set out in subsection (a), above, which list shall be available for inspection and copying in the office of the taxicab inspector during all normal business hours. The taxicab inspector shall place on the list all persons and businesses having demonstrated a capability to perform repairs on taximeters, who have made application to be included on the list, in accordance with regulations to be promulgated by the taxicab inspector. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Secs. 11-140-11-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FARES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 11-151. - Rates generally. 
(a)  The rates for the transportation of passengers in the city by taxicabs shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the initial hiring or activation of the meter for service, and to include the first one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of a mile or fraction thereof, the sum of three dollars ($3.00). For each additional one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of a mile or fraction thereof, the sum of fifteen cents ($0.15). 
(2)  For each passenger carried in excess of one (1), except for an infant in arms up to and including two (2) years of age, the sum of one dollar ($1.00), regardless of distance traveled. 
(3)  For each twenty-seven (27) seconds waiting time, the sum of fifteen cents ($0.15). 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a)(3) above, waiting time shall be deemed to include: 
(1)  Time consumed while the taxicab is waiting and unavailable to other passengers for hire, beginning five (5) minutes after the later of (i) time of arrival at the place to which it has been called, or (ii) the agreed pick-up time. 
(2)  Time consumed while the taxicab is stopped, or slowed for traffic to a speed less than fifteen (15) miles per hour. While such time is charged, there shall be no charges for mileage under subsection (a)(1)-(3) of this section. 
(3)  Time consumed for delays or stopovers en route at the direction of the passenger or customer. Waiting time shall not include time lost on account of inefficiency of the taxicab, police traffic stop, vehicle accident involving the taxicab or any delay caused by the driver. 
(c)  When a driver has taken into a taxicab a passenger for transportation and has actually begun the transportation of such passenger, no other person shall be received by the driver into such taxicab until the original passenger's destination is reached, except with the consent of such original passenger. No charge shall be made for the additional passenger, except when the additional passenger rides beyond the original passenger's destination. Where the meter shall be reset to compute the additional passenger's fare to his destination. This subsection shall not apply to the exceptions listed in section 11-159. 
(d)  In cases where more than one (1) passenger enters a taxicab at the same time and bound for different destinations, the fare shall be charged as follows: Whenever a passenger gets out and pays the fare, then the meter shall be reset upon such passenger's departure; however, when such passenger does not pay the fare then the total fare shall be paid by the last passenger delivered. This subsection shall not apply to the exceptions listed in section 11-159. 
(e)  Drivers may give discounted fares of up to twenty-five (25) per cent to passengers carrying a driver's license or other written proof that they are at least sixty-five (65) years old. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-152. - Service charge for pickups beyond three-mile radius of operation. 
    In addition to the rates prescribed by section 11-151, a service charge of one dollar ($1.00) per mile may be charged from the operator's base of operation or closest taxicab stand to the point of pickup, when a request for service is from beyond the operator's three-mile radius of operation; provided that, this charge shall not be allowed unless the prospective passenger is advised of the service charge at the time the service is requested, or if the passenger's destination is within three (3) miles of the operator's base of operation or closest taxicab stand. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-153. - Charge for transporting baggage, groceries, etc. 
(a)  In addition to the rates prescribed in section 11-151, the operator of a taxicab may impose and collect the following charges: 
(1)  A transportation charge, not to exceed twenty-five cents ($0.25), for baggage or suitcases handled by the driver, in excess of two (2) per passenger. 
(2)  A transportation charge for trunks, large boxes or similar containers of three (3) cubic feet or more of one dollar ($1.00). 
(3)  A transportation charge, not to exceed ten cents ($0.10), for bags of groceries or other shopping bags handled by the driver, in excess of two (2) per passenger. 
(4)  A transportation charge of fifty cents ($0.50) for large boxes, bags or similar containers less than three (3) cubic feet. 
(5)  A cleanup charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if a passenger vomits or expectorates or otherwise causes an odor, wets, or stains the interior on the upholstery or other surface of a taxicab or leaves any article in the taxicab that may cause a health risk so that it requires more than a reasonable effort to clean or remove before a driver can go back into service. 
(6)  A reimbursement charge equal to any road tolls, parking fees or other toll or fee incurred by a driver to provide the requested service to a passenger. 
(b)  None of the charges authorized by this section shall be allowed unless a list of such charges is available to the passenger at his/her request and the driver informs the passenger of such charges. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-154. - Charge for transporting animals. 
    In addition to the rates prescribed by section 11-151, the operator of a taxicab may charge one dollar ($1.00) for the transportation of any animal other than one held by the passenger or assisting a bona fide handicapped person. If any animal should litter a taxicab, an additional charge may be made of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-155. - Charge for personal services. 
(a)  In addition to the rates prescribed by sections 11-151 and 11-153, a personal-service charge, not to exceed two dollars ($2.00), may be charged by the operator of a taxicab, when a personal service is performed. A "personal service" is defined as any service, at the request of the passenger or customer, which requires the driver to leave the vicinity of the taxicab. Each request by the passenger or customer shall constitute a separate personal service, for which a separate charge may be made. 
(b)  No charge authorized by this section shall be allowed unless the passenger or customer is advised of the charge when he requests the service and before it is performed. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-156. - Procedure for changing fares or rates. 
    Any petition for increase or decrease of fares or rates prescribed by this article shall be presented in writing to the governing body. The board shall, after public notice and after a public hearing, make a determination whether the rate changes are just and reasonable. If found to be just and reasonable, such changes shall become effective sixty (60) days thereafter or at such other time as the board may ordain. This procedure shall constitute an automatic revision of the fares or rates prescribed in this article and each subsequent vote of the governing body to increase or decrease such fares or rates shall constitute an amendment to this article, and shall be recorded as such by the clerk to the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-157. - Posting of rates. 
    The rates prescribed by this article shall be posted in such a manner as to be easily visible to all passengers in a taxicab and passengers entering a taxicab. Rate posters shall be supplied by the taxicab inspector to all operators, who shall be charged the actual cost for production of the same. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-158. - Unlawful charges. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the certificate holder or driver of any taxicab to charge, or knowingly allow to be charged, any fare for the transportation of passengers, except as provided in this article. 
(b)  In no event may a person be charged for loading or unloading a wheelchair into or from a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-158.1. - Taxicab services and fares for elderly or physically handicapped persons pursuant to a contract between a taxicab certificate holder and the city or a nonprofit private or public organization. 
(a)  The rates and fares provided for under this article shall not apply when any taxicab is operated pursuant to a contract entered into under paragraph (b) of this section. 
(b)  Upon approval of the regional review board, any certificate holder may enter into a contract, on an annual or semiannual basis, with the city or any nonprofit private or public organization to provide taxicab services for elderly, physically handicapped, or low income persons who are certified as eligible in accordance with standards set forth in the contract, under a fare schedule agreed upon in the contract. Such fare schedule may differ from the fares established in other sections of this article. 
(c)  Any certificate holder operating a taxicab pursuant to such a contract shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter, except where otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-159. - Nonpaying passengers. 
(a)  No nonpaying passenger shall be transported with a paying passenger, except bona fide officers or employees of the certificate holder, a police officer engaged in the performance of his duty and unable to obtain other adequate means of transportation, a taxicab inspector, or Medicaid patients and authorized attendants designated by the department of health to be transported under a providers agreement. 
(b)  This section shall not apply when any taxicab is operated pursuant to a contract provided for in section 11-158.1. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-160. - Payment in advance. 
    Any driver may, at his discretion, demand payment, in advance of the rendering of any service, of the estimated charges for such service. Adjustments shall be made at the passenger's destination in accordance with the rates and charges established by this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-161. - Refusal to pay; hiring taxicab with intent to defraud. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any taxicab passenger to refuse to pay the legal fare for transporting such passenger and/or any allowable charges under article VII. It shall be unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab with the intent to defraud the operator, owner, or driver of the value of such service. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Sec. 11-162. - Receipt for payment. 
    The driver of any taxicab shall, upon the request of a passenger, give a receipt to the passenger for the fare charged. This receipt shall contain the name of the taxicab company, the taxicab number, the driver's name and permit number, the date and time of the trip, the origin and destination and the amount of the fare. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-736, § 1, 2-3-04) 
Chapter 12 - GAMBLING 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Gambling device. A "gambling device" includes: 
(1)  Any device, machine, paraphernalia, equipment or other thing, including books, records and other papers, which are actually used in an illegal gambling operation or activity, and 
(2)  Any machine, apparatus, implement, instrument, contrivance, board or other thing, including but not limited to those dependent upon the insertion of a coin or other object for their operation, which operates, either completely automatically or with the aid of some physical act by the player or operator, in such a manner that, depending upon elements of chance, it may eject something of value or determine the prize or other thing of value to which the player is entitled; provided, however, that the return to the user of nothing more than additional chances or the right to use such machine is not deemed something of value; and provided further, that machines that only sell, or entitle the user to, items of merchandise of equivalent value that may differ from each other in composition, size, shape or color, shall not be deemed gambling devices. 
Such devices are no less gambling devices if they indicate beforehand the definite result of one or more operations but not all the operations, nor are they any less gambling devices because, apart from their use or adaptability as such, they may also sell or deliver something of value on a basis other than chance. 
    Illegal gambling. The making, placing or receipt of any bet or wager in this city of money or other thing of value, made in exchange for a chance to win a prize, stake or other consideration or thing of value, dependent upon the result of any game, contest or any other event the outcome of which is uncertain or a matter of chance, whether such game, contest or event occurs or is to occur inside or outside the limits of this city, shall constitute illegal gambling. 
    Operator. An "operator" includes any person, firm or association of persons, who conducts, finances, manages, supervises, directs or owns all or part of an illegal gambling enterprise, activity or operation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325. 
Sec. 12-2. - Illegal gambling generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who illegally gambles shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. If an association or pool of persons illegally gamble, each person therein shall be guilty of illegal gambling. 
(Code 1971, § 10-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-326. 
Sec. 12-3. - Winning by fraud. 
    If any person, while gambling, cheats or by fraudulent means wins or acquires for himself or another, money or any other valuable thing, he shall be fined not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) times the value of such winnings. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-327. 
Sec. 12-4. - Permitting gambling to continue on one's premises. 
    If the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in control of any place or conveyance knows, or reasonably should know, that it is being used for illegal gambling, and permits such gambling to continue without having notified a law-enforcement officer of the presence of such illegal gambling activity, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 10-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-329. 
Sec. 12-5. - Aiding or abetting operation of illegal gambling activity. 
    Any person, other than those persons specified in other sections of this chapter, who knowingly aids, abets or assists in the operation of an illegal gambling activity shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 10-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-330. 
Sec. 12-6. - Manufacture, sale, possession, etc., of gambling devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, transport, rent, give away, place or possess any gambling device or conduct or negotiate any transaction affecting or designed to affect ownership, custody or use of any gambling device, believing or having reason to believe that the same is to be used in the advancement of any illegal gambling activity. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 10-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-331. 
Sec. 12-7. - Forfeiture of money, gambling devices, etc., seized from illegal gambling enterprise. 
    All money, gambling devices, office equipment and other personal property used in connection with an illegal gambling enterprise or activity, and all money, stakes and things of value received or proposed to be received by a winner in any illegal gambling transaction, which are lawfully seized by any city police officer or which shall lawfully come into his custody, shall be forfeited to the city by order of the court in which a conviction under this chapter is obtained. Such court shall order all money so forfeited to be paid over to the city and, by order, shall make such disposition of other property so forfeited as the court deems proper, including award of such property to any city or state agency or charitable organization for lawful purposes, or in case of the sale thereof, the proceeds therefrom to be paid over to the city. Such forfeiture shall not extinguish the rights of any person without knowledge of the illegal use of such property who is the lawful owner or who has a lien on the same which has been perfected in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1971, §§ 10-2, 10-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-336. 
Sec. 12-8. - Certain acts not deemed "consideration" in prosecution under chapter. 
    In any prosecution under this chapter, no consideration shall be deemed to have passed or been given because of any person's attendance upon the premises of another; his execution, mailing or delivery of an entry blank; his answering of questions, verbally or in writing; his witnessing of a demonstration or other proceeding; or any one or more thereof, where no charge is made to, paid by, or any purchase required of him in connection therewith. 
(Code 1971, § 10-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-332. 
Sec. 12-9. - Exceptions from chapter-Contests of speed or skill. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any contest of speed or skill between men, animals, fowl or vehicles, where participants may receive prizes or different percentages of a purse, stake or premium dependent upon whether they win or lose or dependent upon their position or score at the end of such contest. 
(b)  Any participant who, for the purpose of competing for any such purse, stake or premium offered in any such contest, knowingly and fraudulently enters any contestant other than the contestant purported to be entered or knowingly and fraudulently enters a contestant in a class in which he or it does not belong, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-333. 
Sec. 12-10. - Same-Games of chance in private residences. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make it illegal to participate in a game of chance conducted in a private residence, provided such private residence is not commonly used for such games of chance and there is no operator, as defined in section 12-1. 
(Code 1971, § 10-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-334. 
Sec. 12-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 96-1700-545, adopted June 18, 1996, repealed former section 12-11 in its entirety which pertained to the exemption of bingo games permitted by state law from the regulations of this chapter and which derived from this codification. 
Chapter 13 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Disposition of dead animals, § 5-7; unlawful accumulations of garbage and trash, § 17-48. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require property owners to remove garbage and refuse and city's right to operate a garbage and refuse disposal service, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-901, 15.1-927. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance 05-1700-784 of August 1, 2005, added the titles Article I, In General, §§ 13-1-13-6, Article II, Reserved, §§ 13-7-13-10, and Article III, Dumpsters, §§ 13-11-13-19. 

Sec. 13-1. - Containers required for city collection. 
    Trash or garbage will not be removed from any premises by the agents of the city, unless placed in a galvanized, aluminum or plastic container not larger than thirty (30) gallons in capacity. 
(Code 1971, § 22-3) 
Sec. 13-2. - Placement for collection. 
    Any person desiring the collection and disposition, by the agents of the city, of accumulated trash and garbage shall place the containers holding such trash and garbage at the curb in such location as to be convenient to the agents of the city; provided, however, that any such trash and/or garbage shall not be placed in front of or adjacent to a residential mailbox so as to obstruct or retard the passage of the United States mail or any carrier or vehicle carrying the mail. Any person so setting out trash and garbage for collection shall also be responsible for the removal of the emptied containers. 
(Code 1971, § 22-4; Ord. No. 07-1700-821, § 1, 2-20-07) 
Cross reference- Placing obstructions in or on streets, gutters and sidewalks, § 20-3; vehicles obstructing mailboxes, § 24-48. 
Sec. 13-3. - Collection schedule. 
    Trash and garbage accumulated by the people of the city will be collected and disposed of by the agents of the city in accordance with such schedule as may be established by the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 22-5) 
Sec. 13-4. - Unlawful disposal generally. 
    No person shall dump or deposit any garbage, rubbish or trash anywhere in the city. 
(Code 1971, § 22-1) 
Cross reference- Unlawful accumulations of garbage and trash, § 17-48. 
Sec. 13-5. - Littering. 
    No person shall place, throw or otherwise deposit, or cause to be deposited, any trash, refuse, litter or garbage in or on any public street, public property, parking lots, walks or alleys within the city, or upon any private property not his own. 
(Code 1971, § 22-2) 
Cross reference- Deposit of hazardous or injurious materials on, and removal thereof from, streets, § 20-8. 
State Law reference- Litter control and recycling, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1414 et seq. 
Sec. 13-6. - Outdoor storage and use of indoor furniture prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection: 
    Indoor furniture. Furniture and similar objects that are not specifically designed by the manufacturer to withstand the elements or are otherwise not intended for outdoor use. Indoor furniture includes, but is not limited to, beds and upholstered chairs and couches. 
    Outdoor area. That portion of real property or the improvements located thereon that is not fully enclosed and/or fully roofed so as to provide effective protection from the elements. Outdoor areas include, but are not limited to, yards, driveways and unenclosed porches. Fully-screened and fully-roofed porches and lanais are specifically excluded from this definition. 
(b)  Unless otherwise permitted under the provisions of chapter 31 of this Code, no person who owns, or is in possession, in charge or in control of, any real property within Manassas Park shall store or keep in the outdoor area of said real property any indoor furniture. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-728, § 1, 10-21-03) 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED. 

Secs. 13-7-13-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DUMPSTERS 

Sec. 13-11. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them herein: 
    Bulky waste . Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, appliances, furnaces, plumbing equipment (e.g. toilets, sinks, tubs), furniture and other waste materials. 
    Construction debris . Conventional waste building materials resulting from building construction, remodeling, repair and/or demolition operations. 
    Dumpster . A device or container one (1) cubic yard or more in size used or intended for the storage of bulky waste, construction debris, refuse, and like materials. 
    Hazardous material . Material which is hazardous, volatile, highly inflammable, radioactive, or otherwise dangerous, including asbestos fibers, infectious waste, all petroleum-based distillates, liquids, gasses and suspensions, alcohol-based liquids, and any other material which, under any federal, state, or city law must be disposed of in any manner other than by being placed in a sanitary landfill. 
    Permit . A permit issued by the director of public works or designated representative authorizing the temporary placement of a dumpster, a portable storage facility, or trash in or upon a street or public grounds or upon private property. 
    Portable storage facility . A portable device or container one (1) cubic yard or more in size used or intended for the storage of personal property. 
    Refuse . Any and all waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, discarded mattresses, discarded clothing, shoes and boots, waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging or wrapping ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not otherwise included in the definitions herein. 
    Organic waste . Waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the use or consumption of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of limitation, discarded cans and other food containers and all putrescible or decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies, rodents or other pest), manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock 
    Trash . Bulky waste, construction debris, refuse and like materials placed within public right-of-way and not stored or placed in a dumpster or portable storage facility. The term "trash" specifically excludes hazardous material and organic waste. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-784, § 1, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 13-12. - Temporary placement of dumpsters, portable storage facilities and trash within public rights-of-way. 
    It shall be illegal for any person to place one (1) or more dumpsters, portable storage facilities or trash in or upon any street or public grounds or upon private property without first having obtained a permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-784, § 1, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 13-13. - Permit. 
(a)  Every person seeking to place one (1) or more dumpsters, portable storage facilities or trash in or upon a street or public grounds or upon private property shall apply to the director of public works or designated representative for a permit. No permit shall be issued for placement one (1) or more dumpsters, portable storage facilities or trash on a street or public grounds unless placement on private property is not reasonably feasible. 
(b)  The application fee for a permit allowing the temporary placement of dumpsters, portable storage facilities and/or trash on a street or public grounds shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The application fee is waived for any permit allowing the temporary placement of dumpsters, portable storage facilities and/or trash upon private property. 
(c)  Every applicant for a permit to place of one or more dumpsters, portable storage facilities or trash in or upon a street or public grounds shall provide a refundable bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to cover the cost to repair any damage caused by the applicant's use of the street or public grounds for such purpose. No permit shall be issued until such bond has been provided to the city. If the cost to repair any damage caused by the applicant's use of the street or public grounds exceeds the value of such bond, such amount shall become a personal debt of the applicant, immediately due and owing to the city. 
(d)  Application for a permit must be submitted to the director of public works or designated representative at least seven (7) days prior to the proposed placement of one (1) or more dumpsters, portable storage facilities or trash. 
(e)  Each permit holder shall allow access to private property by the director of public works or designate representative, and the building official, during reasonable hours of the day to verify compliance with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(f)  By applying for a permit, each applicant agrees to allow access to private property to the extent necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-784, § 1, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 13-14. - Duration of permits. 
(a)  Permits issued for placement on streets and/or public grounds shall be limited in duration as follows: 
(1)  Dumpsters. Thirty (30) days; 
(2)  Portable storage facilities. Fourteen (14) days; 
(3)  Trash. Seven (7) days. 
(b)  Permits issued for placement on private property shall be limited in duration to ninety (90) days. 
(c)  The duration of permits may be extended for good cause shown at the discretion of the director of public works or designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-784, § 1, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 13-15. - General restrictions and requirements. 
(a)  No dumpster, portable storage facility or trash shall be transported, emptied or serviced between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. on any day, nor shall any mechanical, hydraulic or electrical loader, compactor, packer or conveyor be utilized during such hours. 
(b)  No dumpster or portable storage facility shall be filled beyond the top of such dumpster or portable storage facility. Trash shall not be piled higher than three (3) feet and shall not interfere with the flow of traffic. Dumpsters and portable storage facilities shall be emptied as soon as practical when full; trash shall be hauled away as soon as it threatens to impede the flow of traffic or is three (3) feet high. 
(c)  No dumpster or portable storage facility shall be filled by means of a chute, conveyor, belt, or other device, located in, above, on or across a street, or by dropping or throwing items in, above, on or across a street, unless the permit authorizing placement of such dumpster or portable storage facility specifically authorizes such method. 
(d)  When not in use, all dumpsters and portable storage facilities shall be covered with a tarpaulin or otherwise secured, as approved by director of public works or designated representative, to prevent debris from blowing out of the container. Trash shall be secured to ensure it is properly contained. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-784, § 1, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 13-16. - General placement; visibility. 
(a)  Dumpsters, portable storage facilities and trash shall not be placed closer than thirty (30) feet from any intersection, or upon any one-way street. The director of public works or designated representative must approve the proposed location of any dumpster, portable storage facility or trash placed in or upon a street or public grounds. 
(b)  A placard or decal shall be affixed to each dumpster, portable storage facility and/or trash until such time as the dumpster, portable storage facility or trash is removed. Such placard or decal shall have one (1) or more warning signs of a contrasting color to identify that the container is dangerous, that children should be kept away, that that playing in, on or about the dumpster, portable storage facility or trash is forbidden. 
(c)  Dumpsters, portable storage facilities and trash placed in or upon a street or public grounds shall be visible at night from all angles of traffic flow. Means to provide nighttime visibility include but are not limited to the use of reflecting tape at least two (2) inches in width, reflectors, cones or other methods as approved by the director of public works or designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-784, § 1, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 13-17. - Emergency removal. 
    In the event of an emergency any dumpster, portable storage facility or trash be removed by the director of public works or designated representative, and/or police or fire personnel. The city shall not be liable for any loss or damage caused by such emergency removal. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-784, § 1, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 13-18. - Use restrictions. 
(a)  No hazardous material or organic waste shall be placed in a dumpster or portable storage facility. Any trash authorized for placement pursuant to this article shall not include hazardous material or organic waste. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to maintain the dumpster or storage unit rodent, vermin or insects free. 
(c)  Any person who violates the restrictions set forth herein shall be personally liable for such actions. This liability is in addition to any criminal sanctions that may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-784, § 1, 7-19-05) 
Sec. 13-19. - Penalty. 
    Violation of this article shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-784, § 1, 7-19-05) 
Chapter 13.1 - GRAFFITI PREVENTION AND REMOVAL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13.1-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to prevent damage to and defacement of public and private buildings, walls, fences and other structures and to provide for a procedure to remove graffiti from public and private buildings, walls, fences and other structures. 
(Ord. No. 08-1700-847, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 13.1-2. - Graffiti declared a nuisance. 
    The existence of graffiti within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Manassas Park in violation of this chapter is expressly declared by the governing body to be a public nuisance, which must be quickly removed and abated as provided herein to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the city and its residents and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 08-1700-847, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 13.1-3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them herein: 
    Application of graffiti means any form or act of drawing, painting, scrawling, writing, marking, inscribing, scratching, gluing, posting or otherwise affixing graffiti to public or private property. 
    Graffiti includes writings, drawings, inscriptions, etchings, figures or marks of paint, ink, chisel, chalk, dye, acid or other similar substances, or flyers, bills and similar materials, which have been placed on any public or private building, wall, fence or other structure without the permission of the owner, manager or occupant of the property or which is otherwise deemed by the city to be a public nuisance. 
    Jurisdictional limits of the city means the area within which the city's police powers may be used, including the area within the corporate limits of the City of Manassas Park and the city-owned properties known as Signal Hill Park and Generals Ridge Golf Course. 
    Person means any individual, firm, owner, sole proprietorship, corporation, unincorporated association, governmental body, municipal corporation, executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, agent, occupant or other legal entity. 
    Private property means any portion of a privately-owned building, wall, fence or other structure that is visible from any street, sidewalk or public grounds. 
    Public property means any publicly-owned building, wall, fence or other structure. 
    Removal of graffiti means removal, obscuration and/or abatement of graffiti and/or repair of the damage and/or defacement of any property resulting from the application of graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 08-1700-847, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 13.1-4. - Graffiti prohibited; criminal penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously deface or damage by application of graffiti any public property or private property within the jurisdictional limits of the city. Any person convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. The punishment for any such violation in which the defacement is (i) more than twenty (20) feet off the ground, (ii) on a railroad or highway overpass, or (iii) committed for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with any criminal street gang, as that term is defined by Virginia Code § 18.2-46.1, shall include a mandatory minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  Upon a finding of guilt in any case tried before the court without a jury, in the event the violation constitutes a first offense which results in property damage or loss, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt, upon motion of the defendant, may defer further proceedings and place the defendant on probation pending completion of a plan of community service work. If the defendant fails or refuses to complete the community service as ordered by the court, the court may make final disposition of the case and proceed as otherwise provided. If the community service work is completed as the court prescribes, the court may discharge the defendant and dismiss the proceedings against him. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is a conviction only for the purposes of applying this chapter in subsequent proceedings. 
(c)  Any community service ordered by the court shall, to the extent feasible, include the repair, restoration or replacement of any damage or defacement to property within the jurisdictional limits of the city, and may include clean-up, beautification, landscaping or other appropriate community service within the jurisdictional limits of the city. The chief of police, or his designee, shall supervise the performance of any community service work required and shall report thereon to the court imposing such requirement. At or before the time of sentencing under this chapter, the court shall receive and consider any plan for making restitution or performing community service submitted by the defendant. The court shall also receive and consider the recommendations of the city's supervisor of community services concerning the plan. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be placed on probation or have his sentence suspended unless such person has made at least partial restitution for such property damage or is compelled to perform community services, or both in accordance with Virginia Code § 19.2-305.1. 
(Ord. No. 08-1700-847, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 13.1-5. - Parental liability for cost of graffiti. 
    If the application of graffiti to any public property is made by a minor who is living with either or both parents or a legal guardian, the city may institute an action and recover from either or both of the parents of the minor or from the legal guardian, as applicable, the costs for damages suffered by reason of the willful or malicious destruction of, or damage to, public property by the minor. The action by the city shall be subject to any limitation of the amount of recovery set forth in Virginia Code § 8.01-43, or other applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 08-1700-847, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 13.1-6. - Removal of graffiti. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to undertake or contract for removal of graffiti from any public property. 
(b)  The city manager is also authorized to undertake or contract for removal of graffiti from any private property, in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Prior to such removal of graffiti, the city manager shall issue to the property owner, by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last address listed for the owner in the city's property assessment records, a notice which states: (i) the street address and legal description of the property; (ii) that the property has been determined by the city to constitute a graffiti nuisance; (iii) that the owner must undertake and complete removal of graffiti from the property within ten (10) days of the date of the owner's receipt of the notice or refusal of the owner to receive the notice; and (iv) that if removal of graffiti is not undertaken and completed within the ten-day period, the city will either (1) begin removal of graffiti and charge the cost of such removal of graffiti to the property owner, or (2) institute legal action to require the property owner to undertake and complete removal of graffiti from the property. If the property owner has not completed the removal of graffiti from the subject property within fifteen (15) days after the property owner's receipt of the notice or refusal to receive the notice, the city manager will be authorized to promptly undertake removal of graffiti from the property. 
(2)  Before entering upon private property for the purposes set forth in this section, the city shall attempt to obtain the consent of the property owner, occupant or other responsible party. If no owner or occupant or other responsible person can be found to whom to direct the notice provided for in this subsection, the city, after giving five (5) days' notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, may proceed to remove the graffiti and/or repair the property and charge the property owner or other responsible party for costs therefor as provided for in section 13.1-8 below. 
(c)  When a structure that has been damaged or defaced by the application of graffiti is owned by a public entity other than the city, removal of graffiti by the city shall be authorized after securing the consent of an authorized representative of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure or, if such consent cannot be obtained after a reasonable effort has been made, in accordance with the procedure for removal of graffiti from private property described in subsection 13.1-6(2) above. 
(d)  In addition to the foregoing, the city manager is authorized to institute appropriate legal action on behalf of the city, including but not limited to actions pursuant to Virginia Code, § 15.2-900, to compel the owner or owners of the subject property to remove any graffiti and/or repair the property at the owner's own cost. 
(Ord. No. 08-1700-847, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 13.1-7. - Emergency removal of graffiti. 
    If the city manager determines that any graffiti is an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, he may undertake or contract for emergency removal of graffiti from any private property forty-eight (48) hours after the later of (i) mailing to the subject property owner or other responsible person the notice described in paragraph 13.1-6(2)(a) above, and (ii) posting notice of the impending emergency removal of graffiti in a conspicuous place on the subject property. The city may bring an action against the property owner or other responsible party to recover the necessary costs reasonably required for removal of graffiti from the subject property as provided for in section 13.1-8 below. 
(Ord. No. 08-1700-847, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 13.1-8. - Assessment of costs against property owner for removal of graffiti from private property. 
(a)  If the city undertakes removal of graffiti from private property after complying with the notice provisions of paragraph 13.1-6(2)(a) or section 13.1-7 above, as applicable, then the total cost for such removal of graffiti shall be chargeable to and paid by the subject property owner, and may be collected as a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates in the manner in which city taxes and levies are collected. 
(b)  Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property has been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property with the same priority as liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as such liens. 
(Ord. No. 08-1700-847, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 13.1-9. - Retention of rights. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to be a limitation on the rights of the city to seek and enforce the removal of graffiti by any other means or remedies available at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 08-1700-847, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 13.1-10. - Severability. 
    If any, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part of this chapter is for any reason determined by a court of competent jurisdiction law to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-1700-847, § 1, 3-11-08) 
Chapter 13.3 - HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 13.3-1-13.3-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HEALTH AND SAFETY MENACES 

Sec. 13.3-15. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Designated enforcement officer. The director of community development or his designee, any city law enforcement officer, or any duly designated sworn special police officer. 
    Hazardous waste. Any hazardous material (as defined in section 13-11) which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Public health or safety menace. Any condition which might endanger the health or safety of the public, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Unsanitary or improper storage or disposal of trash, garbage, refuse, debris, other solid waste or hazardous waste; 
(2)  Unburied dead animals; 
(3)  Accumulation of water causing mosquito or other vector breeding or proliferation; 
(4)  Rodent or insect infestation; 
(5)  Accumulation of bees, fowl or animals in such a manner as to create a condition that may be injurious to the public health or safety; 
(6)  The accumulation of solid waste or hazardous waste in such a manner as to create a condition that may be injurious to the public health or safety; 
(7)  Hazards such as open excavations, open wells, pits, or parts thereof in danger of falling, discarded refrigerators and freezers with doors attached, unsecured vacant structures, and or habitation for bats, wasps or other venomous pests; 
(8)  Garbage that is not contained in a watertight, rodent proof container that is equipped with a tightfitting lid; 
(9)  Improper disposal of medical, dental, veterinary or pharmaceutical equipment or supplies, including but not limited to syringes, needles, scalpels, blades and other medicinal items in solid or liquid form, in such a manner as to make it possible for any other person to retrieve and utilize said equipment or supplies; 
(10)  Any other condition that may be injurious to the public health or safety. 
    Solid waste. Any refuse, bulky waste, organic waste (as those terms are defined in section 13-11), garbage, sludge, or other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, commercial, mining or agricultural operations or from community activities. The term "solid waste" does not include: 
(1)  Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage; 
(2)  Solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows or in industrial discharges which are sources subject to a permit from the state water control board; or 
(3)  Source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-993, § 2, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 13.3-16. - Health or safety menaces prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain with the city any public health or safety menace. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-993, § 2, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 13.3-17. - Inspection and notice. 
(a)  The designated enforcement officer is authorized to inspect occupied or vacant land or premises to ascertain the existence of health or safety menaces on such land or premises. The designated enforcement officer shall inspect the land or premises at reasonable daylight times in a reasonable manner. If the owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of the land or premises denies the designated enforcement officer free access for such purposes, the designated enforcement officer may inspect after obtaining a search warrant from a Virginia court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  When any condition that constitutes a public health or safety menace is found on occupied or vacant land or premises, the designated enforcement officer shall notify in writing the owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of such land or premises. Such written notice shall contain a description of the public health or safety menace; the time within which the menace shall be abated, corrected or eliminated; a statement that the owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of the land or premises may request a hearing within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice; and an address or telephone number at which information may be obtained concerning such public health or safety menace. The amount of time allowed to abate, correct or eliminate the condition shall be forty-eight (48) hours. Upon a good-faith showing that a longer period of time is required to abate, correct or eliminate the condition, the designated enforcement officer may allow a longer period of time, not to exceed ten (10) days. Notice sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books shall be deemed compliance with the notice requirement to the owner. 
(c)  When the written notice as provided for in this section is undeliverable, or if an emergency is found to exist, the designated enforcement officer shall cause a notice, as described in subsection (b) above, to be posted on the land or premises on which the public health or safety menace exists. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-993, § 2, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 13.3-18. - Health or safety menaces abatement, correction or elimination. 
(a)  Following receipt of the written notice required by section 13.3-17, the owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of the land or premises on which a public health or safety menace exists, shall promptly abate, correct or eliminate the public health or safety menace as required by the notice. Failure to abate, correct or eliminate the public health or safety menace within the time required shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  If the written notice is undeliverable and is therefore posted, or if, after the receipt of the written notice, the owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of the land or premises on which the condition exists fails to abate, correct or eliminate the condition as required, the designated enforcement officer, after granting such owner, lessee, occupant or person in control an opportunity to be heard, may take reasonable steps to abate, correct or eliminate the condition whether the land or premises are occupied or vacant. If the owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of the land or premises denies free access for such purposes, the designated enforcement officer may proceed after obtaining a search warrant from a Virginia court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Costs and expenses incurred by the city for abating, correcting or eliminated the public health or safety menace that remain unpaid shall be treated as follows: 
(1)  If against the owner of the land or premises, such costs and expenses shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and shall be enforceable in accordance with Article 3 (Va. Code § 58.1-3940 et seq.) and Article 4 (Va. Code § 58.1-3965 et seq.) of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. The city may waive such liens in order to facilitate the sale of the property. Such liens may be waived only as to a purchaser who is unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner and who has no business association with the owner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner of the property at the time the liens were imposed. 
(2)  If against the lessee, occupant or person in control of the land or premises, such costs and expenses shall constitute a personal obligation of such lessee, occupant or person in control of the land or premises. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-993, § 2, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 13.3-19. - Emergency procedure. 
    In the case of an emergency, the designated enforcement officer may take reasonable steps to abate, correct or eliminate, to the extent immediately necessary, a public health and safety menace without providing the owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of the land or premises an opportunity to be heard until afterwards. In such an emergency, any request for hearing must be made within ten (10) days after the condition is abated, corrected or eliminated. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-993, § 2, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 13.3-20. - Hearing and appeals procedure. 
    Each hearing request shall be in writing and directed to the designated enforcement officer who issued the notice, who shall forward any such request to the city manager within two (2) days of its receipt. All hearings shall be before the city manager or the city manager's designee. The city manager, or the designee of the city manager, shall set a time and place for the hearing, which shall occur within ten (10) days of the request for the hearing, and shall so notify the designated enforcement officer and the appellant. After the hearing, the city manager, or the designee of the city manager, may order the appellant to abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety menace in the same manner as the designated enforcement officer may require. Any person who fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with any such order shall be guilty of violating the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-993, § 2, 6-21-16) 
Sec. 13.3-20.1. - Penalty. 
    If after receipt of the written notice or an order from the city manager or the designee of the city manager, the owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of the land or premises refuses or neglects to abate, correct or eliminate the condition as required, such individual shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Further, each additional day that the violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-993, § 2, 6-21-16) 
ARTICLE III. - CLEAN AIR[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 90-1700-428, adopted Oct. 16, 1990, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Ch. 13.3, Art. I, §§ 13.3-1-13.3-6. In order to maintain the structural integrity of the Code as well as to provide space for future expansion of said Ch. 13.3, said provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 13.3, Art. II, §§ 13.3-21-13.3-26 at the discretion of the editor.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 16-1700-993, § 1, adopted June 21, 2016, renumbered Art. II to Art. III. 

Sec. 13.3-21. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the Clean Air Ordinance of the city of Manassas Park. 
(Ord. No. 90-1700-428, 10-16-90) 
Sec. 13.3-22. - Purpose and intent. 
    Based on a substantial body of scientific evidence and based on the 1986 Report of the Surgeon General, entitled "The Health Consequences of Involuntary Smoking," the city hereby acknowledges that passively inhaled tobacco smoke poses a potential health hazard. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating smoking in certain city facilities and in other public places in the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-1770-428, 10-16-90) 
Sec. 13.3-23. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article unless the context requires a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Manassas Park. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Private workplace means any office or work area which is not open to the public in the normal course of business, except by individual invitation. 
    Smoke or smoking means the carrying of any lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting, inhaling, or exhaling of smoke from a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 90-1700-428, 10-16-90) 
Sec. 13.3-24. - Smoking in governmental facilities. 
(a)  All government buildings owned, leased and/or occupied by the city ("city building") are hereby designated nonsmoking facilities. These facilities include, but are not necessarily limited to: 
(1)  City hall; 
(2)  School board; 
(3)  Public works; 
(4)  Social services; 
(5)  Public safety; and 
(6)  Parks and recreation. 
(b)  The city shall provide reasonable no smoking areas, considering the nature of the use and the size of the building, in all city buildings. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Public and private assembly rooms when these places are being used for private functions; and 
(2)  Office or work areas which are not entered by the general public in the normal course of business or use of the premises. 
(c)  The city manager shall be responsible for designation of rooms or areas in which smoking is permitted with all city buildings as follows: 
(1)  Designated smoking areas shall not encompass so much of the building structure, space, place, or areas open to the general public that reasonable no smoking areas, considering the nature of the use and size of the building, are not provided; 
(2)  Designated smoking areas shall be separate to the extent reasonably practicable from those rooms or areas entered by the public in the normal use of the particular business or institution; and 
(3)  In designated smoking areas, ventilation systems and existing physical barriers shall be used when reasonably practicable to minimize the permeation of smoke into no smoking areas. However, this section shall not be construed as requiring modifications or alterations to any structure. 
(d)  In all city buildings, the city manager, or his designee, shall post in a clear, conspicuous and appropriate manner a sufficient number of signs, including: "Smoking Permitted," "No Smoking," or "No Smoking Section Available." 
(Ord. No. 90-1700-428, 10-16-90) 
Sec. 13.3-25. - Regulation of smoking in private places of employment. 
    Employers may regulate smoking in the private workplace as they deem appropriate under the following conditions: 
(1)  If the designation of smoking and no smoking areas is the subject of a written agreement between the employer and his employees, the provisions of the written agreement shall control such designation; and 
(2)  A total ban on smoking in any workplace shall only be enforced by the employer upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the affected employees voting, unless such ban is the subject of a contract of employment between the employer and the employees as a prior condition of employment. This section shall not affect no smoking policies established by employers prior to the adoption of this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-1770-428, 10-16-90) 
Sec. 13.3-26. - Smoking prohibited in certain public places. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any of the following places: 
(1)  Elevators, regardless of capacity; 
(2)  Common areas in an educational facility, including but not limited to, classrooms, libraries, hallways, auditoriums, and public meeting rooms; 
(3)  Any part of a restaurant designated a "no smoking" area pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.1 of the Virginia Indoor Clean Air Act; 
(4)  Indoor service lines and cashier areas; 
(5)  School buses and public conveyances; 
(6)  Election polling rooms; 
(7)  Hospital emergency rooms; and 
(8)  Designated no smoking areas. 
(b)  Any restaurant having a seating capacity of fifty or more persons shall have a designated no smoking area sufficient to meet customer demand. In determining the extent of the no smoking area the following shall not be included as seating capacity: 
(1)  Seats in any bar or lounge area of a restaurant; and 
(2)  Seats in any separate room or section of a restaurant which is used exclusively for private functions. 
(c)  The proprietor or other person in charge of an educational facility, health care facility, or a retail establishment of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more serving the general public, including, but not limited to, department stores, grocery stores, drug stores, clothing stores, and shoe stores, shall designate reasonable no smoking areas, considering the nature of the use and the size of the building. 
(d)  The proprietor or other person in charge of a space subject to the provisions of this article shall post signs stating "Smoking Permitted" or "No Smoking," and in restaurants, signs conspicuous to ordinary public view at or near each public entrance stating "No Smoking Section Available." Any person failing to post such signs may be subject to a civil penalty of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(e)  No person shall smoke in a designated no smoking area and any person who continues to smoke in such area after being asked to refrain from smoking may be subject to a civil penalty of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(f)  This section shall not be construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited or restricted by other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 90-1700-428, 10-16-90) 
Chapter 14 - LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 96-1700-552, adopted Dec. 17, 1996, amended Ch. 14 to read as herein set out in §§ 14-1-14-179. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 14, §§ 14-1-14-179 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 94-1700-506, adopted May 17, 1994; Ord. No. 94-1700-513, adopted Oct. 18, 1994; Ord. No. 95-1700-527, §§ 1, 2, adopted Apr. 4, 1995; and Ord. No. 96-1700-544, adopted May 8, 1996. 
Cross reference- General duty of city treasurer to collect license taxes, § 2-121; dog licenses, § 5-36 et seq.; bicycle licenses, § 6-16 et seq.; solicitors and door-to-door salesmen, Ch. 19.5; taxation, Ch. 22; permit for yard sales, § 27-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Licenses taxes, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3700 to 58.1-3735. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, and as applied to the businesses, trades, professions, occupations and callings enumerated in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
    Affiliated group. "Affiliated group" means: 
(1)  One or more chains of corporations subject to inclusion connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is a corporation subject to inclusion if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least eighty (80) per cent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) per cent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the corporations subject to inclusion, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other corporations subject to inclusion; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least eighty (80) per cent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) per cent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other subject to inclusion corporations. As used in this subdivision, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends; the phrase "corporation subject to inclusion" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two (2) or more corporations if five (5) or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least eighty (80) per cent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least eighty (80) per cent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and 
b.  More than fifty (50) per cent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than fifty (50) per cent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
    When one or more of the corporations subject to inclusion, including the common parent corporation is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this subdivision shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
    Assessment. "Assessment" means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the commissioner of the revenue or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by the commissioner of the revenue when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the commissioner of the revenue or an employee of the commissioner of the revenue, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
    Base year. "Base year" means either the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, or the immediately preceding fiscal year used by the business, provided that the base year employed must coincide with the year used for federal and state income tax purposes. 
    Business. "Business" means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (i) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business or (ii) filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
    Business service occupation. "Business service occupation" includes every business, trade, profession, occupation or calling described in section 14-43(c). 
    Carnival. "Carnival" means an aggregation of shows, amusements, concessions, eating places and riding devices or any of them, operated together on one lot or street or on contiguous lots or streets, moving from place to place, whether or not the same are owned and actually operated by separate persons, firms or corporations. The term includes, but is not limited to, sideshows, dog and pony shows, trained animal shows, circuses and menageries. 
    City. "City" means the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
    Commission merchant. "Commission merchant" means any person engaged in the business of selling merchandise on commission by sample, circular, or catalogue for a regularly established retailer, who has no stock or inventory under his control other than floor samples held for demonstration or sale and owned by the principal retailer. For purposes of this chapter, a commission merchant is engaged in a business service. 
    Commissioner of the revenue. "Commissioner of the revenue" means the commissioner of the revenue of the City of Manassas Park. 
    Commonwealth. "Commonwealth" means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Contractor. "Contractor" includes every person engaged in the conduct of the business, trade, profession, occupation or calling of a contractor as defined in section 14-40. Every person who shall build, erect or construct a house or houses, or building, for the purpose of selling or renting the same, and who shall not have employed therefor in writing a contractor or person who has paid the license tax required by section 14-38(1), and who has acted as superintendent of the whole construction shall, himself, be deemed a contractor and shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter. Any person who shall erect or construct a house or building and later sell or offer to sell or rent the same, without having himself resided in the same for not less than ninety (90) days, shall be prima facie deemed to have erected or constructed that house or building for the purpose of selling or renting the same. 
    Definite place of business. "Definite place of business" means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for thirty (30) consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not subject to licensure as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
    Department. "Department" means the Virginia Department of Taxation. 
    Direct seller. "Direct seller" means any person who engages in the trade or business of selling or soliciting the sale of consumer products primarily in private residences and maintains no public location for the conduct of such business; and receives remuneration for such activities, with substantially all of such remuneration being directly related to sales or other sales-oriented services, rather than to the number of hours worked; and performs such activities pursuant to a written contract between such person and the person for whom the activities are performed and such contract provides that such person will not be treated as an employee with respect to such activities for federal tax purposes. 
    Federally appropriated funds. "Federally appropriated funds" means identifiable federal appropriations for research and development services as defined in Section 31.205-18(a) of the Federal Acquisition Regulation in the areas of (i) computer and electronic systems, (ii) computer software, (iii) applied sciences, (iv) economic and social sciences, and (v) electronic and physical sciences. 
    Federal research and development contract. "Federal research and development contract" means a contract for research and development services as defined in Section 31.205-18(a) of the Federal Acquisition Regulation in the areas of (i) computer and electronic systems, (ii) computer software, (iii) applied sciences, (iv) economic and social sciences, and (v) electronic and physical sciences. 
    Federal research and development contractor. "Federal research and development contractor" means any person designated as the principal or prime contractor receiving identifiable federal appropriations for research and development services as defined in Section 31.205-18(a) of the Federal Acquisition Regulation in the areas of (i) computer and electronic systems, (ii) computer software, (iii) applied sciences, (iv) economic and social sciences, and (v) electronic and physical sciences. 
    Financial services. "Financial services" means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities, or other investments. 
    Gross receipts. "Gross receipts" means the whole, entire, total receipts without deduction, for the base year from any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling including cash, credits, offsets, fees, commissions, brokerage charges and rentals, and property of any kind, nature or description from either sales made or services rendered. "Gross receipts" shall include, in the case of merchants, the value of supplies and goods furnished to or used by the licensee or his family or other person(s) for which less than full value has been paid. The term "gross receipts," when used in connection with, or in respect to, financial transactions involving the sale of notes, stocks, bonds or other securities, or the loan, collection or advance of money, or the discounting of notes, bills or other evidence of debt, shall mean gross interest, gross discount, gross commissions and the other gross receipts earned by means of or resulting from such financial transactions, but "gross receipts" shall not include any principal amounts received in payment of debts. 
    Gross receipts shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business. In addition, the following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
(1)  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the Commonwealth or any county, city or town for the Virginia retail sales or use tax, for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels; 
(2)  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business); 
(3)  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer; 
(4)  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor; 
(5)  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset; 
(6)  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive; 
(7)  Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes; 
(8)  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a business subject to licensure not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business; 
(9)  The license and admission taxes established under Sections 59.1-392 and 59.1-393, respectively, of the Code of Virginia; 
(10)  Pari-mutual wagering pools as established under Section 59.1-392 of the Code of Virginia; 
(11)  With respect to real estate brokers, amounts received by any such broker which arise from real estate sales transactions to the extent that such amounts are paid to a real estate agent as a commission on any real estate sales transaction and the agent is subject to the business license tax on such receipts. The broker claiming the exclusion shall identify on its license application each agent to whom the excluded receipts have been paid, and the jurisdiction in the Commonwealth to which the agent is subject to business license taxes; and 
(12)  With respect to a motor vehicle dealer who accepts a trade-in as part of a sale of a motor vehicle, the amount of the trade-in. 
    The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable: 
(1)  Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United States federal or state government entity provided that such property was purchased within two years of the sale to said entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or federal government entity in accordance with the original contract obligation; and 
(2)  Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income. 
    Gross value. "Gross value," when used in connection with, or in respect to, manufacturers, processors, assemblers or producers involving the manufacturing, processing, assembling or producing of any product shall mean the fair value of all such products, or like articles, after the same have been manufactured, processed, assembled or produced. 
    Itinerant merchant. "Itinerant merchant" means any person who engages in, does, or transacts any temporary or transient business in the city and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, occupies any location for a period of less than one (1) year. The term "itinerant merchant" shall not apply to a peddler at wholesale or to those who sell or offer for sale in person or by their employees ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale. 
    Legal entity . "Legal entity" means a business organization, other than a sole proprietorship, that is a corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, or limited liability partnership duly organized under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia or another state. 
    License year . "License year" means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
    Peddler. "Peddler" means any person who carries from place to place any goods, wares or merchandise and offers to sell or barter the same, or actually sells or barters the same. The term "peddler" shall not apply to a peddler at wholesale or to those who sell or offer for sale in person or by their employees ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale. 
    Peddler at wholesale. "Peddler at wholesale" means any person who sells or offers to sell goods, wares or merchandise to licensed dealers, other than at a definite place of business operated by the seller, and at the time of such sale or exposure for sale delivers or offers to deliver, the goods, wares or merchandise to the buyer for purposes of this definition any delivery made on the day of sale shall be construed as a delivery at the time of sale. 
    Person. "Person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations, companies, limited liability companies, joint stock companies and associations, and all combinations of persons of whatever form or character, including any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof carrying on or continuing a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling. 
    Photographer. "Photographer" means any person having no regularly established place of business in the Commonwealth who provides services consisting of the taking of pictures or the making of pictorial reproductions in the Commonwealth. "Photographer" shall also include every employee, agent or canvasser for such photographer. The term "photographer" shall not apply to (i) amateur photographers who expose, develop and finish their own work and who do not receive compensation for such work or receive compensation for performing any of the processes of photography; (ii) coin-operated photography machines; or (iii) photographers providing service in the course of their employment by newspapers, magazines or television stations. 
    Professional services. "Professional services" means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to Section 58.1-3701 of the Code of Virginia. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
    Purchases. "Purchases" means all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. A wholesale merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine the cost of manufacture or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
    Real estate services. "Real estate services" means providing a service with respect to the purchase, sale, lease, rental, or appraisal of real property. 
    Repair service occupation. "Repair service occupation" means the business of repairing, renovating, cleaning or servicing some article or item of personal property for compensation. 
    Retail merchant. "Retail merchant" means every person who sells at retail only and not for resale. Any person who shall cook, or otherwise furnish for compensation, diet or refreshments of any kind, for casual visitors at his house for consumption therein, and who does not furnish lodging, and who is not the keeper of a hotel or lodginghouse, is classified as a retail merchant for the purposes of this chapter, and shall be licensable as such. Any person who shall sell soft drinks from a soda fountain is also classified as a retail merchant and shall be licensable as such. Moreover, a caterer is classified as a retail merchant, licensable as such, and for the purpose of measuring his license tax, his gross receipts shall be regarded as sales. 
    Tax commissioner. "Tax commissioner" means the chief executive officer of the Virginia Department of Taxation. 
    Wholesale merchant. "Wholesale merchant" means every merchant who sells to others for resale or who sells at wholesale to institutional, commercial or industrial users. 
    Within the city; in the city. "Within the city" or "in the city" shall be construed to mean within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96; Ord. No. 98-1700-580, 5-19-98; Ord. No. 17-1700-999, § 1, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 14-2. - Purposes of chapter. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to adopt and levy, within the limitations imposed by the Code of Virginia, a system of license taxes applicable to each person engaged in a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling in the city. Within the limitations imposed by this chapter and the Code of Virginia, this chapter shall be construed broadly so as to impose a license tax on every person engaged in a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling in the city. 
(b)  The license taxes enumerated in this chapter shall be for the privilege of engaging in a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling in the city, including all phases and activities (including storing and warehousing) of the business, trade, profession, occupation or calling so conducted in the city or the maintenance of any office or branch office in the city, either or both, and for the granting of certain privileges. Any person engaged in a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling at a definite place of business in the city shall be presumed, for purposes of this chapter, to conduct his operations entirely within the city unless such person demonstrates otherwise to the commissioner of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-3. - Application and adoption of state law. 
    As to all questions in regard to the duty and conduct of officers of the city in collecting and enforcing the license taxes imposed by this chapter, and in regard to matters of construction and for definitions of terms used in this chapter and the rules and regulations applicable to putting the same in operation; for the assessment, levy and collection of taxes for the current year and ensuing years, reference is hereby made to the laws of the Commonwealth and, more particularly, to Chapter 37, Title 58.1 (Section 58.1-3700 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, as from time to time amended and any recodification or successor statutes, or to so much thereof as is applicable to this chapter and is not inconsistent with it or the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. For the conduct and guidance of the officers of the city and other parties affected by this chapter, and for fixing their powers, rights, duties and obligations, the provisions of such laws, so far as applicable, are hereby adopted, without, however, being specially quoted or set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-4. - License requirement. 
    Every person shall apply for a license for each business or profession when engaging in a business in the city if (a) the person has a definite place of business in the city; (b) there is no definite place of business anywhere and the person resides in the city; or (c) there is no definite place of business in the city but the person operates amusement machines or is classified as an itinerant merchant, peddler, carnival, circus, contractor subject to Section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, or public service corporation. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-5. - Exemption for home occupations with de minimis gross receipts. 
    In the event any resident of the city shall engage in any such business, trade, profession, occupation or calling in the city which business, trade, profession, occupation or calling is conducted as a home occupation, as defined in city Code section 31-6, and which does not produce gross income in excess of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) per year, then such person shall be exempt from the requirement of city Code section 14-4 to file an application for and to obtain a current license provided, however, that such person shall file an application and pay the applicable license tax within thirty (30) days after the business, trade, profession, occupation or calling shall produce gross revenue of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) or more. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-6. - Manufacturer's license tax exemptions; determinations; appeals. 
(a)  Exemption. Any business located within the city shall be exempt from the license tax (but not from the requirement to file a license tax application) for the privilege of manufacturing and selling goods, wares and merchandise at wholesale at the place of manufacturing. 
(1)  Determination. The commissioner of the revenue shall determine, based upon the following definitions, whether any such business shall be entitled to the exemption set forth in this section. 
(2)  Application. Any applicant claiming the manufacturing exemption from the business license tax requirements, shall submit to the commissioner of the revenue, in writing, its application for such exemption. The application shall set forth, specifically, the raw materials used in the manufacturing process; a full and complete description of the manufacturing process performed by the business; a detailed description of the product which results from the manufacturing activity; a full and complete description of the method of sale and customers to whom the products are sold; and a specific identification of each location in the city from which sales are made. 
(3)  Decision. The commissioner of the revenue shall stamp on the application the date on which it is received by the commissioner of the revenue. Within thirty (30) days from such date, the commissioner of the revenue shall make and issue to the applicant a written determination about whether the business is a manufacturer entitled to manufacturing exemption. 
(4)  Manufacturing defined. A business constitutes manufacturing for local business license tax purposes if: 
a.  There is an original material referred to as a raw material; 
b.  The business employs a manufacturing process by which the raw materials are changed into an article or a product of substantially different character, which results in a transformation of the raw material into a new and different article having a distinctive name, character or use (it shall be insufficient to establish a change in the material simply because the article is increased in value or in usefulness, or simply that the article has been changed as the result of some treatment, labor or manipulation); and 
c.  A resulting product which is different from the original raw material. 
The commissioner of the revenue shall apply liberally the definitions of manufacturing to effectuate the public policy to encourage manufacturing in the Commonwealth. 
(5)  Sale. To qualify for the manufacturing exemption, the business must exhibit to the commissioner of the revenue, in its application, that the resulting products are sold at wholesale at the place of manufacture. 
(6)  Manufacturing activities. In order to qualify for the manufacturing exemption, the business must demonstrate in its application that its manufacturing activities are substantial in relation to its nonmanufacturing activities. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-7. - Each location and each business to be separately licensed. 
    A separate license shall be required and a separate license tax shall be paid for each definite place of business at which a person engages in a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling subject to a license tax under the provisions of this chapter and for each different business, trade, profession, occupation or calling engaged in at each such definite place of business. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-8. - Person engaged in two or more businesses may elect to obtain one license. 
    A person engaged in two (2) or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one (1) license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (a) each business or profession is subject to licensure at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of this jurisdiction; (b) all of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and (c) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-9. - Compliance with chapter; failure to comply is unlawful; injunction against violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling in the city for which a license is required by this chapter without first obtaining from the city the license required by this chapter or to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who engages in a business in the city without obtaining a license, or after being refused a license, shall not be relieved of the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue may institute an action in the appropriate court of record to obtain an injunction for the continuing violation of any provision of this chapter, including, but not limited to, prohibiting any person from continuing to conduct or engage in a business, profession, trade, occupation or calling unless and until the appropriate license has been obtained and the license tax therefor has been paid. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue shall cause appropriate summons to be issued and prosecuted for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-10. - Failure to comply with this chapter a misdemeanor. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to willfully fail or refuse to file an application for license at the time or times required by this chapter; to willfully fail or refuse to obtain a current license required by this chapter; or to conduct any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling within the city without such license. Upon conviction for such misdemeanor, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business in the city as a fortune-teller without the license required by this chapter. Any person violating this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or give a performance or exhibition in the city of any show, carnival or circus without the license required by this chapter. Any person violating this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-11. - Making misleading statements or giving false testimony to obtain license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false or misleading statement or to give false testimony for the purpose of obtaining a license required by this chapter or for the purpose of assisting or aiding another person to obtain such a license. In addition to any penalty that may be imposed because of a violation of this section, the license issued in connection with such false or misleading statement or false testimony shall he revoked and no part of the license tax collected in connection therewith shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-12. - Application for license generally; due dates; contents; proof of gross receipts, value, etc. 
(a)  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business if he was not subject to licensure in the city on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March 1 of the license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. The application shall state: 
(1)  The county or city in which the application is made; 
(2)  The definite place of business where the business, trade, profession, occupation or calling is to be pursued; 
(3)  The name and trade name of the applicant as such names are registered or reported to the Virginia State Corporation Commission or the local circuit court if so registered or reported; 
(4)  The residence address of the applicant; 
(5)  Whether the applicant is an individual, a firm, a corporation, or other legal entity; 
(6)  The name, residence address and registered agent (if any) of each member of the firm, if a firm is the applicant, and, if a corporation or other legal entity is the applicant, whether the corporation or other legal entity is a domestic or foreign corporation or other legal entity and, if foreign, the date of its authority to do business in Virginia; 
(7)  The nature of the business, trade, profession, occupation or calling for which the application for a license is made; 
(8)  The number of years the applicant has pursued in the city such business, trade, profession, occupation or calling; 
(9)  A record of the applicant's gross receipts, verified by oath, for the applicant's immediately preceding year; and 
(10)  Such other information as the commissioner of the revenue may require. 
    Every application for a license shall have incorporated therein or annexed thereto the affidavit of the applicant stating that the statements and information contained in the application are true and complete. If the applicant is (i) an individual, the affidavit must be made by such individual, (ii) a firm, the application must be made by one (1) of the members of the firm, or (iii) a corporation or other legal entity, the application must be made by an officer having knowledge of the correctness of the statements made and information provided in the application. 
    If the license tax imposed on a person's business, trade, profession, occupation or calling is measured by gross receipts, gross value, sales, purchases, or the like, as provided in this chapter, the applicant shall make a statement of the amount of such gross receipts, gross value, sales, purchases, or the like to the commissioner of the revenue who shall, thereupon, assess such applicant with the proper license tax. The commissioner of the revenue may require such statement to be made under oath. 
    If the commissioner of the revenue deems it advisable or necessary, he may demand of such person such other proof of the amount of his gross receipts, gross value, sales, purchases or the like as will enable a satisfactory determination of the same and the commissioner of the revenue may decline to issue any license to such person until such proof has been furnished to the satisfaction of the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96; Ord. No. 17-1700-999, § 1, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 14-13. - Issuance of license generally; payment of license tax prerequisite to validity of license. 
    Upon the filing of an application for license and the assessment of the license tax, the commissioner of the revenue, if satisfied that the application is complete and correct, shall compute and assess the license tax prescribed by law and shall issue a license to the applicant to prosecute the business, trade, profession, occupation or calling therein named. Such license shall not be valid or effective unless and until the license tax imposed shall have been properly paid. If a license can be granted only on the certificate of a court, the applicant, upon obtaining such certificate, shall be entitled to a license. The commissioner of the revenue may refuse to issue a license until the applicant has produced evidence satisfactory to the commissioner of the revenue that all delinquent business license, personal property, meals, transient occupancy, severance and admission taxes owed by the applicant to the city have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-14. - Not to issue license for prohibited location. 
    No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling at a location where the conduct of such business, trade, profession, occupation or calling is prohibited by the provisions of this Code, any other ordinance of the city, or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-15. - Contents of license. 
    It shall be stated in each license issued with reference to any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling licensed under this chapter that the person to whom such license is issued is thereby licensed to carry on the business, trade, profession, occupation or calling therein named for the license year, or for the specific period stated by reason of special or unusual conditions. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96; Ord. No. 17-1700-999, § 1, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 14-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-1700-999, § 1, adopted April 4, 2017, repealed § 14-16, which pertained to license year and derived from Ord. No. 96-1700-552, adopted Dec. 17, 1996; Ord. No. 98-1700-580, adopted May 19, 1998. 
Sec. 14-17. - Annual basis of levy of taxes and grant of privileges. 
    The license taxes set out in this chapter are levied and shall be collected with reference to the conduct of businesses, trades, professions, occupations and callings within the city and for the grant of such privileges as are set forth in this chapter for each and every license year, except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-1700-999, § 1, adopted April 4, 2017, repealed § 14-18, which pertained to expiration of licenses and derived from Ord. No. 96-1700-552, adopted Dec. 17, 1996; Ord. No. 98-1700-580, adopted May 19, 98. 
Sec. 14-19. - When and where license taxes due and payable; extensions of time to file. 
(a)  The license tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts. If the license tax is measured by the gross receipts of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before March 1. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue may grant an extension of time in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension may be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate license tax; the license tax is then subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension, together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, with a penalty of ten (10) per cent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96; Ord. No. 17-1700-999, § 1, 4-4-17) 
Sec. 14-20. - Computation of license tax for persons beginning business, trade, profession, occupation or calling. 
    Whenever any person commences a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling after the first day of any license year, the license tax imposed by this chapter on such person for such license year shall be measured by such person's good faith estimate of the gross receipts, gross value, sales, purchases or the like that will be received, made, established, or produced from the commencement date of the business, trade, profession, occupation or calling to the end of such license year. Such estimate shall be included in the license application and the license tax imposed on such person for such license year shall be computed thereon. Such person shall, within ninety (90) days after the end of such license year, furnish the commissioner of the revenue with the true amount of the gross receipts, gross value, sales, purchases or the like for that part of such license year during which such person operated and thereupon shall pay to the treasurer for such license year an additional amount of license tax due based on such true amount of gross receipts, gross value, sales, purchases or the like. Until such payment is made, there shall not be issued to such person any license permitting such person to carry on any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling in the city. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall have the authority to correct an erroneous estimate and to assess such person with any additional license tax found to be due adding thereto any penalty and interest that may be applicable and shall, at the same time, correct the estimate for the then current license year until a full year of operation shall have been completed. In case of an overestimate, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a credit upon his license tax payable the following year. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-21. - Proration, refund or rebate of tax. 
(a)  In the event a person permanently ceases to engage in a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling within the city during a year for which a license tax based on gross receipts has already been paid, the taxpayer shall be entitled, upon application, to a refund for that portion of the license tax already paid, prorated on a monthly basis so as to ensure that the licensed privilege is taxed only for that fraction of the year during which it is exercised within the city. The city may remit any refunds in the ensuing fiscal year, and may offset against such refund any amount of past-due taxes owed by the same taxpayer. In no event shall the city be required to refund any part of a flat fee or minimum flat tax. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, no refund or rebate of a license tax enumerated in this chapter shall be allowed on any license after the license has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-22. - Calculation of gross receipts. 
    The calculation of gross receipts for license tax purposes shall be on either the cash or accrual method; provided, however, that the method used must coincide with the method of accounting used for federal and state income tax purposes. The base year's gross receipts may be either the calendar year immediately preceding the license year or the immediately preceding fiscal year used by the business, provided that the year employed must coincide with the year used for federal and state income tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-23. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this ordinance is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a privilege subject to licensure at a definite place of business within the city. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia; 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two (2) or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality; 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then to the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed; and 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then to the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to the city solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
(c)  Agreements. The commissioner of the revenue may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of Virginia concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than one hundred (100) per cent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the commissioner of the revenue shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. If an agreement cannot be reached, either the commissioner of the revenue or taxpayer may seek an advisory opinion from the department of taxation pursuant to Section 58.1-3701 of the Code of Virginia; notice of the request shall be given to the other party. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 58.1-3993 of the Code of Virginia, when a taxpayer has demonstrated to a court that two (2) or more political subdivisions of Virginia have assessed taxes on gross receipts that may create a double assessment within the meaning of Section 58.1-3986 of the Code of Virginia, the court shall enter such orders pending resolution of the litigation as may be necessary to ensure that the taxpayer is not required to pay multiple assessments even though it is not then known which assessment is correct and which is erroneous. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-24. - Penalty and interest. 
(a)  A penalty of ten (10) per cent of the license tax is hereby imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the commissioner of the revenue if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the commissioner of the revenue determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the commissioner of the revenue, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the commissioner of the revenue is not paid within thirty (30) days, the treasurer or other collecting official may impose a ten (10) per cent late payment penalty. If the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer, the penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 
"Acted responsibly" means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business, and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
"Events beyond the taxpayer's control" include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the commissioner of the revenue who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
(b)  Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the commissioner of the revenue is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any license tax from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under Section 58.1-3916 of the Code of Virginia. No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than thirty days from the date of the payment that created the refund or the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-25. - General powers of treasurer to collect tax. 
    The city treasurer shall have the same powers to enforce the collection of license taxes that are not given or may hereafter be given unto the commissioners of the revenue by the applicable provisions of the Code of Virginia for the enforcement of state licenses. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-26. - Assessment of additional tax. 
    Whenever the commissioner of the revenue ascertains that any person should be assessed with other or any additional license tax pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he shall assess such person with such additional license tax as he may ascertain to be due. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-27. - Display of license. 
    Every person required by this chapter to pay a license tax or to obtain any license, tag, sticker or sign under the provisions of this chapter shall display the license, tag, sticker or sign in a conspicuous place at his regular place of business or profession in order that any authorized representative of the city may inspect the same at any and all reasonable times. Any licensee under this chapter who does not maintain a regular place of business shall either carry the license, tag, sticker or sign with him on his person or have the same fixed or attached to his truck, automobile or motor vehicle, and properly display the same when called upon to do so by any authorized representative of the city. No license measured by volume of business shall be required to be publicly displayed. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-28. - Transfer of licenses. 
    Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-29. - Record-keeping and audits. 
    Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the commissioner of the revenue to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the commissioner of the revenue in order to allow the commissioner of the revenue to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within the city. The commissioner of the revenue shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside the city, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the commissioner of the revenue's office upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-30. - Procedure when application for license not made or tax not paid. 
    If any person fails or refuses to file an application for license or to pay the license tax imposed by this chapter, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as the commissioner of the revenue deems best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. 
    As soon as the commissioner of the revenue has secured such facts and information, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the license tax, penalty and interest provided for in this chapter and shall notify such person of the amount of such tax, penalty and interest. The total amount shall be due and payable within ten (10) days of the date of such notice. The commissioner of the revenue shall have the power to examine such records for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-31. - Limitations and extensions. 
(a)  Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this ordinance, both the commissioner of the revenue and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Section 58.1-3903 of the Code of Virginia, the commissioner of the revenue shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six (6) preceding license years. 
(c)  The period for collecting any license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in Section 58.1-3940 of the Code of Virginia, two (2) years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this subdivision of the ordinance, two (2) years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to sections 14-32(b) or 14-32(d) of this chapter, or two (2) years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to Section 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-32. - Appeals and rulings. 
(a)  Any person assessed with a license tax as a result of an audit may apply within ninety (90) days from the date of such assessment to the commissioner of the revenue for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The commissioner of the revenue may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, a further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the application. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The commissioner of the revenue shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the jurisdiction (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed). 
(b)  Provided a timely and complete application is made, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the commissioner of the revenue, unless the treasurer determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 14-24(b), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires to (i) depart quickly from the city, (ii) remove his property therefrom, (iii) conceal himself or his property therein, or (iv) do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(c)  Any person assessed with a local license tax as a result of an audit may apply within ninety days of the determination by the commissioner of the revenue on an application pursuant to section 14-32(a) to the tax commissioner for a correction of such assessment. The tax commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within ninety (90) days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the commissioner of the revenue are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to Section 58.1-1821 of the Code of Virginia, and the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to Section 58.1-1822 of the Code of Virginia. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the commissioner of the revenue may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to Section 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the tax commissioner is erroneous. Neither the tax commissioner nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(d)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under section 14-32(c), the treasurer shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the treasurer determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 14-24(b), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 14-32(b) above. 
(e)  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of a local license tax to a specific situation from the commissioner of the revenue. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or the guidelines issued by the department of taxation upon which the ruling was based or (ii) the commissioner of the revenue notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Secs. 14-33-14-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL LICENSE TAX SCHEDULE 

Sec. 14-38. - License tax rate. 
    A license tax is hereby imposed on every person engaging in a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling in the city in the amounts set forth below for the class of enterprise in which such business, trade, profession, occupation or calling is properly categorized: 
(1)  Contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, per $100.00 of gross receipts, with a $30.00 minimum tax ..... $0.10 
(2)  Retail sales (including persons engaged in the short-term rental business), per $100.00 of gross receipts, with a $30.00 minimum tax ..... 0.15 
(3)  Financial, real estate and professional services, per $100.00 of gross receipts, with a $30.00 minimum tax ..... 0.35 
(4)  Repair, personal and business services, and all other businesses and occupations not listed or excepted, per $100.00 of gross receipts, with a $30.00 minimum tax ..... 0.18 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-39. - Exceptions to tax rate. 
    The rates prescribed in section 14-38 shall not be applicable to license taxes on (i) wholesalers, which shall be governed by section 14-44; (ii) carnivals, circuses and speedways, which shall be governed by section 14-45; (iii) fortune-tellers, clairvoyants, and practitioners of palmistry, which shall be governed by section 14-46; (iv) peddlers or itinerant merchants which shall be governed by section 14-47; (v) peddlers at wholesale, which shall be governed by section 14-48; (vi) savings and loan associations and state-chartered credit unions, which shall be governed by section 14-49; (vii) photographers, which shall be governed by section 14-50; and (viii) certain public service companies, which shall be governed by section 14-52. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-39A. - License tax for license year beginning July 1, 1998. 
    The license tax imposed by sections 14-38, 14-44, 14-48, 14-49, 14-50, 14-53(b), 14-54 and 14-57 of the Manassas Park Code for the six-month license year of the city beginning on the first day of July 1998 and ending on the thirty-first day of December 1998, shall be one-half of the license tax that would be imposed without regard to this section 14-39A if such period were an entire twelve month license year. 
(Ord. No. 98-1700-580, 5-19-1998) 
Sec. 14-40. - Contractors. 
(a)  A contractor is any person: 
(1)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for doing any work on or in any building or structure, requiring the use of paint, stone, brick, mortar, wood, cement, structural iron or steel, sheet iron, galvanized iron, metallic piping, tin, lead, or other metal or any other building material; 
(2)  Accepting or offering to accept contracts to do any paving, curbing or other work on sidewalks, streets, alleys or highways, or public or private property, using asphalt, brick, stone, cement, concrete, wood or any composition; 
(3)  Accepting or offering to accept an order for or contract to excavate earth, rock or other material for foundation or any other purpose or for cutting, trimming or maintaining rights-of-way; 
(4)  Accepting or offering to accept an order or contract to construct any sewer of stone, brick, terra-cotta or other material; 
(5)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for doing any work on or in any building or premises involving the erecting, installing, altering, repairing, servicing, or maintaining electric wiring, devices or appliances permanently connected to such wiring, or the erecting, repairing or maintaining of lines for the transmission or distribution of electric light and power; or 
(6)  Engaging in the business of plumbing and steam fitting. 
(b)  Contracting generally includes, but is not limited to, persons engaged in the following occupations, businesses or trades: 
Air conditioning. 
Brick contracting and other masonry. 
Building. 
Cementing. 
Dredging. 
Electrical contacting. 
Elevator installation. 
Erecting signs which are assessed as realty. 
Floor scraping or finishing. 
Foundations. 
House moving. 
Paint and paper decorating. 
Plastering. 
Plumbing, heating, steam fitting. 
Refrigeration. 
Road, street, bridge, sidewalk or curb and gutter construction. 
Roofing and tinning. 
Sewer digging and well drilling. 
Sign painting on the side of a building or other structure assessed as realty. 
Structural metal work. 
Tile, glass, flooring and floor covering installation. 
Wrecking, moving or excavating. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-41. - Retail sales. 
    A retail sale, for purposes of this classification, is the sale of goods, wares and merchandise for any purpose other than resale, but not including sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. Any person (including amusement operators) who makes retail sales is a retail merchant. However, itinerant merchants and peddlers are not retail merchants. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-42. - Financial, real estate and professional services. 
(a)  Financial service: "Financial service" means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities, or other investments. Those persons engaged in rendering financial services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Buying installment receivables. 
Chattel mortgage financing. 
Consumer financing. 
Credit card services. 
Credit unions. 
Factors. 
Financing accounts receivable. 
Industrial loan companies. 
Installment financing. 
Inventory financing. 
Loan or mortgage brokers. 
Loan or mortgage companies. 
Safety deposit box companies. 
Security and commodity brokers and services. 
Stockbroker. 
Working capital financing. 
    Any person other than a national bank or bank or trust company organized under the laws of the Commonwealth, or duly licensed or practicing attorney at law, that engages in the business of buying or selling for others on commission or for other compensation, shares in any corporation, bonds, notes or other evidences of debt is a stockbroker. 
(b)  Real estate service: Any person rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker is providing a real estate service, unless the service is specifically provided for under another section of this chapter. Those rendering real estate services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Appraisers of real estate. 
Escrow agents, real estate. 
Fiduciaries, real estate. 
Lessors of real property. 
Real estate agents, brokers and managers. 
Real estate selling agents. 
Rental agents for real estate. 
(c)  Professional service: "Professional services" means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to [Code of Virginia] Section 58.1-3701. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-43. - Repair, personal, business and other services. 
(a)  Repair service: "Repair service occupation" means the business of repairing, renovating, cleaning or servicing some article or item of personal property for compensation. 
(b)  Personal service: Any service rendered for compensation either upon or for persons, animals or personal effects is a personal service, unless the service is specifically provided for under another section of this chapter. 
(c)  Business service: Any service rendered for compensation to any business, trade, occupation or governmental agency is a business service, unless the service is specifically provided for under another section of this chapter. Any person buying or selling any kind of goods, wares or merchandise for another on commission is a commission merchant engaged in a business service. 
(d)  Those rendering a repair, personal or business service include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Advertising agencies. 
Airports. 
Ambulance services. 
Amusements and recreation services (all types). 
Animal hospitals, grooming services, kennels or stables. 
Auctioneers and common criers. 
Automobile driving schools. 
Barber shops, beauty parlors, and hairdressing establishments, schools and services. 
Bid or building reporting service. 
Billiard or pool establishments or parlors. 
Blacksmith or wheelwright. 
Boat landings. 
Bondsman. 
Bookbinding. 
Booking agents or concert managers. 
Bottle exchanges. 
Bowling alleys. 
Brokers and commission merchants other than real estate or financial brokers. 
Business research and consulting services. 
Chartered clubs. 
Child-care attendants or schools. 
Collection agents or agencies. 
Commercial photography, art and graphics. 
Commercial sports. 
Dance halls, studios and schools. 
Data processing, computer and systems development services. 
Developing or enlarging photographs. 
Detective agency and protective services. 
Drafting services. 
Duplicating and copying. 
Engraving. 
Erecting, installing, removing or storing awnings. 
Extermination services. 
Freight traffic bureaus. 
Fumigating or disinfecting. 
Funeral services and crematories. 
Golf courses, driving ranges and miniature golf courses. 
Hauling of sand, gravel or dirt. 
Health maintenance organizations. 
Hospitals, profit or nonprofit. 
Hotels, motels, tourist courts, boarding and rooming houses and trailer parks and campsites. 
House cleaning services. 
Information bureaus. 
Instructors, tutors, schools and studios of music, ceramics, art, sewing, sports and the like. 
Interior decorating. Janitorial services. Laundry cleaning and garment services including laundries, dry cleaners, linen supply, diaper service, coin-operated laundries, and carpet and upholstery cleaning. 
Mailing, messenger and correspondence services. 
Movie theaters and drive-in theaters. 
Nickel-plating, chromizing and electroplating. 
Nurses and physician registries. 
Nursing and personal care facilities including nursing homes, convalescent homes, homes for the retarded, old age homes and rest homes. 
Packing, crating, shipping, hauling or moving goods or chattels for others. 
Parcel delivery services. 
Parking lots, public garages and valet parking. 
Pawnbrokers. 
Personnel services, labor agents and employment bureaus. 
Piano tuning. 
Picture framing and gilding. 
Porter services. 
Press clipping services. 
Printing. 
Promotional agents or agencies. 
Public relations services. 
Realty multiple-listing services. 
Renting or leasing any items of tangible personal property. 
Reproduction services. 
Secretarial services. 
Septic tank cleaning. 
Shoe repair, shoe shine and hat repair shops. 
Sign painting. 
Storage, all types. 
Swimming pool maintenance and management. 
Tabulation services. 
Tax preparers (other than professionals listed in section 14-42(c) of this chapter). 
Taxicab companies. 
Taxidermist. 
Telephone answering services. 
Theaters. 
Theatrical performers, bands and orchestras. 
Towing services. 
Transportation services including buses and taxis. 
Travel bureaus. 
Tree surgeons, trimmers and removal services. 
Trucking companies, intrastate. 
Turkish, Roman or other like baths or parlors. 
Wake-up services. 
Washing, cleaning or polishing automobiles. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-44. - Wholesale merchants. 
(a)  A license tax is hereby imposed on every person engaged in the business of a wholesale merchant, measured by the amount of purchases made by him during the next preceding year, as follows: 
(1)  If the amount of purchases made during the next preceding year did not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the license tax shall be fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(2)  If the amount of purchases made during the next preceding year exceeded ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the license tax shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) plus five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of purchases in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000). 
(b)  All goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by such wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale as merchandise shall he considered as purchases within the meaning of this section, but shall not include such manufactured goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale at the place of manufacture. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-45. - Carnivals, circuses, and speedways. 
    A license tax of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per performance for each performance held in the city or given by a carnival, circus or speedway operating within city limits. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-46. - Fortune-tellers, clairvoyants, and practitioners of palmistry. 
(a)  A license tax is hereby imposed in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on every fortune-teller, clairvoyant, phrenologist, spirit medium, spiritualist, astrologist, hypnotist and palmist. This license tax is a minimum flat tax and shall not be prorated. 
(b)  This license shall be a personal privilege and shall be granted only upon the written permit of the council. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-47. - Peddlers; itinerant merchants. 
(a)  A license tax is hereby imposed in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) on every peddler and itinerant merchant. This license tax is a minimum flat tax and shall not be prorated. Each member of a firm shall obtain a separate license. 
(b)  The license tax imposed by this section 14-47 shall not apply to the persons described in section 14-48(b). 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96; Ord. No. 00-1700-617, 1-18-00) 
Sec. 14-48. - Peddlers at wholesale. 
(a)  A license tax is hereby imposed on every peddler at wholesale at the rate or rates imposed by section 14-44 on wholesale merchants. 
(b)  The license tax imposed by this section 14-48 and the license tax imposed by section 14-47 shall not apply to: 
(1)  A licensed wholesale dealer who sells and, at the time of such sale, delivers merchandise to retail merchants; 
(2)  A distributor or vendor of motor fuels and petroleum products; 
(3)  A distributor or vendor of seafood who catches seafood and sells only the seafood caught by him; 
(4)  A farmer or producer of agricultural products who sells only the farm or agricultural products produced or grown by him; 
(5)  A farmers' cooperative association; or 
(6)  A manufacturer who is subject to Virginia tax on intangible personal property who peddles at wholesale, only the goods, wares or merchandise manufactured by him at a plant, whose intangible personal property is taxed by the Commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-49. - Direct sellers. 
    Every person engaged in the business of a direct seller shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax equal to the sum of twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of retail sales and five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of wholesale sales; provided, however, that no license tax shall be imposed upon a direct seller unless the total sales of such direct seller exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-50. - Commission merchants. 
    Every person engaged in the business of a commission merchant shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax as another business under section 14-43 of this chapter only on commission income. Such person shall not be subject to tax on total gross receipts from sales. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-51. - Savings and loan association; state-chartered credit unions. 
    A license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby imposed on every savings and loan association and state-chartered credit union whose main office is located in the city. This license tax is a minimum flat tax and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-52. - Photographers with no readily established place of business. 
(a)  A license tax of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is hereby imposed on every photographer. This license tax is a minimum flat tax and shall not be prorated. 
(b)  If a person mentioned in subsection (a) above also engages in the sale of photographic supplies, cameras and related equipment, he shall obtain a merchant's license under the provisions of section 14-38 and make returns of sales as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-53. - Amusement machines. 
(a)  A license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00) is hereby imposed on the operator of ten (10) or more coin-operated amusement machines. The operator of less than ten (10) coin-operated but more than three (3) amusement machines shall pay a license tax of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per machine, not to exceed, however, one hundred and seventy-five dollars ($175.00). 
(b)  A license tax shall also be imposed on the gross receipts of amusement operators at the rates established for retail sales by section 14-38 of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person failing to obtain a license or to pay the license tax imposed by this section 14-51 shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the machine or other device shall be forfeited to the city at the direction of the commissioner of the revenue enforceable by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-54. - Certain public service corporations. 
    A license tax is hereby imposed on every person conducting a telephone or telegraph company, water company, or heat, light or power company in the amount of one-half (1/2) of one (1) per cent of the gross receipts of such company accruing from sales to the ultimate consumer in the city. In the case of telephone companies, charges for long-distance telephone calls shall not be included in gross receipts for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-55. - Fireworks dealers. 
    A license tax of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), in addition to the license tax imposed on retail and wholesale merchants, is hereby imposed on every person selling skyrockets, bombs, torpedoes, Roman candles, firecrackers or fireworks of any nature or kind, or any other invention composed in whole or in part of gunpowder or any other combustible material which could endanger any person or property, whether such sale is at wholesale or retail. This license tax is a minimum flat tax and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-56. - Industrial loan associations and agricultural credit associations. 
    A license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is hereby imposed on every industrial loan association and agricultural credit association. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-57. - Federal research and development contractors. 
    Every federal research and development contractor shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax equal to three cents ($0.03) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of federally appropriated funds received in payment of federal research and development contracts upon documentation provided by such person to the commissioner of the revenue confirming the applicability of subsection 58.1-3706.D.1 of the Code of Virginia. If a federal research and development contractor does not provide such documentation to the commissioner of the revenue, then he or she shall be pay an annual license tax as a business service provider. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-58. - Gross receipts taxes not applicable to persons having gross receipts of fifty thousand dollars or less per year. 
    No license tax shall be imposed by this chapter (but an application for license shall be filed) on any person whose license is based on gross receipts and whose total actual gross receipts in the base year (or, in the case of a person beginning business in the city, total actual gross receipts for the current year) otherwise subject to city license tax do not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Secs. 14-59-14-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY VEHICLE LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, adopted May 16, 2017, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 14-114-14-129, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 15-1700-973, § 1, adopted Sept. 1, 2015. 

Sec. 14-114. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Motor vehicle has the same meaning as given in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
    Motorcycle has the same meaning as given in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
    Semitrailer has the same meaning as given in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
    Trailer has the same meaning as given in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
    Vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-115. - License required. 
(a)  Every person owning, leasing or operating a vehicle normally garaged, stored or parked in the city shall register the vehicle and obtain an annual city vehicle license in accordance with this article. 
    The situs for the imposition of the vehicle license fee under this article shall be the jurisdiction in which such vehicle is normally garaged, stored or parked. In the event it cannot be determined where such vehicle is normally garaged, stored or parked, the situs shall be the domicile of the owner of such vehicle. In the event the owner of the vehicle is a full-time student attending an institution of higher education, the situs shall be the domicile of such student, provided the student has presented sufficient evidence that he or she has paid a personal property tax on the vehicle in his or her domicile. 
(b)  A nonresident or non-domiciled owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle shall register the vehicle with the commissioner of the revenue within thirty (30) days of taking residence or becoming domiciled in the city. 
(c)  Every owner, lessee or operator of a new or used vehicle shall register the vehicle with the commissioner of the revenue within thirty (30) days of the date of purchase or the effective date of the lease. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-116. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply and a vehicle license shall not be required when: 
(1)  A similar tax or license fee is imposed by the locality wherein the vehicle is normally garaged, stored, or parked. 
(2)  The vehicle is owned by a nonresident of the city and is used exclusively for pleasure or personal transportation or as a TNC partner vehicle as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2000 and not otherwise for hire or for the conduct of any business or occupation other than that set forth in paragraph (c) of this section. 
(3)  The vehicle is owned by a nonresident and is used for transporting into and within the city, for sale in person or by his employees, wood, meats, poultry, fruits, flowers, vegetables, milk, butter, cream or eggs produced or grown by him, and not purchased by him for sale. 
(4)  The vehicle is owned by an officer or employee of the commonwealth who is a nonresident of the city and who uses the vehicle in the performance of his duties for the commonwealth under an agreement for such use. 
(5)  The vehicle is kept by a dealer or manufacturer for sale or for sales demonstration. 
(6)  The vehicle is operated by a common carrier of persons or property operating between cities and towns in the commonwealth and not in intracity transportation or between cities and towns on the one hand and points and places outside cities and towns on the other and not in intracity transportation. 
(7)  The vehicle is inoperable and unlicensed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-734. 
(b)  A vehicle license fee shall not be imposed on any vehicle that is a daily rental vehicle as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1735, the rental of which is subject to the tax imposed by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1736A2. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-117. - License year. 
    For purposes of this article, the license year shall commence on October 6 and shall expire on October 5 of the following calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-118. - Registration. 
    Registration of vehicles shall be made at the office of the commissioner of the revenue, on forms providing for the name and address of the applicant and a description of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-119. - Fee imposed. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed by the city an annual license fee upon every vehicle regularly housed or stored in the city and used or intended to be regularly operated upon the streets or highways in the city. On every vehicle other than a motorcycle, trailer or semitrailer, such fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). On every motorcycle, such fee shall be sixteen dollars ($16.00). On every trailer, semitrailer or vehicle of like design, such fee shall be fourteen dollars ($14.00). 
(b)  For a vehicle that has not previously been registered in the city as required by this article and becomes subject to the registration requirements of this article on or after October 7 of a license year, the license fees listed in subsection (a) above will not be imposed until the subsequent license year. The owner of such vehicle will be required to pay a one-time administrative fee of six dollars ($6.00) when registering the vehicle with the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-120. - Proration of fee; refunds. 
(a)  If any vehicle having situs in the city during any portion of the license year loses situs in the city during the same license year, the applicable license fee shall not be prorated and refunded. 
(b)  Any owner, lessee or operator may surrender the vehicle license fee receipt to the treasurer or his designee and request a refund of the vehicle license fee upon satisfactory proof by such person that the vehicle license fee was paid in error. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-121. - Military personnel. 
(a)  Every person on active duty in the military service, absent from his or her state of residence or domicile solely by reason of compliance with military or naval orders, who is the sole owner of a vehicle normally garaged, stored or parked in the city or on a United States military reservation within the boundaries of the city whose vehicle is licensed and registered, shall not be required to pay a vehicle license fee for that vehicle. 
(b)  A vehicle license fee shall not be charged for a vehicle owned by a military service member, his/her spouse, or by both jointly if (i) the military service member would otherwise not be required to pay a vehicle license fee pursuant to subsection (a) above, and (ii) the service member and the service member's spouse both have the same domicile in a state other than Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-122. - Payment of personal property taxes and fines prerequisite to licensing. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be licensed in the city until the applicant has produced satisfactory evidence that all personal property taxes on the vehicle to be licensed have been paid and satisfactory evidence that any delinquent vehicle personal property taxes owing, which have been properly assessed against the applicant by the city, have been paid. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be licensed in the city unless all fines owed to the city by the owner of the vehicle for violation of the city's ordinances governing parking of vehicles have been paid. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to vehicles owned by firms or companies in the business of renting motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-123. - Registration of vehicle; payment of license fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or operator of a vehicle that is normally garaged, stored or parked in the city to fail to register the vehicle and obtain the vehicle license prescribed by this article. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor, the penalty for which shall be two hundred-fifty dollars ($250.00). Local law enforcement officers are authorized to issue to any individual, business or entity citations, summonses, parking tickets or uniform traffic summonses for violations of this section in the case of any vehicle for which a vehicle license is required by this article but has not been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-124. - Issuance of vehicle license without cost-To disabled veterans. 
    Any veteran who holds a current state motor vehicle registration card establishing that he has received a disabled veteran's exemption from the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles, and who has been issued a disabled veteran's motor vehicle license plate as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-739, shall not be required to pay the fees prescribed by this article upon a showing of proof of such issuance to the city treasurer or his agent. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-125. - Same-To certain elderly persons. 
(a)  The governing body of the city finds that persons who are sixty-five (65) years of age or older who receive low incomes and who are owners of vehicles are in need of relief from the payment of the fees imposed by this article. Any person who is, on January 1 of any year, a resident of the city, sixty-five (65) years of age or older and is the registered owner or co-owner of a vehicle subject to such fee may apply for relief from payment thereof, provided that: 
(1)  The person applying for the relief could qualify for tax relief pursuant to section 22-27 of this Code. 
(2)  The person applying for the relief produces the evidence required by section 14-122 of this article. 
(b)  Within any given dwelling, the relief provided for in this section shall apply to only one (1) vehicle. 
(c)  The application for relief under this section shall be filed on forms to be furnished by the commissioner of the revenue upon request. Any such application shall be made, under oath, in the office of the commissioner of the revenue and shall be filed before April 1 prior to the upcoming license year for which such relief is sought. 
(d)  Following such investigation as he shall deem appropriate, the commissioner of the revenue shall determine whether the applicant meets the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Any material change with respect to financial eligibility for relief and ownership of the vehicle or other applicable factors, which shall occur during the year for which the application under this section is filed, and which would operate to preclude qualifying for relief if applicable at the time of application hereunder, shall nullify any exemption for the current license year and the license year immediately following. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Sec. 14-126. - Disposition of revenue. 
    All revenue derived from the vehicle license fee imposed by this article shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1005, § 1, 5-16-17) 
Secs. 14-127-14-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSE FOR MANUFACTURE, SALE, ETC., OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 14-148. - Definitions. 
    The words and terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Section 4.1-100 of the Code of Virginia unless a different meaning shall be clearly intended. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-149. - Compliance with state law; state license prerequisite to issuance. 
    Persons licensed under this article shall comply in every respect with all applicable provisions of Title 4.1 of the Code of Virginia. No license shall be issued under the provisions of this article unless and until the applicant therefor shall hold and present to the commissioner of the revenue the proper state license as required by the provisions of Title 4.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-150. - Effect upon license when licensee does not hold proper state license. 
    If any person holds a city license under this article without, at the same time, holding the proper state license required by the provisions of Title 4.1 of the Code of Virginia, such city license shall, during the period such person does not hold the proper state license, confer upon such person no rights, powers or privileges under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-151. - Taxes in addition to other licenses and taxes; beverages considered as goods, etc. 
    Any license tax imposed by this article shall be in addition to all other licenses and taxes. Beverages subject to this article shall be considered goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose of licenses and taxes. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-152. - Schedule of license taxes-Generally. 
    The following license taxes shall be charged and collected for the issuance of a license under this article for the manufacture, bottling or sale of alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  For each distiller's license, a license tax of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), but no license shall be required under the provisions of this subsection for any person who shall manufacture not more than five thousand (5,000) gallons of alcohol or spirits or both during the license year; 
(2)  For each fruit distiller's license, a license tax of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); 
(3)  For each license issued to a bed and breakfast establishment, a license tax of forty dollars ($40.00); 
(4)  For each brewery license, a license tax of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
(5)  For each bottler's license, a license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
(6)  For each wholesale beer license, a license tax of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); 
(7)  For each retail on-premises beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club and for each retail off-premises beer license, a license tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(8)  For each winery license, a license tax of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
(9)  For each wholesale wine license, a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(10)  For each retail on-premises wine and beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club; and for each retail off-premises wine and beer license, including each gift shop, gourmet shop and convenience grocery store license, a license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); 
(11)  For each hospital license, a license tax of ten dollars ($10.00); and 
(12)  For each banquet license, a license tax of five dollars ($5.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-153. - Mixed beverage; caterer; and special events licenses. 
    The following license taxes shall be charged and collected for the issuance of mixed beverage licenses: 
(1)  Mixed beverage restaurant license, including restaurants located on the premises of and operated by hotels or motels, or other persons: 
a.  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for up to one hundred (100) persons; 
b.  Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than one hundred (100) but not more than one hundred fifty (150) persons; and 
c.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than one hundred fifty (150) persons; 
(2)  Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each private, nonprofit club operating a restaurant located on the premises of such club; 
(3)  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each mixed beverage caterer license; and 
(4)  Ten dollars ($10.00) for each day of each event for mixed beverage special events licenses. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-154. - Taxes not prorated. 
    The license taxes provided for by this article are minimum annual flat taxes and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-155. - Transfer of license; amendment of license as to change of place of business. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable from one person to another, but such a license may be amended by proper authority to show a change in the place of business. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-156. - Right of police officers to enter licensed premises. 
    Police officers shall at all times during business hours be allowed free access to every place licensed under this article for the purpose of examining and inspecting the premises. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
ARTICLE V. - LICENSE PERMIT FOR PURCHASE AND SALE OF GOLD, SILVER AND OTHER PRECIOUS METALS 

Sec. 14-157. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, a "dealer of precious metals" means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of (i) purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems; (ii) removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by the person, firm, partnership, or corporation; or (iii) buying, acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from manufactured articles. "Dealer" includes all employers and principals on whose behalf a purchase is made, and any employee or agent who makes any purchase for or on behalf of his employer or principal. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-158. - License permit required for dealers of precious metals. 
    No dealer of precious metals may purchase on a secondhand basis gold, silver, platinum, platinum alloys, or other precious metals or any item made of or containing any quantity of gold, silver, platinum, platinum alloys, or other precious metals, without first obtaining a license permit to do so from the chief law enforcement officer of the city. All dealers of precious metals, whether or not already in possession of a license issued by the city under a separate provision of the Code of the City of Manassas Park, shall be required to obtain a license permit as provided herein, and to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-159. - Police report. 
    Any person, firm or corporation that desires to become a dealer of precious metals, prior to applying for a license permit (or if the dealer is a corporation, an officer who is a beneficial owner of the corporation), shall present himself to the police department to be photographed, fingerprinted and to have his records reviewed for prior convictions and aliases. The information obtained by the police department shall be submitted by the police department directly to the commissioner of the revenue and the applicant shall have a right of access to such information. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-160. - Issuance of license by commissioner of the revenue; fee. 
    A license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) per year shall be charged. The chief law enforcement officer of the city shall issue a license to any person who: 
(1)  Has presented himself to the police department of the city and has been photographed, fingerprinted and had his records reviewed as required by section 14-159; 
(2)  Has completed the application requirement of section 14-161; and 
(3)  Is able to produce satisfactory evidence of good character in making a determination of what evidence is satisfactory to prove good character, the chief law enforcement officer of the city shall review and consider the report to be issued by the city, as provided for in section 14-159. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-161. - Application for license; contents. 
    The application for license permit as a dealer of precious metals shall be in writing and verified by the applicant and shall state the applicant's full name, any aliases, his address, age, date of birth, sex, and fingerprints; the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if any; the street and number of the proposed place of business; the names and addresses of all employees and agents; and shall state the length of time which the applicant plans to do business within the city. If the applicant has previously engaged in a like or similar business, the applicant shall designate on the application the cities and/or counties and states where such business was conducted within the preceding twelve (12) months. The applicant shall also furnish to the chief law-enforcement officer of the city any evidence as the chief shall deem necessary to establish the truth of the statements made by the applicant, and the good character of the applicant. The licensee shall agree that such place of business shall be open to the inspection of any revenue agent of county, city, state or federal police officer. The application shall be accompanied by a two hundred dollar ($200.00) application fee. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-162. - Contents, display of license permit; license permit not transferable. 
    The license permit shall designate the premises on which the licensee shall conduct his business. The licensee shall display his license permit on the premises, in a place visible to the public. The license permit issued hereunder shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-163. - Filing list of articles purchased daily; purchased property to be held ten working days prior to disposal. 
    By 10:00 of each morning during the period of validity of the license permit, the licensee shall file with the police department a complete descriptive list of all articles purchased on a second-hand basis on the previous day, showing: 
(1)  A complete description of each article and item purchased on the previous day; 
(2)  The name(s), addresses and date(s) of birth of the seller(s) of each article(s) and item(s) regulated herein; and 
(3)  The true price paid for each article and item purchased. 
    All property purchased shall be held by the licensee for ten (10) working days prior to its disposal or change in any form, and shall be produced for inspection within the city upon request by the city police. All daily reports shall be open for public inspection at police headquarters. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-164. - Identification of seller; purchases from minors. 
    Licensees shall ascertain the full name, residence address, work place, home and work telephone numbers, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, hair and eye color, and other identifying marks of the seller. Such information shall be verified by requiring identification by the exhibition of a government-issued identification card such as a driver's license, and at least one (1) other corroborating means of identification. No purchase of precious metals may be made from any person under the age of eighteen (18). 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-165. - False statement on application voids license. 
    Any false statements made on the application form or in securing a license permit voids the license ab initio. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-166. - Hours of business. 
    No purchase shall be made by any dealer, his agents, or employees, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-167. - Bond required. 
    Every person, firm, partnership, or corporation receiving a license permit hereunder shall, at the time of receiving such permit and before the same shall be effective, enter into with one (1) corporate surety or two (2) personal sureties a joint and several recognizance to the city in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-168. - Private action on bond. 
    If any person shall be aggrieved as a consequence of any purchase by a licensed dealer of precious metals, and shall recover judgment against him therefor, such person may, after a writ shall have been returned unsatisfied, either in whole or in part, on any excavation, issued upon such judgment, maintain an action in his own name upon the bond of the license in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-169. - Violation is misdemeanor. 
    Any violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine or not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or thirty (30) days in jail, or both, and each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-170. - Severability. 
    If any of the foregoing provisions of this article or any portion thereof are declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of said section or sections shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
ARTICLE VI. - LICENSE FOR PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 14-171. - Definitions. 
    "Pawnbroker" means any person who lends or advances money or other things for profit on the pledge and possession of personal property, or other valuable things, other than securities or written or printed evidences of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back to the seller at a stipulated price. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-172. - Pawnbroker's license required; limitation of pawnbroker licenses. 
(a)  No person shall conduct business in the city as a pawnbroker without first obtaining a license pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Not more than three (3) places in the city shall be licensed where the business of a pawnbroker may be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-173. - Issuance of pawnbroker license. 
    Upon the authorization of the circuit court, the commissioner of the revenue shall issue a pawnbroker license upon payment of a two hundred dollar ($200.00) application fee and satisfaction of the requirements of this article and section 14-43 of the city Code. The license shall be valid for not more than one (1) year from the date of issuance, but may be renewed in the same manner as the initial license is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-174. - Application form. 
    The application for pawnbroker's license shall be in writing and verified by the applicant. The application shall state the applicant's name, residence address, street and number of the proposed place of business, and the names and addresses of all employees and agents. If the applicant has previously engaged in a like or similar business, the applicant shall designate all locations where such business was conducted within the preceding twelve (12) months- The applicant shall furnish such additional information or evidence as the commissioner of the revenue shall deem necessary to establish the truth of the applicant's statements, and the good character of the applicant. False statements on the application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a license. The application shall include a photograph and fingerprints obtained in advance from the police department, and a record of any prior convictions or aliases. Subject to the limitations set forth in this article, the applicant shall be given a license if the commissioner of the revenue is satisfied of the applicant's good character, and otherwise meets the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-175. - Place of business. 
    The pawnbroker's business shall be conducted only from the fixed permanent location specified in the application. The licensee shall agree that such place of business shall be open to the inspection of any renewal agent, or police officers. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-176. - Contents, display of licenses, license not transferrable. 
    The license shall designate the premises on which the licensee shall conduct the pawnbroker's business. The licensee shall display the license on the premises in a place clearly visible to the public. The license is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-177. - Daily reports. 
    By noon of the following day, each pawnbroker shall prepare and submit to the police department a daily report of all goods, articles or things pawned, pledged or sold the preceding day. The report shall include the name and residence of the pledger and a description of the goods and articles pledged. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-178. - Identification of pledgor. 
    Licensees shall ascertain the name, address and age of the pledger by requiring identification issued by a governmental agency with a picture of the pledger and one corroborating means of identification. No pledge may be made by a minor unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
Sec. 14-179. - Violation. 
    Any violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the court may revoke or suspend the pawnbroker's license for second and subsequent offenses. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-552, 12-17-96) 
ARTICLE VII. - GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE 

Sec. 14-180. - General permit and advertising requirements. 
    Every person desiring to advertise or conduct a sale in the city for the purpose of discontinuing a retail business, or to modify the word "sale" in any advertisement with the words "going out of business" or any other words which tend to insinuate that the retail business is to be discontinued and the merchandise liquidated, shall make application to and obtain from the city a special sale permit and shall pay a fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) for each such permit. 
    Any person who advertises such sale shall conspicuously include in the advertisement the special sale permit number assigned for the sale by the city and the effective dates of the sale as authorized in the special sale permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-553, 12-17-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia 18.2-224. 
Sec. 14-181. - Unlawful not to comply with permit or advertising requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a sale in the city for the purpose of discontinuing a retail business, or to modify the word "sale" in any advertisement with the words "going out of business" or any other words which tend to insinuate that the retail business is to be discontinued and the merchandise liquidated, unless such person has obtained from the city a special sale permit and has paid a fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) for each such permit. A violation of the provisions of this section or section 14-180 shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-553, 12-17-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia §§ 18.2-223 and 18.2-224. 
Sec. 14-182. - Application for permit; contents. 
    Every person desiring to conduct a sale in the city for the purpose of discontinuing a retail business shall, before such sale is conducted and before any advertisement of such sale, make written application for a special sale permit to the commissioner of the revenue. All applications shall be made on the form or forms prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue and shall be accompanied by the fee specified in section 14-180 and an inventory, including the kind and quantity of all goods which are to be offered for sale during the sale. Goods not included on the inventory of special sale goods shall not be commingled with or added to the special sale goods. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-553, 12-17-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 18.2-224. 
Sec. 14-183. - Issuance of special sale permit; payment of fee prerequisite to permit. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a special sale permit, the commissioner of the revenue, if satisfied that the application is complete and correct and that the proper fee has been paid, shall issue a special sale permit to the applicant to conduct such a sale in the city for the purpose of discontinuing a retail business. Each special sale permit shall be valid for a period of no longer than sixty (60) days, and any extension of that time shall constitute a new special sale and shall require an additional application, permit and inventory. A maximum of one (1) permit beyond the initial sixty-day permit may be granted solely for the purpose of liquidating only those goods contained in the initial inventory list which remain unsold. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall have the right to revoke a special sale permit upon proof that goods not appearing on the original inventory of special sale goods have been commingled with or added to the special sale goods. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-553, 12-17-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 18.2-224. 
Chapter 15 - NOISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-1700-632, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 2000, repealed former Ch. 15, §§ 15-1-15-15, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1971 and Ord. No. 77-1700-108, adopted Sept. 6, 1977. 
Cross reference- Noisy animals and fowl generally, § 5-9. 

Sec. 15-1. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the public policy of Manassas Park to protect its citizens against excessive noise that is detrimental to life, health and enjoyment of property. In order to promote the public health, safety, welfare and the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the city, the following measurements and standards relating to noise are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-632, § 1, 11-6-00) 
Sec. 15-2. - Violations of chapter. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-632, § 1, 11-6-00) 
Sec. 15-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    A-weighted decibel means the sound level, in decibels, measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting network or scale as specified in the ANSI S1.4-1983 (specification for sound level meters). The level so read shall be postscripted dB(A) or dBA. 
    ANSI means the American National Standards Institute, Inc., New York, New York. 
    Chief means the Chief of Police of Manassas Park or his authorized agents. 
    Daytime means the local time of day between the following hours: 
  7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays; 
  7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Fridays; 
  9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Saturdays; and 
  9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays and legal holidays observed by city government. 
    Decibel means a unit that describes the sound pressure level or intensity of sound. The sound pressure level in decibels is twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound in microbars to a reference pressure of 0.0002 microbar; abbreviated dB. 
    Motor vehicle has the same meaning as found in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Nighttime means those times excluded from the definition of daytime. 
    Noise means any steady-state or impulsive sound occurring on either a continuous or intermittent basis. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which: 
(1)  Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans; or 
(2)  Endangers or injures personal or real property; or 
(3)  Exceeds the applicable maximum permissible sound levels as they appear in the table in section 15-4. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument to measure sound pressure levels that meets or exceeds performance standards for a Type 2 meter as specified by the ANSI and approved by the Division of Consolidated Laboratory Services in the Virginia Department of General Services. 
    Sound pressure level means the intensity in decibels (dB) of a sound. 
    Zoning district classification is the scheme of land use classification contained in chapter 31 of this Code, with zoning districts grouped as follows: 
(1)  Agricultural - A-1 zoning district. 
(2)  Business - B-1, B-2, B-3, MU-D, PUD (Commercial) zoning districts. 
(3)  Industrial - I-1, I-2 zoning districts. 
(4)  Public Facilities - PF zoning district. 
(5)  Residential - R-1, R-2, R-3, PUD (Residential) zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-632, § 1, 11-6-00; Ord. No. 02-1700-696, § 1, 12-3-02; Ord. No. 18-1700-1013, § 1, 3-20-18) 
Sec. 15-4. - Maximum permissible sound levels generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, any noise which emanates from any operation, activity or source and which exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels established in Table I below is hereby prohibited. Such levels shall be measured at the property boundary of the sound source or at any point within any other property affected by the noise. When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more than one (1) zoning district classification, the limits of the most restrictive classification shall apply. 
Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure Levels 
Table I Zoning District Classifications Maximum 
dBA 
Daytime Maximum 
dBA 
Nighttime Agricultural and Residential 60 55 Business and Public Facilities 65 60 Industrial 79 72  
(b)  Heating and cooling systems, including but not limited to air conditioners and heat pumps, shall not be subject to the night levels enumerated above. 
(c)  Any person, with either a valid building permit issued by the city or a lawfully obtained exemption provided for under section 15-10 who during daytime operates or causes to be operated any equipment used in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, alleys or appurtenances thereto in the outdoors in any residential district within one hundred fifty (150) yards of a lawfully occupied dwelling shall not be subject to the levels enumerated above. 
(d)  Persons performing construction of public projects, repair or maintenance work for such projects or persons performing work for private or public utilities for the repair of facilities or restoration of services shall not be subject to the levels enumerated above. 
(e)  Normal yard and house maintenance equipment shall not be subject to the maximum daytime levels enumerated above. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-632, § 1, 11-6-00; Ord. No. 02-1700-696, § 2, 12-3-02; Ord. No. 18-1700-1013, § 1, 3-20-18) 
Sec. 15-5. - Prohibitions generally. 
    The following acts are violations of this chapter: 
(a)  Sounding a horn or other signaling device on any motor vehicle except as an emergency or danger-warning signal. 
(b)  Operating a motor vehicle, other than an authorized emergency vehicle, a vehicle moving under special permit, or a motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce, in such a manner that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle, when measured at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more, exceeds the sound levels established in Table II below. 
Table II Vehicle Class Maximum dBA 
Speed limit 
35 mph or less Maximum dBA 
Speed limit 
over 35 mph All motor vehicles of GVWR or GCWR of 6,000 lbs. or more 86 90 Any motorcycle 82 86 Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor vehicle 76 82  
(c)  Operating, loading or unloading any vehicle, including but not limited to trucks, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers in the outdoors in zones other than industrial zoning districts within one hundred (100) yards of a lawfully occupied dwelling between the hours of during nighttime. 
(d)  Operating or causing to be operated any equipment used in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, alleys or appurtenances thereto in the outdoors within one hundred fifty (150) yards of a lawfully occupied dwelling located in a residential district after 7:00 p.m. and before (i) 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or (ii) 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays observed by city government. This subsection shall not apply to construction of public projects, repair or maintenance work performed on such projects, or work performed by private or public utility companies for the repair of facilities or restoration of services. 
(e)  Using, operating or causing to be operated mechanical loud speakers or other sound amplification devices on trucks or other moving vehicles or in commercial establishments for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public during nighttime. The use of such at all other times shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The only sounds permitted are music or human speech. 
(2)  Sound shall not be issued and sound amplification devices shall not be used within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals, schools, religious institutions or courthouses. 
(3)  The human speech and music amplified shall not be obscene, as that term is defined in section 18.2-372 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(f)  Operating or permitting to be operated any powered model aircraft in the outdoors during the nighttime. Any person desiring to use city parks or facilities to operate such aircraft at any time must first obtain permission from the city's parks and recreation department. 
(g)  The playing of radio, phonographs, television, tape or disc players, musical instruments or drums, sound amplifiers or similar devices which produce, reproduce or amplify sound in such a manner as to emit sound audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet outside of a building or audible through partitions common to two (2) or more dwellings within a building. 
(h)  Talking, yelling, shouting, screaming, singing, or any other form of human sounds produced by any person or group of people that creates a noise disturbance at nighttime in such a manner as to be audible across property boundaries or audible through partitions common to two (2) or more dwelling units within a building. 
(i)  Playing, operating or permitting to be operated, any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of sound, which emits sound within a motor vehicle being operated on a public street, alley, parking lot, or city park, and which emits sound audible from outside the motor vehicle at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to motor vehicle alarms or other security devices, the emission of sound for purposes of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(j)  Operating or permitting to be operated, either on a highway or on public or private property within five hundred (500) feet of any residential district, any motorcycle, moped, motorized bicycle, motorcycle-like device commonly known as a trail bike or mini-bike, or motorized cart commonly known as a go-cart, unless it is equipped with an exhaust system of a type installed as standard equipment, or comparable to that designed for use on that particular vehicle or device as standard factory equipment, in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive noise. Violation of this subsection shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-632, § 1, 11-6-00; Ord. No. 02-1700-696, § 3, 12-3-02; Ord. No. 03-1700-705, § 1, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 18-1700-1013, § 1, 3-20-18) 
Sec. 15-6. - Noise from animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal to create noise that is plainly audible at least once a minute for ten (10) consecutive minutes (i) inside the confines of the dwelling unit, house or apartment of another, or (ii) at fifty (50) or more feet from the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-632, § 1, 11-6-00; Ord. No. 18-1700-1013, § 1, 3-20-18) 
Sec. 15-7. - Trash or refuse. 
    Noise relating to the collection of trash or refuse is regulated under section 13-3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-632, § 1, 11-6-00) 
Sec. 15-8. - Measurement procedures. 
    The measurement of sound or noise pursuant to this section shall be as follows: 
(a)  The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with sound level meters Type 1 or Type 2 that meet the standards prescribed by the ANSI and approved by the Division of Consolidated Laboratory Services in the Virginia Department of General Services. The instruments shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration shall be made of the system at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise source. The microphone during measurement shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required. A minimum of three (3) sound level readings will be taken. The geometric mean of these readings will be used as the average sound level. If the background noise is equal to the levels set forth in section 15-4 above, three (3) dB shall be subtracted out of the average sound level. 
(b)  The slow meter response of the sound level meter shall be used to determine that the average amplitude has not exceeded the dBA readings or the limiting noise spectra set forth in section 15-4 above. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specified, the measurement shall be made at the property boundary on which such noise is generated, or at any point within the receiving property affected by the noise. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-632, § 1, 11-6-00; Ord. No. 18-1700-1013, § 1, 3-20-18) 
Sec. 15-9. - Sport shooting ranges. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall not subject a sport shooting range to noise control standards more stringent than those in effect at the time the construction or operation of the range initially was approved. The operation or use of a sport shooting range shall not be enjoined on the basis of noise, nor shall any person be subject to action for nuisance or criminal prosecution in any manner relating to noise resulting from the operation of the range, if the range is in compliance with all ordinances relating to noise in effect at the time construction or operation of the range was approved. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "sport shooting range" means an area or structure designed for time use of rifles, shotguns, pistols, silhouettes, skeet, trap, black powder, or any other similar sport shooting. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-632, § 1, 11-6-00) 
Sec. 15-10. - Exemptions. 
    Exemptions from the provisions of this chapter may be granted in accordance with the requirements below: 
(a)  Any person responsible for any noise from the operating of any equipment used in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, alleys or appurtenances thereto shall either obtain a valid building permit obtained from the city or apply to the city manager for an exemption or partial exemption from the provisions of this chapter. All other requests for exemptions shall be directed to the city manager. The city manager may grant such exemption or partial exemption if he finds that: 
(1)  The detriment to the community due to the noise is outweighed by the benefit to the public interest during the period of the exemption or partial exemption; and 
(2)  Strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter would cause a serious hardship without producing equal or greater benefit to the public. 
(b)  In determining whether to grant such exemption, the city manager shall consider the following: 
(1)  The time of day the noise will occur; 
(2)  The duration of the noise; 
(3)  The loudness of the noise in relation to the maximum permissible sound levels set forth in section 15-4 of this chapter; 
(4)  Whether the noise is intermittent or continuous; and 
(5)  Such other matters that the city manager determines are related to the impact of the noise on the health, safety and welfare of the community and the degree of hardship that may result from the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Exemptions or partial exemptions issued pursuant to this section shall be granted for such period as the city manager deems appropriate. Any such exemption shall be reviewed if complaints are received by the city manager and may be revoked if, when the foregoing standards are applied, circumstances no longer justify the exemption or partial exemption. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city manager made pursuant to this section may request reconsideration of such decision by the city manager by delivering a written statement of appeal to the office of the city manager within ten (10) days of the date of the decision. The city manager shall review all statements of grievances and shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of such written statement of grievance, either affirm or set such decision aside, and make any such further determination as may be necessary to effectuate the provisions of this section. The decision of the city manager shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-632, § 1, 11-6-00; Ord. No. 18-1700-1013, § 1, 3-20-18) 
Chapter 16 - OBSCENITY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Public profanity, § 17-16; use of obscene language over telephone, § 23-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of council to adopt ordinance similar to the provisions of this article, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-389. 

Sec. 16-1. - "Obscene" defined. 
    The word "obscene," where it appears in this article, shall mean that which, considered as a whole, has as its dominant theme or purpose an appeal to the prurient interest in sex, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, excretory functions or products thereof or sadomasochistic abuse, and which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters and which, taken as a whole, does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372. 
Sec. 16-2. - Obscene items enumerated. 
    For the purposes of this article, obscene items shall include: 
(1)  Any obscene book; or 
(2)  Any obscene leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, booklet, picture, painting, drawing, photograph, film, negative, slide, motion picture; or 
(3)  Any obscene figure, object, article, instrument, novelty device, or recording or transcription used or intended to be used in disseminating any obscene song, ballad, words or sounds. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-373. 
Sec. 16-3. - Production, publication, sale, possession, etc., of obscene items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly: 
(1)  Prepare any obscene item for the purpose of sale or distribution; or 
(2)  Print, copy, manufacture, produce or reproduce any obscene item for purposes of sale or distribution; or 
(3)  Publish, sell, rent, lend, transport in intrastate commerce, or distribute or exhibit any obscene item, or offer to do any of these things; or 
(4)  Have in his possession with intent to sell, rent, lend, transport or distribute any obscene item. 
Possession in public or in a public place of any obscene item shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "distribute" shall mean delivery in person, by mail or messenger or by any other means by which obscene items may pass from one person to another. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-374. 
Sec. 16-4. - Obscene exhibitions and performances generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to: 
(1)  Produce, promote, prepare, present, manage, direct, carry on or participate in any obscene exhibitions or performances, including the exhibition or performance of any obscene motion picture, play, drama, show, entertainment, exposition, tableau or scene; provided, that no employee of any person or legal entity operating a theater, garden, building, structure, room or place which presents such obscene exhibition or performance shall be subject to prosecution under this section if the employee is not the manager of the theater or an officer of such entity, and has no financial interest in such theater other than receiving salary and wages; or 
(2)  Own, lease or manage any theater, garden, building, structure, room or place and lease, let, lend or permit such theater, garden, building, structure, room or place to be used for the purpose of presenting such obscene exhibition or performance or to fail to post prominently therein the name and address of a person resident in the locality who is the manager of such theater, garden, building, structure, room or place. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-375. 
Sec. 16-5. - Advertising obscene items, exhibitions or performances generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly prepare, print, publish or circulate, or cause to be prepared, printed, published or circulated, any notice or advertisement of any obscene item referred to in section 16-2 or of any obscene performance or exhibition referred to in section 16-4, stating or indicating where such obscene item, exhibition or performance may be purchased, obtained, seen or heard. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-276. 
Sec. 16-6. - Obscene placards, posters, bills, etc. 
    Every person who knowingly exposes, places, displays, posts, exhibits, paints, prints or marks, or causes to be exposed, placed, displayed, posted, exhibited, painted, printed or marked, in or on any building, structure, billboard, wall or fence, or on any street, or in or upon any public place, any placard, poster, banner, bill, writing or picture which is obscene, or which advertises or promotes any obscene item referred to in section 16-2 or any obscene exhibition or performance referred to in section 16-4, or who knowingly permits the same to be displayed on property belonging to or controlled by him, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-377. 
Sec. 16-7. - Coercing acceptance of obscene articles or publications. 
    No person shall, as a condition to any sale, allocation, consignment or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or publication, require that the purchaser or consignee receive for resale any other article, book or other publication which is obscene; nor shall any person deny or threaten to deny any franchise or impose or threaten to impose any penalty, financial or otherwise, by reason of the failure or refusal of any person to accept such articles, books or publications, or by reason of the return thereof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-378. 
Sec. 16-8. - Photographs, slides and motion pictures. 
(a)  Every person who knowingly: 
(1)  Photographs himself or any other person, for purposes of preparing an obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; or 
(2)  Models, poses, acts or otherwise assists in the preparation of any obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; 
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-382. 
Sec. 16-9. - Indecent exposure. 
    No person shall intentionally make an obscene display or exposure of his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where others are present, or procure another to so expose himself. 
(Code 1971, § 17-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387. 
Sec. 16-10. - Employing or permitting minor to assist in offense under article. 
    Every person who knowingly, hires, employs, uses or permits any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to do or assist in doing any act or thing constituting an offense under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-379. 
Sec. 16-11. - Exceptions from article. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any book, magazine or other printed manuscript material by any library, school or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation. 
(2)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any work of art by any museum of fine arts, school or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation. 
(3)  The exhibition or performance of any play, drama, tableau or motion picture by any theater, museum of fine arts, school or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-383. 
Secs. 16-12-16-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROHIBITED SALES AND LOANS TO JUVENILES 

Sec. 16-23. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Harmful to juveniles means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, when it: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of juveniles, 
(2)  Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for juveniles, and 
(3)  Is, when taken as a whole, lacking in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for juveniles. 
    Juvenile means a person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Knowingly means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both the character and content of any material described herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and the age of the juvenile; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such juvenile. 
    Nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Sadomasochistic abuse means actual or explicitly simulated flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
    Sexual conduct means actual or explicitly simulated acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical contact in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification with a person clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such be female, breast. 
    Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-390. 
Sec. 16-24. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell or loan to a juvenile: 
(1)  Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles, or 
(2)  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in paragraph (1) of this subsection, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to juveniles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell to a juvenile an admission ticket or pass, or to knowingly admit a juvenile to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles or to exhibit any such motion picture at any such premises which are not designed to prevent viewing from any public way of such motion picture by juveniles not admitted to any such premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any juvenile falsely to represent to any person mentioned in subsection (a) or subsection (b) hereof, or to his agent, that such juvenile is eighteen (18) years of age or older, with the intent to procure any material set forth in subsection (a), or with the intent to procure such juvenile's admission to any motion picture, show or other presentation, as set forth in subsection (b). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false representation to any person mentioned in subsection (a) or subsection (b) hereof or to his agent, that he is the parent or guardian of any juvenile, or that any juvenile is eighteen (18) years of age, with the intent to procure any material set forth in subsection (a), or with the intent to procure such juvenile's admission to any motion picture, show or other presentation, as set forth in subsection (b). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391. 
Chapter 17 - OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Gambling, Ch. 12; noise, Ch. 15; obscenity, Ch. 16; weapons, Ch. 26. 

Sec. 17-1. - Violation of rules, regulations or orders. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the violation of any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority vested in him or it by law, the provisions of this Code, or any ordinance or resolution shall be unlawful. 
Sec. 17-2. - Common-law or statutory nuisances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain within the city anything which is deemed a nuisance under the common law or the statutes of the state. The penalty for each violation of this section shall be a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and the court may, in addition to such fine, order the nuisance to be abated or removed, prescribing the time within which such order shall be executed. Should the nuisance be not abated or removed in accordance with the court's order, the offending person shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day that such nuisance shall thereafter continue, and the court may cause such nuisance to be abated or removed at the cost of the offending person. 
(Code 1971, § 17-27; Ord. No. 85-1700-289, 8-6-85) 
State Law reference- General authority of city with respect to abatement of nuisances, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-14, 15.1-867. 
Sec. 17-3. - Attempt to commit misdemeanor. 
    Every person who attempts to commit an offense which is a misdemeanor shall be punishable by the same punishment prescribed for the offense the commission of which was the object of the attempt. 
(Code 1971, § 17-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-27. 
Sec. 17-4. - Obstructing justice by threats or force. 
    No person shall, by threats or force, attempt to intimidate or impede a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, witness, officer of a court or any law-enforcement officer in the discharge of his duty, or obstruct or impede the administration of justice in any court. 
(Code 1971, § 17-33) 
Cross reference- Resisting or interfering with arrests, § 18-6; false reports to police, § 18-7; refusal to assist police officer, § 18-8. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460. 
Sec. 17-5. - Resisting, obstructing, etc., city officers or employees who work for city. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, abuse, obstruct, intimidate or interfere with any officer or employee of the city in the performance of his duties or any contractor or other person in the execution of any work for the city. 
(Code 1971, § 17-38) 
Sec. 17-6. - Falsification or destruction of public records. 
    If a clerk of any court or other public officer fraudulently makes a false entry, or erases, alters, secretes or destroys any record in his keeping and belonging to his office, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-472. 
Sec. 17-7. - Calling ambulance or fire-fighting apparatus without cause; malicious activation of fire alarm in public building. 
(a)  Any person who, without just cause therefor, calls or summons, by telephone or otherwise, any ambulance or fire fighting apparatus, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who maliciously activates a manual or automatic fire alarm in any building used for public assembly or for other public use, including, but not limited to, schools, theaters, stores, office buildings, shopping centers and malls, coliseums and arenas, regardless of whether fire apparatus responds or not, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212. 
Sec. 17-8. - Sale of beer or wine prohibited between certain hours. 
    The sale of beer or wine within the city is hereby prohibited between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. Sundays, and between 10:00 p.m. Sundays and 6:00 a.m. Mondays of each week. 
(Code 1971, § 17-9; Ord. No. 71-1700-45, 4-3-71) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 4-97. 
Sec. 17-9. - Curfew for minors. 
    The purpose of this section is to: (i) promote the general welfare and protect the general public through the reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the city; (ii) promote the safety and well-being of the city's youngest citizens, persons under the age of eighteen (18), whose inexperience renders them particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities, particularly unlawful drug activities, and to being victimized by older perpetrators of crime; and (iii) foster and strengthen parental responsibility for children. 
(a)  Definitions. As used within this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. 
    Curfew hours refers to the hours of 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday through 5:00 a.m. of the following day, and 11:59 p.m. on Friday and Saturday through 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
    Emergency refers to unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb or property. The term includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural disasters, automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances. 
    Establishment refers to any privately-owned place of business within the city operated for a profit, to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. With respect to such establishment, the term "Operator" shall mean any person, and any firm, association, partnership (and the members or partners thereof) and/or any corporation (and the officers thereof) conducting or managing that establishment. 
    Minor refers to any person under eighteen (18) years of age who has not been emancipated by court order entered pursuant to Section 16.1-333 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
    Officer refers to a police or other law enforcement officer charged with the duty of enforcing the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and/or the ordinances of the City of Manassas Park. 
    Parent refers to: 
(1)  A person who is a minor's biological or adoptive parent and who has legal custody of a minor (including either parent, if custody is shared under a court order or agreement); 
(2)  A person who is the biological or adoptive parent with whom a minor regularly resides; 
(3)  A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the minor; and/or 
(4)  A person eighteen (18) years of age or older standing in loco parentis (as indicated by the authorization of an individual listed in part(s) (1), (2) or (3) of this definition, above, for the person to assume the care or physical custody' of the child, or as indicated by any other circumstances). 
    Person refers to an individual, not to any association, corporation, or any other legal entity. 
    Public Place refers to any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to: streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, parks, and/or the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities and shops. 
    Remain refers to the following actions: 
(1)  To linger or stay at or upon a place; and/or 
(2)  To fail to leave a place when requested to do so by an officer or by the owner, operator or other person in control of that place. 
    Temporary care facility refers to a non-locked, non-restrictive shelter at which minors may wait, under visual supervision, to be retrieved by a parent. No minors waiting in such facility shall be handcuffed and/or secured (by handcuffs or otherwise) to any stationary object. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor, during curfew hours, to remain in or upon any public place within the city, to remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon, or to remain in or upon the premises of any Establishment within the city, unless: 
(1)  The minor is accompanied by a parent; or 
(2)  The minor is involved in an emergency; or 
(3)  The minor is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or returning home from such activity, without detour or stop; or 
(4)  The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or she resides with a parent; or 
(5)  The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious, or civic organization, by a public organization or agency or by another similar organization or entity, which activity is supervised by adults, and/or the minor is going to or returning from such an activity without detour or stop; or 
(6)  The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent, and the minor has in his or her possession a writing signed by the parent containing the following information: the name, signature, address and telephone number of the parent authorizing the errand, the telephone number where the parent may be reached during the errand, the name of the minor, and a brief description of the errand, the minor's destination(s) and the hours the minor is authorized to be engaged in the errand; or 
(7)  The minor is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or terminating in, the City of Manassas Park; or 
(8)  The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a minor's parent to knowingly permit, allow or encourage such minor to violate subsection 17-9(b). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person who is the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a violation of subsection 17-9(b). 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any establishment, or for any person who is an employee thereof, to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present at the establishment after curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person (including any minor) to give a false name, address, or telephone number to any officer investigating a possible violation of this section. 
(g)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Minors. Before taking any enforcement action hereunder, an officer shall make an immediate investigation for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the presence of a minor in a public place, motor vehicle and/or establishment within the city during curfew hours is in violation of subsection 17-9(b). 
a.  If such investigation reveals that the presence of such minor is in violation of 17-9(b), then: 
1.  If the minor has not previously been issued a warning for any such violation within the past twelve (12) months, then the officer shall issue a verbal warning to the minor, which shall be followed by a written warning mailed by the police department to the minor and his or her parent(s); or 
2.  If the minor has previously been issued a warning for any such violation within the past twelve (12) months, then the officer shall charge the minor with a violation of this Ordinance and shall issue a summons requiring the minor to appear in court (Ref. Va. Code § 16.1-260(H)(1)); and 
b.  As soon as practicable, the officer shall: 
1.  Release the minor to his or her parent(s); or 
2.  Place the minor in a temporary care facility for a period not to exceed the remainder of the curfew hours, so that his or her parent(s) may retrieve the minor; or 
3.  If a minor refuses to give an officer his or her name and address, refuses to give the name and address of his or her parent(s), or if no parent can be located prior to the end of the applicable curfew hours, or if located, no parent appears to accept custody of the minor, the minor may be taken to a non-secure crisis center or juvenile shelter and/or may be taken to a judge or intake officer of the juvenile court to be dealt with in the manner and pursuant to such procedures as required by law. (Ref. Va. Code § 16.1-260(H)(1); § 16.1-278.6; § 16.1-241(A)(1)) 
(2)  Others. If an investigation by an officer reveals that a person has violated 17-9(c), (d) and/or (e), and if the person has not been issued a warning with respect to any such violation, an officer shall issue a verbal warning to the person, which shall he followed by a written warning mailed by the police department to the person; however, if any such warning has previously been issued to that person then the officer shall charge the person with a violation and shall issue a summons directing the person to appear in court. 
(h)  Each violation of section 17-9 shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 75-1700-69, 1-7-75; Ord. No. 00-1700-633, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 17-10. - Causing or encouraging minors to commit misdemeanors, etc. 
    Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, including the parent of any child, who shall cause or encourage any child under the age of eighteen (18) years to commit any misdemeanor, or who shall send or cause any such child to go into any place for an unlawful purpose, or who shall in any way subject any such child to vicious or immoral influences, or who shall induce, cause, encourage or contribute toward the dependency, neglect or delinquency of any such child, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. When the offense consists of having or attempting to have intercourse with any female child under the age of eighteen (18) years, the fact that such female was not of previous chaste character or had been married may be shown in mitigation. 
(Ord. No. 72-1700-47, 2-1-72; Ord. No. 00-1700-633, 10-3-00) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-371. 
Sec. 17-11. - Assault and battery. 
    No person shall commit a simple assault or an assault and battery upon another person. 
(Code 1971, § 17-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57. 
Sec. 17-12. - Abusive language. 
    No person shall, in the presence or hearing of another, curse or abuse such other person, or use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relations, or otherwise use such language, under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-416. 
Sec. 17-13. - Disorderly conduct generally. 
    Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following shall be guilty of disorderly conduct, which is a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct. 
(4)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(5)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(6)  Jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place. 
(7)  Collect in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes. 
(8)  Frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device. 
(9)  Assemble with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or aid or abet therein. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Frequent any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated. 
(12)  Act in a dangerous manner toward others. 
(13)  Use "fighting words" directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil. 
(14)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another. 
(15)  By acts of violence, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(16)  Congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority. 
(Code 1971, § 17-17; Ord. No. 01-1700-648, § 1, 2-6-01) 
Sec. 17-14. - Disorderly conduct in public places. 
    A person is guilty of disorderly conduct and a misdemeanor if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he: 
(1)  In any street, highway, public building, or while in or on a public conveyance, or public place, engages in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; provided, however, such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under other provisions of this Code; or 
(2)  Wilfully, or being intoxicated, whether wilfully or not, disrupts any meeting of the city council or a division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if such disruption prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of such meeting or has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such disruption is directed; provided, however, such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under other provisions of this Code. 
    The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance or meeting may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. 
(Code 1971, §§ 17-18-17-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and authority of city to adopt above section, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 17-15. - Loitering prohibited. 
(a)  [Loitering prohibited.] It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in, upon or around any public place or place open to the public in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Interfere with, impede or hinder the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(2)  Interfere with, obstruct, harass, curse, threaten or do physical harm to another person; 
(3)  Threaten or do physical harm to the property of another person; or 
(4)  Create, by works, acts or other conduct, a present danger of disorderly conduct or a breach of the peace. 
(b)  [Identification.] It shall be unlawful for any person at a public place or place open to the public to refuse to furnish a proper form of identification or otherwise properly identify himself by name and address to a uniformed police officer or properly identified police officer not in uniform if the surrounding circumstances are such as to indicate to a reasonable person that the public safety requires such identification. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Loiter. To stand around or remain, to be slow in moving, to dawdle, to delay, to saunter, to lag behind, or to remain in a parked motor vehicle. 
(2)  Place open to the public. Any place open to the public or any place to which the public is invited, whether owned or operated by public or private interests, including, but not limited to, any place in, on or around any privately-owned place of business, parking lot, vacant lot, place of worship, or place of amusement or entertainment. 
(3)  Public place. Any area that is used or held out for use by the public, whether owned or operated by public or private interests, including, but not limited to, any public street, road, highway, alley, land, sidewalk, crosswalk, place of amusement or entertainment, park, parking lot, or vacant lot. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(e)  [Free association and assembly.] Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the constitutional right to free association and assembly. 
(Code 1971, § 17-25; Ord. No. 03-1700-722, § 1, 8-19-03) 
Sec. 17-16. - Public profanity and drunkenness. 
(a)  If any person profanely curses or swears or is drunk in public he shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  If any person shall be convicted of being drunk in public three (3) times within one (1) year in this city, upon the third or any subsequent conviction for such offense within the period of one (1) year, such person shall be punished as for a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, §§ 17-21, 17-36) 
Cross reference- Obscenity, Ch. 16; use of profane language over telephone, § 23-3. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388; authority of city to adopt above section, § 18.2-389. 
Sec. 17-17. - Adultery and fornication generally. 
(a)  Any person, being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any person not his or her spouse shall be deemed guilty of adultery. 
(b)  Any person, not being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any other person shall be deemed guilty of fornication. 
(c)  No person shall commit adultery or fornication within the city. Any person violating this provision shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, §§ 17-2-17-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-344, 18.2-365. 
Sec. 17-18. - Adultery and fornication by persons forbidden to marry. 
    If any person commits adultery or fornication, as defined in section 17-17 with any person whom he or she is forbidden by law to marry, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to a person committing adultery or fornication with his daughter or granddaughter, or with her son or grandson, or her father or his mother. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-366, which declares adultery or fornication by persons mentioned in the proviso to be a felony. 
Sec. 17-19. - Lewd and lascivious cohabitation. 
    If any persons, not married to each other, lewdly and lasciviously associate and cohabit together, or whether married or not, be guilty of open and gross lewdness and lasciviousness, each of them shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Upon a repetition of the offense, each of them shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-345. 
Sec. 17-20. - Prostitution generally. 
    Any person who, for money or its equivalent, commits adultery or fornication, as defined in section 17-17, or offers to commit adultery or fornication and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof, shall be guilty of being a prostitute, or prostitution, which shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1971, § 17-52) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-346. 
Sec. 17-21. - Bawdy places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any bawdy place, or to frequent, reside in or at or visit, for immoral purposes, any bawdy place. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "bawdy place" shall mean any place, within or without any building or structure, in this city which, is used or is to be used for lewdness, assignation or prostitution, and the term shall include, but shall not be limited to, every house of prostitution, house of ill fame, bawdy house, house of assignation and brothel. 
(Code 1971, §§ 17-53, 17-54) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-347. 
Sec. 17-22. - Aiding prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or any officer, employee or agent of any firm, association or corporation, with knowledge of or good reason to believe the immoral purpose of such visit, to take or transport or assist in taking or transporting or offer to take or transport, on foot or in any way, any person to a place, whether within or without any building or structure, used or to be used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution within the city, or to procure or assist in procuring, for the purpose of illicit sexual intercourse, or to give any information or direction to any person with intent to enable such person to commit an act of prostitution. 
(Code 1971, § 17-55) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-348. 
Sec. 17-23. - Using vehicle to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or chauffeur of any vehicle, with knowledge or reason to believe the same is to be used for such purpose, to use the same or to allow the same to be used for the purpose of prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, or to aid or promote such prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse by the use of such vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 17-56) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-349. 
Sec. 17-24. - Confinement of persons convicted of violating sections 17-20-17-23. 
    Every person convicted of violating any of the provisions of sections 17-20 through 17-23 shall be punished as for a Class 1 misdemeanor; provided that, in every case in which a city or county farm or hospital is available for the confinement of persons so convicted, confinement may be in such farm or hospital, in the discretion of the court or judge. 
(Code 1971, § 17-57) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-350. 
Sec. 17-25. - Sale, distribution, possession, etc., of controlled substances (drugs). 
(a)  As used in this section, the terms "controlled substances" and "Schedules III, IV, V and VI" refer to those terms as they are used or defined in the State Drug Control Act, being chapter 15.1 (§ 54-524.1 et seq.) of title 54 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  Except as authorized provided in the Drug Control Act referred to above, it shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, give, distribute, or possess with intent to manufacture, sell, give or distribute, any controlled substance classified in Schedule III, IV, V or VI within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally possess a controlled substance classified in Schedule III or marijuana, within the city, unless the substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of his professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by the Drug Control Act referred to in subsection (a) above. Upon the prosecution of a person for a violation of this subsection, ownership or occupancy of the premises or vehicle upon or in which a controlled substance was found shall not create a presumption that such person either knowingly or intentionally possessed such controlled substance. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conspire to commit any offense defined in this section. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to commit any offense defined in this section. 
(f)  Any person violating any provision of this section, except subsection (e), shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Any person violating subsection (e) shall be deemed guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-247, 18.2-248, 18.2-250, 18.2-256, 18.2-257. 
Sec. 17-26. - Premises frequented by persons under influence of illegally obtained controlled substances or used for illegal possession, distribution, etc., of such substances. 
    Any office, store, shop, restaurant, dance hall, theater, poolroom, clubhouse, storehouse, warehouse, dwelling house, apartment, building of any kind, vehicle, vessel, boat or aircraft which, with the knowledge of the owner, lessor, agent of any such lessor, manager, chief executive officer or operator thereof, is frequented by persons under the influence of illegally obtained controlled substances, as defined in § 54-524.2 of the Code of Virginia, or for the purpose of illegally obtaining possession of, manufacturing or distributing such controlled substances, or which is used for the illegal possession, manufacture or distribution of such controlled substances, shall be deemed a common nuisance. It shall be unlawful for such owner, lessor, agent of any such lessor, manager, chief executive officer or operator to knowingly permit, establish, keep or maintain such a common nuisance. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-258. 
Sec. 17-27. - Inhaling drugs or other noxious chemical substances or causing others to do so. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deliberately smell or inhale any drugs or any other noxious chemical substances, including but not limited to fingernail polish or model airplane glue, containing any ketones, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons or vapors, with the intent to become intoxicated, inebriated, excited, stupefied or to dull the brain or nervous system. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than one duly licensed, to deliberately cause, invite or induce any person to smell or inhale any drugs or any other noxious substances or chemicals containing any ketone, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons or vapors with the intent to intoxicate, inebriate, excite, stupefy or to dull the brain or nervous system of such person. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-264. 
Sec. 17-28. - Fraudulent use of coin-operated machines or devices. 
(a)  No person shall operate, cause to be operated or attempt to operate or cause to be operated any coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine that operates on the coin-in-the-slot principle, whether of like kind or not, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, in connection with the use or enjoyment of telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges or any other service, or the sale of merchandise or other property, by means of a slug, or any false, counterfeit, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever, not authorized by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine. 
(b)  No person shall obtain or receive telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges, merchandise or any other service or property from any such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, without depositing in or surrendering to such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine lawful coin of the United States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine. 
(c)  Any violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-179. 
Sec. 17-29. - False statements for publication. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly and willfully state, deliver or transmit, by any means whatever, to any publisher, or employee of a publisher, of any newspaper, magazine or other publication, any false or untrue statement concerning any person or corporation, with intent that the same shall be published. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-209. 
Sec. 17-30. - Petit larceny. 
    Any person who: 
(1)  Commits larceny from the person of another of money or other thing of value of less than five dollars ($5.00); or 
(2)  Commits simple larceny, not from the person of another, of goods and chattels of the value of less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), shall be deemed guilty of petit larceny, which shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-32; Ord. No. 01-1700-648, § 2, 2-6-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-96. 
Sec. 17-31. - Shoplifting. 
(a)  Whoever, without authority, with the intention of converting goods or merchandise to his own or another's use without having paid the full purchase price thereof, or of defrauding the owner thereof out of the value of the goods or merchandise: 
(1)  Willfully conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, or 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on such goods or merchandise, or transfers the goods from one container to another, or 
(3)  Counsels, assists, aids or abets another in the performance of any of the above acts, 
shall be deemed guilty of larceny and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by subsections (b) and (c) below. The willful concealment of goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, while still on the premises thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to convert and defraud the owner thereof out of the value of the goods or merchandise. 
(b)  Any person convicted for the first time of an offense under this section, when the value of the goods or merchandise involved in the offense is less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), shall be as punished as for a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person convicted of an offense under this section, when the value of the goods or merchandise involved in the offense is less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and it is alleged in the warrant or information on which he is convicted, and admitted, or found by the jury or judge before whom he is tried, that he has been before convicted in the Commonwealth of Virginia for a like offense, regardless of the value of the goods or merchandise involved in the prior conviction, shall be confined in jail not less than thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months. 
(d)  A merchant, agent or employee of the merchant, who causes the arrest of any person pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be held civilly liable for unlawful detention, if such detention does not exceed one hour, slander, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, false arrest, or assault and battery of the person so arrested, whether such arrest takes place on the premises of the merchant or after close pursuit from such premises by such merchant, his agent or employee; provided that, in causing the arrest of such person, the merchant, agent or employee of the merchant, had, at the time of such arrest, probable cause to believe that the person had shoplifted or committed willful concealment of goods or merchandise. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, "agents of the merchant" shall include attendants at any parking lot owned or leased by the merchant, or generally used by customers of the merchant through any contract or agreement between the owner of the parking lot and the merchant. 
(Code 1971, §§ 17-13-17-15; Ord. No. 01-1700-648, § 3, 2-6-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-103-18.2-106. See § 18.2-104 for conditions under which the above offense is a felony. 
Sec. 17-32. - Damaging property generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously damage or injure any property not his own, real or personal, public or private. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-47; Ord. No. 01-1700-648, § 5, 2-6-01) 
Cross reference- Interfering or tampering with fire-fighting equipment, § 9-3; damage or injury to property of sewer plant or waterworks, § 25-11. 
State Law reference- Damaging property, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137 et seq. 
Sec. 17-33. - Injuring trees on streets and public grounds. 
(a)  No person shall wilfully injure in any way any tree on any street or in the public places of the city. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-46; Ord. No. 01-1700-648, § 6, 2-6-01) 
Cross reference- Cutting, trimming or removal of trees on streets, §§ 20-10, 20-11. 
Sec. 17-34. - Defacing, etc., signs posted by city. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, destroy or remove any sign posted by the city. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-48; Ord. No. 01-1700-648, § 7, 2-6-01) 
Sec. 17-35. - Interfering or tampering with utility property. 
(a)  No person shall interfere with or in any way tamper with, any telephone or telegraph wire or other property of any telephone, telegraph or telecasting company, or with any of the lights, electric wires or other property used in lighting the city. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, §§ 17-50, 17-51; Ord. No. 01-1700-648, § 8, 2-6-01) 
Cross reference- Telephones, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 17-36. - Injuring, tampering with, etc., vehicles, aircraft, etc. 
(a)  No person shall, individually or in association with one or more others, wilfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part of any vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or in any other manner wilfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel. 
(b)  Any person who shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, climb into or upon such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, or who, while a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crank or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crank or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad in motion, with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This subsection shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a bona fide repossession of a vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel by the holder of a lien on such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or by agents or employees of such lienholder. 
(Code 1971, §§ 16-5, 17-42-17-45) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-146-18.2-148. 
Sec. 17-37. - Posted advertising matter etc., on utility poles, highway signs, trees, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tack or otherwise attach any advertising matter or other substance to any telephone, telegraph or electric transmission pole, to any traffic or highway sign or signal or to any tree within the city. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-5; Ord. No. 01-1700-648, § 4, 2-6-01) 
Cross reference- Advertising generally, Ch. 3; prohibition of zoning ordinance against attachment of signs to utility poles and trees, § 31-29(e)(9). 
Sec. 17-38. - Destroying, defacing, etc., properly posted advertisements or public notices. 
    Any person pulling down, writing on, cutting or otherwise defacing any handbill, advertisement or public notice of any kind posted in a proper place shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 17-39. - Trespass in or on municipal buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass in or on the public buildings or other structures belonging to the city. 
Sec. 17-39.1. - Hunting of birds, mammals or relics on city and private property. 
(a)  The city council hereby declares that all land owned by the city, and all land under option to purchase by the city, located within the city and Prince William County, Virginia (specifically the Signal Hill Tract, the Bull Run Tract, the Bobby Tract, the Conner Tract and all other unnamed land owned by the city) shall be posted to all hunting of birds and mammals (game and nongame) and it shall be unlawful for any person to carry or have in his possession any weapons legal in Virginia for hunting purposes on such land. 
(b)  The hunting of relics or the use or possession of metal detectors shall be unlawful on all of the land referred to in subsection (a) above, unless written permission, authorized by the city council and signed by the mayor, is granted. 
(c)  Any title owner of real property within the corporate limits of the city may request, in writing, that the city enforce the prohibition on the hunting of relics or the use of metal detectors, set forth in subsection (b) above, on such private property. Following receipt of such request by the city, the city will thereafter enforce the prohibition on the hunting of relics or the use of metal detectors on such private property until such time as the title owner of such private property rescinds his request in writing or the governing body amends or revokes this subsection accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 78-1700-129, 10-3-78; Ord. No. 07-1700-831, § 5, 5-15-07) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 5; weapons, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 17-40. - Entering or remaining on property of another after having been forbidden to do so. 
    No person shall, without authority of law, go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign posted on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof at a place where it may be reasonable seen. 
(Code 1971, § 17-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119. 
Sec. 17-41. - Instigating, etc., trespass by others; preventing service to persons not forbidden on premises. 
    No person shall solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate or procure another or others to go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, knowing such other person or persons to have been forbidden, either orally or in writing, to do so by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or knowing such other person or persons to have been forbidden to do so by a sign posted on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof at a place where it may reasonably be seen; and no person shall, on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof prevent or seek to prevent the owner, lessee, custodian, person in charge or any of his employees from rendering service to any person or persons not so forbidden. 
(Code 1971, § 17-59) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-120. 
Sec. 17-42. - Peeping toms. 
    No person shall unlawfully enter upon the property of another, in the nighttime, and secretly or furtively peep through or attempt to so peep, into, through, or spy through, a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure be permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy be permanent or temporary. 
(Code 1971, § 17-60) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130. 
Sec. 17-43. - Unlawful entry on church or school property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of some person authorized to give such consent, to go or enter upon, in the nighttime, the premises or property of any church or upon any school property for any purpose other than to attend a meeting or service held or conducted in such church or school property. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-62) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-128. 
Sec. 17-44. - Unlawful entry on cemetery property. 
    If any person, without the consent of the owner, proprietor or custodian, go or enter in the nighttime, upon the premises, property, driveways or walks of any cemetery, either public or private, for any purpose other than to visit the burial lot or grave of some member of his family, he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-125. 
Sec. 17-45. - Entering premises of another for purpose of damaging property or interfering with its use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the land, dwelling, outhouse or any other building of another for the purpose of damaging such property or any of the contents thereof or in any manner to interfere with the rights of the owner, user or the occupant thereof to use such property free from interference. 
(Code 1971, § 17-63) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-121. 
Sec. 17-46. - Spitting on floors, etc., of public buildings or conveyances or on sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate upon the floor, stairway or any other part of any public building or place where the public assembles, or upon the floor or any other part of any public conveyance, or upon any sidewalk within the city. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-322. 
Sec. 17-47. - Pollution of state waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or deposit, or to cause or allow to be discharged or deposited, in any state waters of the city, any wastes, sewerage, rubbish, trash, garbage, dirt, soil or any matter causing or aiding pollution, or to discharge or deposit, or to cause or allow to be discharged or deposited, any wastes, sewerage, rubbish, trash, garbage, dirt, soil or any matter causing or aiding pollution on any property in this city in any manner so as to allow such to be washed into any state waters by storm or flood waters. 
(b)  The meaning of "pollution" and "state waters," as used in this section, shall be as defined by section 62.1-44.3, Code of Virginia. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the discharge or deposit of waste into state waters, when such discharging or depositing has been approved by the state water control board. The provisions of this section shall not in any manner affect nor be applicable to any agricultural or farming operation. 
(Code 1971, § 11-2) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit pollution of water, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-292. 
Sec. 17-48. - Accumulations of trash, garbage, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any accumulation of trash, garbage, refuse, litter or noxious, unsanitary or offensive matter or other substance, which might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the city, to be or remain on any property in his possession or under his control. 
(b)  The owner of any property in the city shall remove any condition described in subsection (a) from such property at intervals to be designated by the council. Reasonable notice of the date fixed by the council for such removal shall be given by newspaper publication, mail or delivery of a written notice to the owner of the property. Upon the failure of the owner of the property to comply with such notice, the city manager may have such trash, garbage, refuse, litter and/or other substance removed and bill the owner for the work. Upon the owner's failure to pay such bill by tax billing time, such bill shall be placed upon the tax bill of the owner so delinquent and collected as taxes are collected. 
(Code 1971, §§ 22-7, 22-8) 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash generally, Ch. 13; taxation, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11. See also, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867. 
Sec. 17-49. - Grass and weeds. 
(a)  Definition. Weeds are vegetative growth generally deemed to exhale unpleasant and noxious odors; to be foreign growth, undesirable, rank or detrimental to the public health or safety; or to have minimal use or value. 
(b)  Cutting required. The person owning or having possession or charge of any premises, vacant lot, private roadway, whether in use or not, or other lands within the city, within five hundred (500) feet of any inhabited building or dwelling, shall cut the grass and weeds on such property when such grass or weeds reach a height of ten (10) inches or greater. 
(c)  Failure to cut, generally. 
(1)  When any grass or weeds with a height of ten (10) inches or greater are found on such property, the city manager shall give written notice to the person owning or having possession or charge of same, requiring such grass or weeds to be cut within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice. Notice sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books shall be deemed in compliance with the notice requirement to the owner. 
(2)  If the written notice is undeliverable or if, after receipt of the written notice, the person owning or having possession or charge of the property on which the violation exists fails to cut grass or weeds, the city manager shall cut such grass or weeds, whether the property is occupied or vacant. If the person owning or having possession or charge of the property denies free access for such purposes, the city manager may proceed after obtaining a warrant. Costs and expenses incurred by the city manager shall be assessed against the person owning or having possession or charge of the property and shall be recoverable from the person owning or having possession or charge in the same way as taxes and levies. 
(3)  Any person owning or having possession or charge of the property may appeal any action of the city manager under this section within ten (10) days of such action. All hearing requests shall be in writing and directed to the city manager who shall forward the request to the local board of appeals within ten (10) days of receipt. All hearings shall be before the local board of appeals. The city manager shall set a time and place for the hearing, which shall occur within ten (10) days of the request for the hearing, and shall so notify the appellant to correct or eliminate the violation in the same manner as the city manager or may require other action or may direct that no further action is necessary. 
(4)  When the written notice as provided for in this article is undeliverable, the city manager shall cause a public notice to be posted on the property for a period of ten (10) days stating the nature of the violation, the action which is being taken to correct or eliminate the violation and an address and/or telephone number where additional information can be obtained concerning the violation. Such posting or notice shall not preclude the city manager from cutting the grass or weeds on the property. 
(d)  Penalty for failure to cut. Any person who shall be in violation of the provisions of this section and who, upon receipt of written notice from the city manager to correct the same, shall fail or refuse to correct the violation within the time prescribed, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by section 17-2. 
(Code 1971, § 22-9; Ord. No. 85-1700-289, 8-6-85) 
Cross reference- Taxation, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11. See also, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867. 
Sec. 17-50. - Stagnant water. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any stagnant water to be or remain on his property. 
(Code 1971, § 22-6) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require the raising or drainage of grounds subject to be covered by stagnant water, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867. 
Sec. 17-51. - Abandoned or discarded refrigerators and other airtight containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two (2) cubic feet of clear space, which is airtight, without first removing the doors or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed, or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant, or is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(c)  A violation of this section constitutes a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 17-23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319. 
Sec. 17-52. - Fencing of junk yards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either owner or tenant, to place, store or abandon, or permit to be placed, stored or abandoned, any junk, disused machinery, equipment or motor vehicle on any lot or other premises bordering upon any street in the city, unless such junk, disused machinery, equipment or motor vehicle is concealed from such street by a tight boarding or fence not less than six (6) feet in height, which boarding or fence shall be constructed and maintained in a sightly and workmanlike manner by the owner of such lot or premises or his bona fide tenant, so as completely to screen from the street a view of such junk, disused machinery, equipment or motor vehicle. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the word "junk" shall mean any secondhand or used material or machine or part thereof. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect or limit any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city providing for the licensing of junk dealers or junk collectors or further regulating the conduct of a junk dealer's business. 
(Code 1971, §§ 13-1-13-3) 
Cross reference- License tax for junk dealers, § 14-69; screening requirements of zoning ordinance, § 31-33(d). 
Sec. 17-53. - Open storage of inoperative motor vehicles in residential districts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure, on any property within a residential district, as established by the zoning ordinance, any motor vehicle whose condition is such that it is economically impractical to make it operative. 
(Code 1971, § 22-10) 
Cross reference- Parking, 24-47 et seq.; zoning ordinance, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.1. 
Sec. 17-54. - Repairing or dismantling automobiles, boats, etc., in residential districts. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "repair" does not include minor adjustments or replacement of parts, where such adjustments or replacement may reasonably be expected to be accomplished within a seventy-two-hour period. 
(b)  No person shall repair or dismantle in the open, in any residential district established by the zoning ordinance, any automobile, boat or other vehicle or conveyance without having first obtained a permit to do so from the office of the building official. Each such permit shall specify the time period in which the work shall be accomplished, which time period shall not be more than fifteen (15) days; provided that, the permit may be renewed for one additional fifteen-day period. 
(c)  No person shall repair a vehicle until a permit is secured from the office of the building official. The cost of the permit is seventeen dollars ($17.00). A performance deposit of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be required. The deposit will be refunded only if the vehicle is repaired and operable within fifteen (15) days or within thirty (30) days if an extension has been granted. 
(d)  Applicants for a permit under this section shall be required, as a condition to the granting of the permit, to authorize the police department to remove and store, at the owner's expense, any conveyance or parts thereof, or both, where the dismantling or repair is not completed within the time specified in the permit and such permit has not been renewed. 
(Code 1971, §§ 22-11-22-15; Ord. No. 86-1700-339, 6-17-86) 
Cross reference- Loud and excessive noise from repairing vehicles, § 15-9; zoning ordinance, Ch. 31. 
Sec. 17-55. - Wells and pits-Filling prior to abandonment. 
(a)  Every person who has caused to be dug on his own land or the land of another any well or pit shall fill such well or pit with earth, so that the same shall not be dangerous to human beings, animals or fowl, before such well or pit is abandoned. Any person owning land whereon any well or pit is located shall, in the same manner, fill with earth any such well or pit which has been abandoned, provided such person has knowledge of the existence of such well or pit. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-316. 
Sec. 17-56. - Same-Covers required on certain wells. 
(a)  Every person owning or occupying any land on which there is a well having a diameter greater than six (6) inches, and which is more than ten (10) feet deep, shall at all times keep the same covered in such a manner as not to be dangerous to human beings, animals or fowl. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and authority of city to adopt above section, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-317, 18.2-318. 
Sec. 17-57. - Distribution of handbills. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or otherwise affix to any motor vehicle parked within a publicly-owned parking lot or to distribute within a publicly-owned parking lot any advertisement, flyers, handbills or other printed or written material, without first obtaining a permit therefore from the commissioner of the revenue and paying the applicable permit fee. Applications for such permits shall be filed with the commissioner of the revenue in such form and shall give such information as the commissioner of the revenue may require. The form shall require the person making the application to agree to be responsible for all damage to public and private property caused by the distribution. 
(b)  The city council shall from time to time fix the amount of the fee required to obtain a permit. The fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) payable to city treasurer which includes the estimated cost of cleaning up any discarded materials. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 92-1700-478, 12-1-92; Ord. No. 00-1700-628, § 1, 6-6-00) 
Chapter 17.1 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - ORDINANCES 

Sec. 17.1-1. - Effect of city ordinances. 
    All parks and the recreational facilities owned by the city, whether located within or outside of the city boundaries, shall be under the police jurisdiction of the city, and the ordinances of the city shall be enforceable therein. Any member of the police force of the city shall have the power to make arrests in parks owned by the city, whether located within or outside of the city, for violations of any such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 17.1-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, where no other penalty is provided and which is not otherwise defined as a misdemeanor or felony, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per offense. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Secs. 17.1-3-17.1-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS OPERATION 

Sec. 17.1-21. - Park rules and regulations. 
    The governing body shall have the power to establish, by ordinance, rules and regulations relating to the operation and use of parks and the recreational facilities therein owned by the city, whether located within or outside of the city, and for the preservation of order, safety and decency therein. The rules shall, inter alia, designate the criteria under which use of a park or recreational facility therein owned by the city is permitted, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Procedures for permit application; 
(2)  Procedures for appeals of permit denial; 
(3)  Fee schedules for city services beyond established regular service levels for the activity or performance; 
(4)  Permitted hours for scheduled performances or activities; 
(5)  Rules and regulations governing use of swimming and wading pools, tennis courts and other facilities; 
(6)  Operation and parking of motorized and nonmotorized vehicles; 
(7)  Rollerskating, skateboarding, rollerblading and other wheeled device activities; 
(8)  Grilling, barbecuing and cooking activities; and 
(9)  Any other criteria necessary to the safe, sufficient and orderly use of a public or city-owned park or recreational facility. 
    The rules and regulations shall be made available in convenient public facilities throughout the city and shall be available to any person upon written request. The governing body may require the rules and regulations, or portions thereof, to be posted at one or more parks owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 17.1-22. - Enforcement. 
    For the purpose of enforcing park rules and regulations, all parks and the recreational facilities therein owned by the city, whether located within or outside of the city, shall be under the police jurisdiction of the city. Any member of the police force of the city or park employee appointed as a special policeman shall have the power to make arrests for violations of any park rule or regulation. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any park rule or regulation. Any such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 17.1-23. - Park closings. 
    Any section or part of any park or recreational facility therein owned by the city, whether located within or outside of the city, may be declared closed to the public by the city manager at any time or for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, daily or otherwise and either in entirely or merely to certain uses, as the city manager shall find reasonably necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 17.1-24. - Closing hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon or remain upon the lands or premises of any park owned by the city, whether located within or outside of the city, including any city-owned parking area appurtenant thereto, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., Eastern Standard Time or Daylight Savings Time, whichever time is in effect, except as follows: 
(1)  Public officials or employees in the performance of their duties; 
(2)  Persons participating in or witnessing events where public authorities have given specific permission to exceed the above-stated time limits. 
    The city manager or his designee may issue permits for nighttime use of a city-owned park upon written application accompanied by reasonable demonstration that such use or activity is not at variance with the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, with particular regard to lighting, noise control and sanitation, and that such use or activity shall comply with other applicable state statutes and rules and regulations and with other city ordinances and rules and regulations and accompanied by such other documentation as the governing body may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 17.1-25. - Swimming, wading or bathing in streams, brooks, etc., prohibited. 
    It shall unlawful for any person to in any manner swim, wade or bathe in any stream, brook, run or any other type of watercourse located in or running through any park owned by the city, whether located in or outside of the city, provided that any such watercourse in such a park has been posted with signs indicating that swimming, wading or bathing is prohibited. Any such violation shall be a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 17.1-26. - Open fires prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or maintain any open fire or to leave unattended any fire in any grill, hibachi, charcoal cooker, brazier or any gasoline or liquified petroleum or other flammable fuel stove or similar device in any park or recreational facility therein owned by the city, whether located in or outside of the city. Violation of this section shall be a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 17.1-27. - Camping prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to set up or maintain any tent or other shelter structure, except for tents or shelters set up on a temporary basis for an event for which a permit has been obtained from the city, or to establish any campsite in any park owned by the city, whether located in or outside of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 17.1-28. - Use of alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or to drink or consume or to tender to another, whether or not accepted, any beer, wine, whiskey or other alcoholic beverage in a park or recreational facility therein owned by the city, whether located in or outside of the city, or parking area appurtenant thereto, except by express written permission of the city manager where a permit has been issued by the state alcoholic beverage control commission. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Secs. 17.1-29, 17.1-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADVISORY COMMISSION 

Sec. 17.1-31. - Advisory commission. 
    There is hereby established an advisory group to the governing body to be known as the Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission of the City of Manassas Park. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 17.1-32. - Purpose. 
    The advisory commission shall serve as the advisory body to the governing body of the city, shall serve as a liaison on parks and recreation issues among the governing body, city staff and the citizens of the city, shall advise the city manager on matters affecting parks and recreation policies, programs and properties. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Sec. 17.1-33. - Membership. 
    The advisory commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed at large by the governing body of the city. One (1) member may be a member of the governing body and one (1) member may be a member of the school board. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96; Ord. No. 01-1700-677, § 1, 11-7-01; Ord. No. 04-1700-772, § 1, 12-21-04) 
Sec. 17.1-34. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the advisory commission shall be determined by ordinance of the governing body and enumerated in the bylaws of the advisory commission. 
(Ord. No. 1996-1700-549, 9-17-96) 
Chapter 18 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Members of police department designated as part of official safety program and entitled to benefits under Line of Duty Act, § 2-11; traffic code, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- General powers and duties of local police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-138. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Appointment and dismissal of chief. 
    The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager, with the concurrence of a majority of the council. The chief of police may be dismissed or otherwise relieved of duty by the manager, with the concurrence of the council. 
(Code 1971, § 21-5) 
Sec. 18-2. - Appointment and removal of other officers. 
(a)  The chief of police shall, with the approval of the city manager, be responsible for hiring or employing, and for deputizing or otherwise utilizing, all police officers, either regular or special, below the rank of chief. The chief of police shall, with the approval of the city manager, be responsible for dismissing, suspending or otherwise removing from duty any police officer, either regular or special, below the rank of chief. 
(b)  Any police officer dismissed, suspended or otherwise relieved from duty by the chief of police under this section, may, by written request to the council, have a hearing before the council, either in closed or open session, as he may choose. All members of the council shall be notified in writing of such hearing at least twenty-four (24) hours prior thereto. 
(Code 1971, §§ 21-6, 21-7) 
Sec. 18-3. - Limitation on action of council relative to officers and chief. 
    No member of the council shall at any time interpret the duties of or direct or act in the capacity of a police officer. Questions relative to the police shall be decided at a regular meeting of the council and any directives to the chief of police from the council shall be executed only after majority approval of the council at a regular council meeting. 
(Code 1971, § 21-1) 
Sec. 18-4. - Hearing to call officer to account for his actions. 
    Any police officer called before the council to account for his actions shall do so at a regularly scheduled open council meeting. Such hearing may only be held at the request of the chief of police or at the written request of five (5) or more citizens of the city. All members of the council shall be notified in writing of such hearing, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior thereto. 
(Code 1971, § 21-3) 
Sec. 18-5. - Department rules. 
    The police department shall be operated in accordance with rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the council. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations so adopted and promulgated. 
(Code 1971, § 21-4) 
Sec. 18-6. - Resisting or interfering with arrests. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, obstruct or in any way interfere with any arrest made or attempted by any police officer or other officer having authority to make arrests. 
(Code 1971, § 17-37; Ord. No. 70-1700-44, 11-17-70) 
Cross reference- Intimidating or impeding law-enforcement officers,§ 17-4. 
Sec. 18-7. - False reports to police. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly give a false report, as to the commission of any crime, to any police officer of the city, with intent to mislead. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-461. 
Sec. 18-8. - Refusal to assist officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or neglect to assist any police officer of the city, upon being requested by such officer to assist him: 
(1)  In the execution of his office in a criminal case; 
(2)  In the preservation of the peace; 
(3)  In the apprehending or securing of any person for a breach of the peace; or 
(4)  In any case of escape or rescue. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-463. 
Sec. 18-9. - Disposition of unclaimed property in possession of police department or sheriff. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Unclaimed personal property means any personal property, not including contraband, belong to another which has been acquired by a law enforcement officer pursuant to his duties, which is not needed in any criminal prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner and which the state treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act (55-210-1 et seq., Code of Virginia). 
(2)  Found property means any personal property, not including contraband, which has been found and delivered to the chief of police, sheriff, or his or her duly authorized agent, the owner of which cannot be identified, which has been offered to the finder thereof but declined and which is not needed in any criminal prosecution. 
(b)  Applicability. None of the provisions of this section shall be held to require the chief of police to take possession of or to make disposition of any lost or stolen property, the disposition or possession of which is otherwise provided by law. None of the provisions of this section shall apply to pistols, revolvers, derringers, bowie knives, dirks, slingshots, metallic knuckles or other deadly weapons of like character. 
(c)  Duty of officers for delivery of seized, taken, or found property. It shall be the duty of all officers and members of the police into whose possession any property seized, taken or found shall come, to deliver such property as soon as possible to the chief of police, or a person designated by him, unless the property is needed for immediate use as evidence in any case, and in that event a report and inventory of the same shall be forwarded as soon as possible to the chief of police. 
(d)  Duty of chief of police to keep records. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep or cause to be kept a record of all property seized or otherwise taken possession of by the City of Manassas Park Police Department. 
(e)  Disposition. The chief of police or his or her duly authorized agent is hereby authorized to dispose of unclaimed personal property, which has been in his or her possession for more than sixty (60) days, by a public sale. Prior to any such public sale, the chief of police or his or her duly authorized agent, shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property, obtain a written statement from the attorney for the city or for the commonwealth advising that the item is not needed in any criminal prosecution, and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once a week for two (2) successive weeks, notice that there will be a public sale of unclaimed personal property. The property shall be described generally in the notice, along with the date, time and place of the sale. 
(f)  Disposition of proceeds of sale. The chief of police or his or her duly authorized agent shall pay from the proceeds of the sale the costs of advertisement, removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens, and notice of the sale. The balance of the proceeds from any sale pursuant to subsection (d) above shall be held by such officer for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. 
    If no claim has been made by the owner of the proceeds of such sale within sixty (60) days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. Upon satisfactory proof of ownership, the owner of any property sold pursuant to subsection (d) above may apply to the city within three (3) years of the date of the sale, and the city shall pay the remaining proceeds of the sale to the owner without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three (3) years from the date of the sale. 
(g)  Disposition of dangerous property. Any property coming into the possession of the police department, pursuant to subsection (d) above, which the chief of police determines is dangerous or likely to be dangerous to persons or property, may be disposed of by the chief of police immediately, and without further notice, in such manner as the chief of police deems appropriate. 
(h)  Disposition of perishable property. Any property coming into the possession of the police department, pursuant to subsection (d) above, which the chief of police determines is perishable, may with prior approval of the city manager after consulting the city attorney, be sold at public auction at such time and after such notice as the chief of police shall deem property. Perishable property not claimed or sold shall forthwith be reported to the city manager, who may cause such property to be used as he deems to serve the interest of the city, or may order it destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 94-1700-507, 5-17-94) 
Secs. 18-10-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-1700-874, § 1, adopted June 16, 2009, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 18-21-18-24, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 76-1700-82, adopted April 6, 1976. 

Sec. 18-21. - Establishment; appointment; revocation of appointment; uniforms; organization, rules and regulations. 
(a)  There is hereby established an auxiliary police force for the city, which shall consist of no more than fifteen (15) members appointed by the chief of police; provided, however, that the appointment of members shall be revocable at any time by the governing body. 
(b)  The auxiliary police force shall wear uniforms as directed, and shall be subject to the rules, regulations and general orders established by the chief of police. The members of the auxiliary police force shall have all the powers and authority and all the immunities of constables at common law. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything in subsection (b) above to the contrary, once the auxiliary police force has met the training requirements established by the department of criminal justice services under § 9.1-101 of the Code of Virginia, the members of the auxiliary police force shall have all the powers and authority and all the immunities of full-time law-enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 09-1700-874, § 1, 6-16-09) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1731, 15.2-1733. 
Sec. 18-22. - Calling auxiliary police officers into service; police officers performing service to wear uniform; exception. 
(a)  Auxiliary police officers may be called into service when deemed necessary (i) in time of public emergency, (ii) at such times as there are insufficient numbers of regular police officers to preserve the peace, safety and good order of the community, and (iii) at any time for the purpose of training such auxiliary police officers. At all times when performing such service, the members of the auxiliary police force shall wear the prescribed uniform. 
(b)  At such time as the members of the auxiliary police force have all the powers and authority and all the immunities of full-time law-enforcement officers as provided for in subsection 18-21(c) above, such members may be called into service by the chief of police to aid and assist regular police officers in the performance of their duties. 
(c)  When the duties of an auxiliary police officer are such that the wearing of the prescribed uniform would adversely limit the effectiveness of the auxiliary police officer's ability to perform his prescribed duties, then clothing appropriate for the duties to be performed may be required by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 09-1700-874, § 1, 6-16-09) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1734. 
Sec. 18-23. - Acting beyond limits of jurisdiction of the city. 
    The members of the auxiliary police force shall not be required to act beyond the limits of the jurisdiction of the city except when called upon to protect any city-owned public property located beyond its boundaries, or as provided in section 18-24 below. 
(Ord. No. 09-1700-874, § 1, 6-16-09) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1725, 15.2-1735. 
Sec. 18-24. - Mutual aid agreements. 
    The city has entered into, and may in the future enter into or become a party to, reciprocal agreements, mutual aid agreements and/or contracts with other localities, sheriffs, state-supported institutions of higher learning having police forces, and the director of the department of conservation and recreation with commissioned conservation officers, or any combination thereof, for the use of the city's forces, both regular and auxiliary, and their equipment and materials, to maintain peace and good order. Any police or other law-enforcement officer, regular or auxiliary, while performing his duty under any such reciprocal agreement, mutual aid agreement or contract, shall have the same authority as he has within the city. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1736. 
(Ord. No. 09-1700-874, § 1, 6-16-09) 
Chapter 19 - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- For-hire vehicles, Ch. 11; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 20; traffic code, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Railroad corporations, Code of Virginia, § 56-345 et seq. 

Sec. 19-1. - Trains obstructing crossings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or any receiver or trustee operating a railroad, to obstruct, for a longer period than five (5) minutes, the free passage on any street or road by standing cars or trains across the same, except a passenger train while receiving or discharging passengers, but a passway shall be kept open to allow normal flow of traffic; provided that, when a train has been uncoupled, so as to make a passway, the time necessarily required, not exceeding three (3) minutes, to pump up the air after the train has been recoupled shall not be included in considering the time such cars or trains were standing across such street or road. Any such railroad company, receiver or trustee, violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); provided that the fine may be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each minute beyond the permitted time, but the total fine shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  This section shall not apply when a train is stopped due to breakdown, mechanical failure or emergency. 
(Code 1971, § 16-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-412.1. 
Sec. 19-2. - Standing of vehicles on tracks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stand any wagon or other vehicle on the track of any railroad which will hinder or endanger a moving train. 
(Code 1971, § 16-15) 
Cross reference- Parking vehicle near railroad crossing, § 24-48(a)(8). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-412.1. 
Chapter 19.4 - SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES* 

Sec. 19.4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Local streets means all streets designated as other than arterial and collector streets in the city comprehensive plan. 
    Snow emergency route means those streets marked as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
Sec. 19.4-2. - Parking on snow emergency routes. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager determines based on a forecast by the U.S. Weather Service that snow, sleet, or freezing rain conditions will make it necessary for motor vehicle traffic to be expedited then parking on city streets shall be restricted. The city manager shall put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or all snow emergency routes as necessary by declaring it in a manner prescribed by this chapter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a parking prohibition shall automatically go into effect on any part of any snow emergency route on which there has been an accumulation of snow and ice of four (4) inches or more. 
(c)  Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall remain in effect until terminated by an announcement of the city manager in accordance with this chapter. While the prohibition is in effect, no person shall park or allow any vehicle to remain parked on any portion of a snow emergency route to which it applies. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
State Law reference- Parking, stopping, and standing regulations; presumption as to violation of ordinances; penalty, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 19.4-3. - Cleats, etc., on tires; chains; tires with studs. 
    No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway shall have on its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat, spike, or any other protuberance of any material other than rubber, which projects beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire. It shall be permissible, however, to use on the highways farm machinery having protuberances, which will not injure the highway, and to use tire chains of reasonable proportions when required for safety because of snow, ice, or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to slide or skid. It shall also be permissible to use on any vehicle whose gross weight does not exceed ten thousand (10,000) pounds tires with studs which project no more than one-sixteenth ( 1/16 ) of an inch beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire when compressed if the studs cover no more than three (3) percent of the traction surface of the tire. The use of studded tires shall be permissible only from October 15 to April 15. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
State Law reference- Use of tire chains, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1044. 
Sec. 19.4-4. - Stalled vehicles on snow emergency route. 
(a)  Any person who obstructs or impedes traffic on a designated snow emergency route through his failure to have the vehicle operated by him equipped with snow tires or chains shall have his vehicle towed. 
(b)  No person shall abandon or leave his vehicle in the roadway of a snow emergency route, except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to travel to a nearby garage, gasoline station, or other place of assistance and immediately return. 
(c)  The city manager shall impose reasonable charges for removal and storage of vehicles, further fines affixed shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
State Law reference- Regulation of operation of vehicles in snow, sleet, etc.; penalties, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1302. 
Sec. 19.4-5. - Announcement of parking prohibition. 
(a)  The city manager shall initiate each declaration pursuant to this chapter announced publicly by means of broadcasts from stations with a normal operating range covering the city. He may also initiate further announcements in newspapers of general circulation and cable television. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the city manager, including the time it became or will become effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected. A parking prohibition shall go into effect four (4) hours after the announcement with at least one (1) announcement between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. in accordance with this chapter, or at such other times as designated by the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall record the time and date each declaration occurs in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
State Law reference- Delegation of authority to make and enforce regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 19.4-6. - Termination of parking prohibition. 
    Whenever the city manager shall find that some or all of the conditions that give rise to a parking prohibition in effect pursuant to this chapter no longer exist, he may declare the prohibition terminated, effective immediately upon announcement. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
Sec. 19.4-7. - Posting of signs on snow emergency routes. 
    On each street designated as a snow emergency route, the city manager shall decree signs at proper intervals reading "Snow Emergency Route," "No Parking or Obstructing Traffic Flow," "Towing Enforced." These signs shall be distinctive and uniform in appearance and shall be unmistakable to all drivers. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
State Law reference- Erection of traffic signs and markers, maximum penalties, Code of Virginia §§ 46.2-1300, 46.2-1312. 
Cross reference- Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks, §20-12. 
Sec. 19.4-8. - Snow emergency routes designated. 
    The following streets or portions of streets, within the city, are designated "snow emergency routes": 
(1)  Manassas Drive from Baker Street to Gulf Court; 
(2)  Denver Drive from Manassas Drive to Rugby Road; 
(3)  Digital Drive from Manassas Drive to West Carondelet Drive. 
(4)  Polk Drive from Old Centreville to Manassas Drive. 
(5)  Carondelet Drive (All). 
(6)  Matthew Drive (All). 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
Sec. 19.4-9. - Removal of unlawfully parked vehicles. 
(a)  The police department shall order the removal of any vehicle from a snow emergency route to the nearest public parking lot or to an area designated or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by this city, when: 
(1)  The vehicle parked is on a snow emergency route in which the prohibition is in effect; 
(2)  The vehicle is stalled on part of a snow emergency route on which there is a covering of snow, sleet or ice or on which there is a parking prohibition in effect and the person who was operating such vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance with the provision of this chapter; 
(3)  The vehicle parked is in violation of any parking ordinance or provision of law and is interfering or about to interfere with snow removal operations. 
(b)  Such removal, impoundment and returning of vehicles will be in accordance with section 4-4 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
Sec. 19.4-10. - Citations and penalties. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle is unattended, in violation of any provision of this chapter, the motor vehicle shall be impounded. The officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and any other information displayed on the vehicle identifying its user. He shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation, on a form provided by the chief of police, for the driver to answer to the charge against him within fourteen (14) days during the hours and at a place specified in the citation. 
(b)  Failure to make payment in accordance with subsection (a) of this section or present ticket, notice or citation for a violation to the office of the city treasurer for certification to the general district court, within 30 days, shall render such owner, upon conviction of such violation, subject to a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(c)  Any person contesting a parking citation shall certify, in writing, on an appropriate form, to the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall issue complaints, summons or warrants for delinquent parking citations to the appropriate district court. 
(d)  Every action to collect unpaid parking citation penalties imposed for violation of a city ordinance regulating parking under this article shall commence within three years of the date upon which such penalty became delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violations, Code of Virginia, §§46.2-113, 46.2-1225. 
Sec. 19.4-11. - Procedure for creation, modification or deletion of restricted parking areas. 
(a)  The city manager shall create, modify, or delete restricted parking areas as needed. 
(b)  Creation, modification or deletion of restricted parking areas shall only be effective after initial notice, in writing, to the property owners of record in the area under consideration. The notice shall clearly state the exact location and boundaries of the restricted parking area under consideration. The notice shall supply reasons why such creation, modification, or deletion of a restricted parking area occurs. 
(c)  The initial notice shall contain a conspicuous statement that any interested person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager to create, modify or delete a restricted parking designation in the stated area, may petition the governing body for a hearing on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to issue parking permits, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1230. 
Sec. 19.4-12. - Appeal of creation, modification or deletion of restricted parking area. 
(a)  Any interested person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager to create, modify or delete a restricted parking area may petition the governing body for a hearing on the proposed change. For purposes of this section, the term "interested persons" shall include but not be limited to business entities such as a corporation, limited liability company or partnership. 
(b)  Appeal shall commence by delivering a certified letter to the city manager no later than the effective date of the proposed creation, modification or deletion of a restricted parking area. Such appeal letter shall contain a short statement specifying the objection to the proposed change and the grounds therefor. 
(c)  Upon receiving an appeal letter, the city manager shall suspend the creation, modification or deletion of a restricted parking area. He shall send an additional notice to the property owners of record, indicating a hearing regarding the restricted parking area shall occur with the governing body, within sixty (60) days of the proposed effective date stated in the initial notice. Additionally, the city manager shall publish or cause to be published a notice of the coming hearing in a newspaper of general circulation at least two (2) weeks before the date of such hearing. However, failure to comply strictly with the requirements of this subsection shall not affect the validity of the action taken. 
(d)  The city manager shall promptly notify the governing body of the appeal and the necessity for a public hearing. The governing body shall schedule a hearing on the matter within sixty (60) days of the proposed effective date stated in the initial notice. After the hearing, the city manager shall post a brief summary describing the action taken in a place open to the public in city hall. Failure to comply with the posting requirements of this section shall not affect the validity of the action taken. If the governing body elects to create or modify a restricted parking area, the governing body shall also specify an effective date. If the governing body elects to delete a restricted parking area, such deletion shall be effective immediately. 
(e)  In the alternative, the city manager may also elect to withdraw the proposed creation, modification or deletion of a restricted parking area. In such case, no public hearing shall be necessary. The city manager shall post a brief notice indicating that the proposed change is void, in a place open to the public in city hall, and mail a copy of the notice to the affected property owners of record. However, failure to strictly comply with the posting and notice requirements of this section shall not affect the validity of the action taken. 
(Ord. No. 05-1700-795, 12-20-05) 
State Law reference- Legal notices in the newspapers, Code of Virginia, §§ 8.01-323, 8.01-324. 
Chapter 19.5 - SOLICITORS AND DOOR-TO-DOOR SALESMEN[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 19.5 is derived from Ord. No. 79-1700-147, §§ 1-12, adopted Dec. 4, 1979, which ordinance did not expressly amend this Code. 
Cross reference- Licenses, Ch. 14; noises by peddlers, solicitors, etc., § 15-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19.5-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to reasonably control the activities of solicitors, canvassers, agents and door-to-door salesmen for the safety and well-being of people residing in the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-1700-147, § 1, 12-4-79) 
Sec. 19.5-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter, the term "solicitor" means any person who shall engage in selling goods, wares, merchandise or services, by sample, display or other means, where delivery is not made at the time of the sale and where the goods, wares, merchandise or services are subsequently delivered and are not the sample or display, or who solicits or canvasses for orders of goods, wares, merchandise or services of any character or description, or who gives or furnishes goods, wares, merchandise or services to induce or invite such orders of goods, wares, merchandise or services of any character or description. 
(b)  For the purpose of this chapter, the term "door-to-door salesman" means any person who shall go from one place of human habitation to another offering an item or items, other than newspapers and fresh farm products. 
(Ord. No. 79-1700-147, § 2, 12-4-79) 
Secs. 19.5-3-19.5-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, adopted Jan. 21, 2003, amended art. II in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. II derived from Ord. No. 79-1700-147, §§ 3-12, adopted Dec. 4, 1979; and Ord. No. 92-1700-450A, adopted Feb. 18, 1992. 

Sec. 19.5-11. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or door-to-door salesman to enter in or upon any private residence, apartment or premises in the city for the purpose of engaging in business as a solicitor or door-to-door salesman, without permission of the resident, and until he shall first have applied for and received a permit therefor from the city manager or his designee for the purpose of identification to the general public, police and other law enforcement officers. Representatives of religious, civic and educational organizations are exempted from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Sec. 19.5-12. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to secure a permit required by this article shall apply therefor, in writing, over his or her signature, to the city manager or his designee on forms provided by the city. Such application shall state: 
(1)  The name, date of birth, and permanent and local business addresses of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person, firm or organization by whom the applicant is employed, if any. 
(3)  The length of service of the applicant with such employer. 
(4)  The place of residence and nature of the employment of the applicant during the last preceding year. 
(5)  The nature or character of the goods, wares, merchandise or services to be offered by the applicant. 
(6)  The length of time the applicant intends to do business in the city. 
(7)  The place or places where the goods, wares, merchandise or services are to be sold or offered for sale or barter. 
(8)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of said vehicle, together with the license number and proof of insurance. 
(9)  A current Virginia criminal record check of the applicant, including any prior criminal convictions, and excluding traffic offenses, if any. 
    The application shall be accompanied by such credentials and evidence of good moral character and the identity of the applicant as may be reasonably required by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Sec. 19.5-13. - Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this article, the city manager or his designee shall conduct a thorough investigation of the applicant avoiding unnecessary delay, but it shall not be mandatory that the permit applied for be granted at the time of the filing of the application. 
If the city manager or his designee shall determine, after such investigation, that the person filing the application in question has met the required credentials, evidences good moral character, and proposes to engage in a lawful and legitimate commercial or professional enterprise, he shall, subject to section 19.5-14, issue the permit applied for. 
Such permit shall be issued on forms prepared for such purpose and shall set forth identification of the holder, shall state the company represented and contain any other pertinent information deemed desirable by the city manager. 
(b)  Any of the following findings by the city manager shall constitute grounds for the denial of a permit required by this article: 
(1)  That the applicant has not properly completed the permit application or that he has falsified such application in a material manner. 
(2)  That the applicant has a criminal record which reveals a pattern of criminal misconduct involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  That the applicant has a history of taking orders for goods, wares and merchandise which are not subsequently delivered in accord with the terms of the order or which are not of the quality represented by the seller. 
(4)  That the applicant fails to cooperate with law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(c)  A two hundred dollar ($200.00) fine shall be levied against the applicant if any false and/or misleading statements are made on the application and discovered after a permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Sec. 19.5-14. - Fee. 
(a)  Before the issuance of a permit under this article, the applicant therefor shall pay to the city treasurer, and obtain a receipt therefor, a nonrefundable fee in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00), which fee shall be considered as the cost incident to the investigation of the application and other services; provided, however, if such applicant has held a like permit from the city for the year immediately preceding the one for which a permit is requested, then such applicant shall pay the city treasurer a fee of five dollars ($5.00) which amount shall represent the cost of issuing a renewal permit. 
(b)  The fees provided for in this section shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Sec. 19.5-15. - Bond. 
(a)  Every applicant of a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall file with the chief of the Manassas Park Police Department or his authorized agent a cash or corporate surety bond naming the governing body of Manassas Park as obligee in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The applicant shall (1) comply fully with all city ordinances and state statutes regulating and concerning solicitors, canvassers, and/or door-to-door salesmen, as defined in this chapter, (2) guarantee that all money paid to the solicitor or door-to-door salesman will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the solicitor or door-to-door salesman, (3) guarantee that the property purchased will be delivered according to such representation and that such property meets the standards as represented by the solicitor or door-to-door salesman, either directly or indirectly, or by manufacturer's representations apparent on the goods, wares, or merchandise. Action under such bond may be brought by and in the name of the aggrieved purchaser or by and in the name of the city. 
(b)  A bond filed pursuant to this section shall be maintained in full force and effect during the term of the permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Sec. 19.5-16. - Term. 
    All permits issued under this article shall run from the date of issuance to the thirty-first day of December following. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Sec. 19.5-17. - Not transferable. 
    Permits issued under this article shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Sec. 19.5-18. - To be carried on the person and exhibited upon request. 
(a)  The permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be carried and displayed at all times by the permittee when soliciting or canvassing in the city. 
(b)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, title 57, section 57-63, charitable organizations must register their names, the names of their solicitors, and the dates and times that they will be soliciting in the city, with the Manassas Park Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Sec. 19.5-19. - Revocation. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city manager for violation by the holder thereof of any of the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city or of any state or federal law, or whenever the holder of such permit shall, in the judgment of the city manager, cease to possess the character and qualifications required by this article for the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Sec. 19.5-20. - Records to be kept. 
    The city manager or his designee shall keep records of all investigations under this article and of applications filed and permits issued or refused under this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Sec. 19.5-21. - Penalty. 
    Upon conviction of any person for violation of this article, the penalty imposed shall be a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-700, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Chapter 20 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Erection of signs on or over rights-of-way, § 3-21; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; for-hire vehicles, Ch. 11; littering streets, § 13-5; spitting on sidewalks, § 17-46; railroads, Ch. 19; traffic code, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference- General authority of municipal corporations relative to streets and other public ways, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2000 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance opening, dedicating, relocating, altering, vacating or naming any street or alley, or establishing the grade thereof, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 20-2. - Begging on street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to beg on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 17-10) 
Sec. 20-3. - Obstructions, etc., generally. 
    No person shall construct or place any obstruction, structure, foreign matter or material, be it permanent or temporary, in or upon the streets, gutters or sidewalks in the city. 
(Code 1971, § 23-1) 
Cross reference- Trash and garbage obstructing mailboxes, § 13-2; trains obstructing crossings, § 19-1; vehicles obstructing mailboxes, § 24-48. 
State Law reference- Authority to prevent street obstructions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2009. 
Sec. 20-4. - Use of sidewalks during building operations generally. 
    When any building or wall is being erected, repaired or demolished, the sidewalks in front thereof may, subject to section 20-5, be occupied and used by the contractor or builder in connection with such work for such period of time as may be reasonable, provided reasonable means are taken for the protection and safe passage of pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1971, § 23-4) 
Cross reference- Building regulations, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 20-5. - Placing building materials on street, alley or sidewalk. 
    No person shall place building materials upon any street, sidewalk or alley for use in connection with construction work, unless he shall have first obtained a permit from the city manager to do so and unless he shall place such materials in the space assigned and in the manner directed by the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 23-3) 
Sec. 20-6. - Limitation on stopping vehicles used on streets for sale of beverages, ice cream, etc. 
    No person paying a license tax under section 14-94 of this Code shall stop his wagon, cart or vehicle within one hundred (100) feet of the front of any open store, shop or stand, in or from which similar merchandise is sold, nor shall he, in using his wagon, cart or vehicle, interfere with or obstruct traffic on the streets. He shall, upon being required to do so by a police officer, move his wagon, cart or vehicle, as directed. 
(Code 1971, § 15-120) 
Cross reference- Hours for sale of ice cream on streets, § 10-1. 
Sec. 20-7. - Washing, greasing, etc., vehicle on street. 
    No person shall, for compensation, wash, polish or grease a vehicle upon a street, nor shall the owner of a vehicle permit it to be washed, polished or greased, for compensation, upon a street. 
(Code 1971, § 16-6) 
Sec. 20-8. - Deposit of hazardous or injurious materials on, and removal thereof from, streets. 
    No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street any glass bottle, glass, nail, tack, wire, can or any other substance likely to injure any person or animal, or damage any vehicle upon such street, nor shall any person throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street any soil, sand, mud, gravel or other substances so as to create a hazard to the traveling public. Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street any destructive, hazardous or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. 
(Code 1971, §§ 16-13, 23-5) 
Cross reference- General prohibition against littering streets, § 13-5. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324. 
Sec. 20-9. - Projection of trees or shrubs over street or sidewalk. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property abutting a street or sidewalk to allow any trees, plants or shrubs growing on such property to project over the street or sidewalk in such manner as to obstruct or interfere with the safe passage of vehicles or pedestrians. 
(Code 1971, § 28-1) 
Sec. 20-10. - Cutting, trimming or spraying trees, on streets. 
    No tree or shrub on any street shall be cut, trimmed or sprayed, except as authorized by franchise, unless a permit therefor shall have been obtained from the city manager. Such cutting, trimming or spraying shall be permitted only when fully justified in the public interest and then only in a manner prescribed in the permit issued therefor. 
(Code 1971, § 28-2) 
Cross reference- Injuring trees on streets and other public grounds, § 17-33. 
Sec. 20-11. - Removal of trees and limbs, dangerous to life or property upon street. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of a tree or of a tree limb endangering life or property upon a street to fail, neglect or refuse to remove such tree or tree limb. 
(Code 1971, § 28-3) 
Sec. 20-12. - Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. 
    The tenant or occupant and, in case there shall be no tenant or occupant, the owner or any person having the care of any building or lot of land abutting on any curbed or paved sidewalk shall, during the first eight (8) hours of daylight following the time when snow or ice ceases to fall or form, cause the same to be removed from such curbed or paved sidewalk. 
(Code 1971, § 23-2) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, §15.1-867. 
Sec. 20-13. - Access streets to construction or development areas to be kept free from dust and mud. 
    Subdividers, builders and contractors shall be responsible for keeping streets and roads used as access to any area of construction or development free from dust and mud. 
(Code 1971, § 23-6) 
Sec. 20-14. - Permit to break curb. 
(a)  No person shall break, or cause to be broken, any curbing within the city, unless he shall first have secured from the building official a permit therefor. A performance deposit of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be required. The deposit will be refunded after final inspection and approval. 
(b)  Any person desiring a permit required by this section shall file an application therefor with the building official. Such application shall be accompanied by evidence that the applicant has met all requirements of the state highway department. 
(Code 1971, § 23-15; Ord. No. 84-1700-245, 9-4-84) 
Secs. 20-15-20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 20-26. - Article not applicable to work done by city. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to work done by city forces under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 23-13) 
Sec. 20-27. - Permit required. 
    No person, unless specially authorized by the council, shall take up or remove any portion of the surface of a sidewalk or street, or excavate in any public street of the city, without a written permit from the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 23-9) 
Sec. 20-28. - Application for permit. 
    Any person desiring a permit required by section 20-27 shall file an application therefor with the city manager. Such an application shall be accompanied by evidence that the applicant has met all requirements of the state highway department. 
(Code 1971, § 23-8) 
Sec. 20-29. - Permit applicant's deposit and assent to provisions of article. 
(a)  Before a permit required by this article is granted, the city manager shall require a deposit sufficient to pay for resurfacing the street to be disturbed, the amount of such deposit to be determined by the city manager. 
(b)  Every person who shall make application for a permit under this article shall be deemed to have assented thereby to all the provisions and terms of this article, including the right of the city to collect the actual cost of replacing the pavement, sidewalk or street surface in the manner above directed. 
(Code 1971, § 23-9) 
Sec. 20-30. - Refusal of permit. 
    The city manager shall not refuse a permit applied for under this article, except for cause. In case of refusal, the applicant may appeal to the council. 
(Code 1971, § 23-7) 
Sec. 20-31. - Required safety precautions; responsibility for damages. 
    Any person to whom a permit required by this article is granted shall place guards or barriers around the excavation in question and shall protect it by warning lights at night, and shall be responsible for damages to persons or property caused by such excavations, until taken in charge by the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 23-12) 
Sec. 20-32. - Duty to prosecute work without delay; notice of completion. 
    It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit is issued under this article to institute at once and prosecute without delay the work for which such permit was obtained, and promptly, on its completion, give written notice thereof to the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 23-10) 
Sec. 20-33. - Replacing surface. 
    No pavement, sidewalk or street surface shall be replaced, after being taken up pursuant to a permit issued under this article, by any person except under the direction of the city manager. If the applicant fails to resurface the street disturbed promptly and in a manner approved by the city manager, the city manager is authorized to cause such work to be done at the expense of the applicant. 
(Code 1971, § 23-11) 
Chapter 21 - SUBDIVISION OF LAND[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 21 is derived from Res. No. 79-1322, adopted Oct. 2, 1979. Absence of a history note following a particular section or subsection indicates that such section or subsection derives unchanged from Res. No. 79-1322; conversely, legislation included in parentheses () following a section or subsection indicates amendment of the provisions by the legislation shown in such history note. Prior to the adoption of Res. No. 79-1322, Ch. 21, § 21-1, saved from repeal ordinances regulating the subdivision of land, particularly Ch. 24 of the 1971 Manassas Park Town Code, as amended. 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-141 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 8; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 20; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-465 et seq.; codification of ordinances relating to subdivision of land, § 15.1-37.3. 

ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 21-1. - Words and terms. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein shall be interpreted and defined as follows. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, the singular includes the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise; the word "lot" includes the word "plot" and "parcel;" the word "shall" is mandatory and not advisory; the word "approve" shall be considered to be followed by the words "or disapprove;" any reference to this chapter includes all ordinances amending or supplementing the same; and all distances and areas refer to measurements in a horizontal plane. 
(1)  Administrator: The representative of the governing body who has been appointed to serve the governing body in the process of reviewing and approving subdivision plats. 
(2)  Alley: A permanent service right-of-way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
(3)  Building: Any structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls, for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, vehicles or other personal property. 
(4)  Building permit: A document issued by the building inspector granting permission to another party to construct, extend, repair, remove or alter a structure. 
(5)  Building setback: The minimum distance by which any structure must be separated from the front property line of a lot. 
(6)  Governmental engineer: The licensed engineer designated by the governing body to furnish engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations. 
(7)  Clerk: The clerk of the circuit court of Prince William County, Virginia. 
(8)  Commission: The planning commission for the city of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
(9)  Council: The city council of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
(10)  Cul-de-sac: A street with one outlet and with an appropriate turnaround for safe and convenient reverse traffic movement. 
(11)  Easement: A grant by a property owner to another person for the use of land for a specific purpose without including title to the land. 
(12)  Engineer: An engineer certified by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(13)  Floodplain: An area(s) flooded by a flood of specific frequency or magnitude, which has been delineated as a regulated area(s) by federal, state or local government order through the use of maps, flood elevations, flood profiles or other techniques. 
(14)  Frontage: The shortest distance between the side lines of any lot measured along a line coinciding with, tangent to, or meeting at one point, the street upon which the lot fronts. 
(15)  Governing body: The city council of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
(16)  Health official: The health director or sanitarian serving the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
(17)  Jurisdiction: The area or territory subject to the legislative control of the governing body. 
(18)  Lot: A numbered and recorded portion of a subdivision intended for transfer of ownership or for the construction of a building and its accessory buildings. 
(19)  Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection; the shortest side, fronting upon a street, shall be considered the front of the lot, and the longest side, fronting upon a street, shall be considered the side of the lot. 
(20)  Lot, depth of: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
(21)  Lot, double frontage: An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets. 
(22)  Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
(23)  Lot of record: A lot which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the appropriate court. 
(24)  Lot, width of: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines. 
(25)  Monuments: Permanent markers from which property lines can be accurately surveyed. 
(26)  Person: An individual, a partnership, a corporation or any other legal entity by whatever term customarily known. 
(27)  Plat, final: A drawing of a survey of a tract or parcel of land prepared by a certified engineer or surveyor. 
(28)  Plat, preliminary: A drawing of a tract or parcel of land prepared by a certified engineer, land surveyor, owner of the land, city planners, land planners, architects, landscape architects or others having training or experience in subdivision planning or design. 
(29)  Regulatory flood elevation: The one hundred-year flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor or one and one-half (11/2) feet. 
(30)  Right-of-way: A strip of land dedicated or reserved for a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, public utilities or other special uses. For land platting purposes, the term "right-of-way" shall mean that every right-of-way, hereafter established and shown on a final plat, is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and is not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. A right-of-way intended for a street, crosswalk, water main, sanitary sewer, storm drain or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use. 
(31)  Secretary: The secretary of the planning commission of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
(32)  Street: A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, intended to be dedicated for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation by the public at large. 
(33)  Street, major: Any existing or future street identified in an adopted plan, which carries traffic, or anticipated traffic, exceeding five hundred (500) vehicles per day. 
(34)  Street, minor: A street that is used primarily as a means of public access to abutting properties with anticipated traffic of less than five hundred (500) vehicles per day. 
(35)  Street width: The total right-of-way width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel, including roadway, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and planting strips. 
(36)  Street, service: A public street, generally parallel and contiguous to major streets, primarily designed to promote safety by properly spacing points of access to major streets. 
(37)  Subdivide: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels of less than two (2) acres each for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or, if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land. The word "subdivide" and any derivative thereof shall have reference to the term subdivider as defined in subsection (38) of this section. 
(38)  Subdivider: A person (as defined in subsection (26) of this section) owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided, or a group of two (2) or more persons owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided, or the person given power of attorney to act on the owner's behalf in the subdivision of land. 
(39)  Surveyor: A land surveyor certified by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(40)  Zoning ordinance: The adopted zoning ordinance for the city of Manassas Park, Virginia [Chapter 31 of this Code.] 
Secs. 21-2-21-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE AND TITLE 

Sec. 21-11. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish subdivision standards and procedures for the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. These regulations are part of a long-range general plan to guide and facilitate orderly, beneficial growth of the community, and to provide for: 
(1)  The coordination of existing streets with proposed streets; 
(2)  Adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air; 
(3)  A distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare; 
(4)  Assurance, insofar as possible, for purchasers of lots that they are buying a commodity which is suitable for their development and use; and 
(5)  Adequate public services. 
Sec. 21-12. - Title. 
    This chapter is known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia." 
Secs. 21-13-21-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 21-21. - Administrator's general responsibilities and duties. 
    The administrator appointed by the governing body is hereby delegated the responsibility and authority to administer this chapter, and his approval or disapproval of subdivision plats shall be considered as though it were given by the governing body. The administrator shall consult with the planning commission on matters contained herein. 
Sec. 21-22. - Administrator's duties to be performed in accordance with chapter and Land Subdivision and Development Act. 
    The administrator shall perform his duties regarding subdivisions and subdividing in accordance with this chapter and the Land Subdivision and Development Act, Title 15.1, Chapter 11, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
Sec. 21-23. - Consultation. 
    In the performance of his duties and with the consent of the city manager, the administrator may call for opinions or decisions, either verbal or written, from other departments in considering details of any submitted plat. This authority of the administrator shall have particular reference to the governmental engineer, health officer and planning commission. 
Sec. 21-24. - Additional authority. 
    In addition to the regulations herein contained for the platting of subdivisions, the administrator may, from time to time, establish any reasonable additional administrative procedures deemed necessary for the administration of this chapter. 
Secs. 21-25-21-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER 

Sec. 21-31. - Platting required. 
    Any owner or developer of any tract of land situated within the City of Manassas Park, who subdivides the same shall prepare a plat of such subdivision in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and shall record the plat in the office of the clerk of the appropriate court. No such subdivision plat shall be recorded unless it has been submitted, approved and certified by the administrator in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. 
Sec. 21-32. - Recordation required. 
    No lot shall be sold in any proposed subdivision, nor shall any building permit be granted, until a final plat for the subdivision has been approved and recorded. 
Sec. 21-33. - Appeal from the decision of the administrator. 
    In the event a plat of a subdivision is disapproved by the administrator, the subdivider may appeal the decision of the administrator to the planning commission. If the subdivider is still aggrieved he may appeal to the governing body. 
Sec. 21-34. - Conflicting ordinances. 
    In any instance where other ordinances, or parts thereof, are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive ordinance(s), or parts thereof, shall prevail. 
Sec. 21-35. - City exempt from bonding, fee and assessment requirements. 
    The provisions of this subdivision chapter shall not be construed or interpreted to require the City of Manassas Park to post bonds, or pay fees or other administrative assessments imposed by this subdivision chapter. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-222, § 2, 7-5-83) 
Secs. 21-36-21-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PREPARATION AND RECORDATION OF SUBDIVISION PLATS 

Sec. 21-41. - Draw and certify. 
    Every subdivision plat, intended for recording, or the deed of dedication to which the plat is attached, shall be prepared by a surveyor or engineer duly licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia, who shall endorse upon each plat a certificate signed by him setting forth the source of the title of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon such plats, within an inset block, or by means of a dotted line upon the plat. 
Sec. 21-42. - Owner's statement. 
    Every subdivision plat, intended for recording or the deed of dedication to which the plat is attached, shall contain, in addition to the surveyor's or engineer's certificate, the following statement: 
    "The platting or dedication of the following described land (here insert a correct description of the land subdivided) is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors and trustees, if any." 
This shall be signed by the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgements of deeds and, when thus executed and approved as herein specified, shall be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of the appropriate court and indexed under the names of the landowners signing such statement and under the name of the subdivision. 
Sec. 21-43. - No one exempt. 
    No person shall subdivide any tract of land that is located within the city except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 21-44. - Private contracts. 
    This chapter bears no relation to any private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction, nor is the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction implied herein to any public official. When this chapter calls for more restrictive standards than are required by private contracts, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
Sec. 21-45. - Changes. 
    No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any subdivision plat intended for recording nor on accompanying data sheets after the approval of the administrator has been endorsed in writing on the plat or sheets unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the administrator. 
Sec. 21-46. - Fees. 
    There shall be a charge for reviewing a subdivision plat in the amount established by the fee schedule. Payment is due at the time of submission. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-214, Ex. B, § 1, 3-1-83; Ord. No. 91-1700-450E, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 2, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 21-47. - Transfer of areas for public use. 
    The recording of a plat shall operate to transfer, in fee simple to the respective counties and municipalities in which the land lies, all portions of the area platted which are set apart for streets, alleys, easements or other public use and to create a public right-of-passage over the same. No such areas dedicated to public use shall be encumbered by easements retained by the subdivider or granted to utility companies or other corporate or natural persons. Nothing contained herein, however, shall prevent the subdivider from constructing and maintaining improvements as required by this chapter. 
Secs. 21-48-21-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 21-61. - Mutual responsibility. 
    There is a mutual responsibility between the subdivider and the City of Manassas Park, to divide the land so as to improve the general use pattern of the land being subdivided. 
Sec. 21-62. - Land must be suitable. 
    The administrator shall not approve the subdivision of land if, from adequate investigations conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that, in the best interest of the public, the site is not suitable for platting and development purposes of the kind proposed. The administrator may require the subdivider to furnish topographic maps, floodplain profile elevation information or other relevant information. 
Sec. 21-63. - Flooding. 
    Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, or for such other uses in such a way as to endanger health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat for such uses as shall neither be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation nor produce conditions contrary to public welfare. 
Sec. 21-64. - Erosion and sediment control. 
    All subdivision plans shall include adequate provisions for control of temporary flooding, erosion and sedimentation, both during construction and after completion of construction, in conformance with applicable ordinances. 
Cross reference- Erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 21-65. - Improvements. 
    All required improvements shall be installed by the subdivider at his cost and in accordance with city rules and regulations. The subdivider's performance bond shall not be released until construction has been completed, inspected and approved by the governmental engineer or appropriate official. 
(1)  STREETS: 
(a)  Alignment and layout: The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas and proposed streets as shown in the adopted plan. The street arrangement must be such as to cause no necessary hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. Where, in the opinion of the administrator, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary line of such property. New perimeter half-streets along the boundary of land proposed for subdivision shall not be permitted. Wherever possible, streets should intersect at right angles. In all hillside areas, streets running with contours shall be required to meet intersecting streets at angles of not less than sixty (60) degrees, unless approved by the administrator upon recommendation of the highway engineer. The finished elevation of proposed streets shall not be more than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation. 
(b)  Access to major streets: Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require the subdivider to provide that the access to such streets be limited by one or more of the following means: 
1.  The subdivision of lots so that they will back onto the major street and front onto a parallel minor street. No access shall be provided from the major street and screen planting shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots. 
2.  The subdivision of lots along a series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel minor street, with the rear lines of the terminal lots contiguous with the major street right-of-way. 
3.  The subdivision of lots along a service street and physically separated from the major street by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at approved points. 
(c)  Approach angle: Major streets shall approach major or minor streets at an angle or not less than ninety (90) degrees, unless the administrator, upon recommendation of the highway engineer, shall approve a lesser angle of approach for reasons of contour, terrain or matching of existing patterns. 
(d)  Minimum widths: The minimum width of proposed streets, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be fifty (50) feet. 
(e)  Cul-de-sacs: Generally, permanent cul-de-sacs shall be no longer than four hundred (400) feet to the beginning of the turnaround. Each cul-de-sac must be terminated by a turnaround of not less than one hundred (100) feet in diameter. 
(f)  Alleys: No alleys shall be platted and/or allowed within any subdivision on or after the adoption of this chapter. 
(g)  Private streets and reserve strips: Private streets in any subdivision shall only be allowed when provision has been made for perpetual maintenance of such streets and proof of such provision shall become part of the final plat and shall be submitted with the final plat. Every private street shall be served from a publicly maintained street or highway. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street. 
(h)  Names: Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with other existing and named streets, shall bear the names of the duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffixes street, avenue, boulevard, road, driveway, place, lane or court. Street names shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats, and shall be approved by the administrator. Names of existing streets shall not be changed except by approval of the governing body. 
(i)  Identification signs: Street identification signs, readable from either side, of a design approved by the administrator shall be provided and installed by the subdivider at all intersections. 
(2)  MONUMENTS: 
(a)  Generally: As required by this chapter, all monuments must be provided and installed by the subdivider and shall meet the minimum specifications described below. Upon completion of subdivision streets, sewers and other improvements, the subdivider shall make certain that all monuments required by the administrator are clearly visible for inspection and use. Such monuments shall be inspected and approved by the administrator before any improvements are accepted by the governing body. 
(b)  Location-Concrete: Concrete monuments four (4) inches in diameter or four (4) inches square, three (3) feet long, with a flat top, shall be set at all street corners, at all points where the street line intersects the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, and at right angle points, and points of curve in each street. The top of the monument shall have an appropriate mark to identify properly the location and shall be set six (6) inches above the finished grade. 
(c)  Location-Iron pipe: All other lot corners shall be marked with iron pipe not less than three-fourths (3/4) inch in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long, and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. When rock is encountered, a hole shall be drilled four (4) inches deep in the rock into which shall be cemented a steel rod one-half (1/2) inch in diameter, the top of which shall be flush with the finished grade line. 
(3)  WATER FACILITIES: Public water service shall be extended by the subdivider to all lots within a subdivision in accordance with the approved design standards and specifications for water service, construction and improvements in the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. All water facilities located in any designated floodplain shall be floodproofed up to the regulatory flood elevation. 
(4)  SEWERAGE FACILITIES: Public sewerage facilities shall be extended by the subdivider to all lots within a subdivision and septic tanks will not be permitted. The subdivider shall provide each lot with a satisfactory and sanitary means of sewage collection and disposal in accordance with the approved design standards and specifications for sewerage construction and improvements in the City of Manassas Park. All sanitary sewerage facilities located in any designated floodplain shall be floodproofed up to the regulatory flood elevation. 
(5)  PRIVATE WATER AND SEWER FACILITIES: Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the installation of privately owned water and/or sewerage facilities in areas where public water and/or sewerage facilities are not available; provided, however, that such installations meet all the regulations of the state water control board, the state health department and any other state or local body having authority over such installation. All privately owned water and/or sewerage facilities located in any designated floodplain shall be floodproofed up to the regulatory flood elevation. 
(6)  OTHER PUBLIC UTILITIES AND FACILITIES: All other public and/or private utilities and facilities, including gas and electric, shall be elevated or floodproofed up to the regulatory flood elevation. 
(7)  STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES: The subdivider shall provide all necessary information needed to determine what drainage improvements are necessary to develop properly such property. Such information shall include, but may not be limited to, contour data, drainage plans and flood-control devices. The subdivider shall also provide plans for all such improvements, together with a certified engineer's or surveyor's statement that such improvements, when properly installed, will be adequate for development and will not increase the rate of storm water runoff. The governmental engineer shall then approve or disapprove the plans. The subdivider shall also provide any other information required by the governmental engineer. The subdivider shall install the approved storm drainage facilities. 
(8)  FIRE PROTECTION: Fire hydrants shall be required in a subdivision at locations approved by the administrator, provided adequate public water is available. The location and design of the fire hydrants shall meet the National Board of Fire Underwriters specifications. 
(9)  EASEMENTS: The administrator may require the subdivider to provide drainage easements through adjoining property. The width of easements provided for drainage, water, sewer, power lines and other utilities in the subdivision shall be determined by the administrator. 
(10)  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS: Nine (9) blue or black line prints of the plans and specifications, for all required physical improvements to be installed, shall be prepared by a certified engineer or land surveyor and shall be submitted with the final plat to the administrator for approval or disapproval within thirty (30) days. If approved, one copy bearing certification of such approval shall be returned to the subdivider. If disapproved, all papers shall be returned to the subdivider with the reason for disapproval stated in writing. 
(11)  BONDING: 
(a)  Performance bond: The subdivider shall furnish a cash bond or equivalent, a surety bond of a surety company or a certified check, payable to the City of Manassas Park, in an amount equal to one hundred and twenty (120) per cent of the total cost of the improvements determined by the administrator. Such bond or check shall guarantee that the improvements will be installed within a designated reasonable length of time in a manner acceptable to the administrator. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the planning commission in the resolution approving the final plat and shall be incorporated in the bond. Said period shall not, in any event, exceed two (2) years from date of final approval. The bond or check shall accompany the final plat. 
(b)  Maintenance bond: The subdivider shall be required to file a maintenance bond payable to the City of Manassas Park, in an amount considered adequate and in a form satisfactory to the administrator, in order to assure the satisfactory condition of the required improvements for a period of one year after the date of their acceptance by the City of Manassas Park. 
(c)  Staged development: In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the planning commission may authorize submission of final plats by section or stages of development, subject to such requirements or guarantees for improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of any approved section of development. 
(d)  Absence of bond: In the absence of a performance bond or check, no final plat shall be approved or recorded until the required improvements have been installed and approved by the administrator or his authorized agent. 
(12)  SIDEWALKS: Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of every interior street proposed in a subdivision and on at least one side of every street boarding the subdivision. 
(13)  CURB AND GUTTER: Curbs and gutters shall be installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-215, Ex. D, § 1, 3-1-83) 
Sec. 21-66. - Lots. 
    Lots shall be arranged in order that the following considerations are satisfied: 
(1)  Lot size: The minimum lot size in any subdivision shall be in accordance with zoning ordinances of the jurisdiction in which the lot is located. 
(2)  Shape: The lot arrangement, design and shape shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings, and be properly related to topography, and conform to requirements of this chapter. Lots shall not contain peculiarly-shaped extensions solely to provide necessary square footage of area which would be unusable for normal purposes. 
(3)  Location: Each lot shall abut on an existing or proposed dedicated public street or on a street which has become public by right-of-use. If the existing streets are not fifty (50) feet in width, the subdivider shall make provisions, in the deeds to the lots, that all buildings be constructed so as to permit the widening by dedication of such roads or streets to a width of fifty (50) feet. 
(4)  Corner lots: Corner lots shall have width sufficient for adequate site distance on both streets as determined by the administrator. 
(5)  Side lines: Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the street line. 
(6)  Remnants: All property of a subdivided tract must be included in lots, or otherwise disposed of, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
(7)  Separate ownership: Where the land covered by a subdivision includes two (2) or more parcels in separate ownership, and lot arrangement is such that a property ownership line divides one or more lots, the land in each lot so divided shall be transferred by deed to single ownership simultaneously with the recording of the final plat. Said deed is to be deposited with the clerk of the court and held with the final plat until the subdivider is ready to record same, and then both shall be recorded. 
(8)  Off-street parking and delivery facilities: All subdivisions, including those intended for business and industrial uses, shall include space set aside for off-street parking and/or delivery facilities, as required by the City of Manassas Park. 
Sec. 21-67. - Blocks. 
    Where created by the subdivision of land, all new blocks shall be designed to comply with the following general requirements: 
(1)  Length: Generally, the maximum length of blocks shall be twelve hundred (1,200) feet, and the minimum length of blocks upon which lots have frontage shall be five hundred (500) feet. 
(2)  Width: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth consistent with section 21-66 of this chapter, unless prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the administrator may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
(3)  Orientation: Where a proposed subdivision will adjoin a major road, the administrator may require that the greater dimension of the block shall front or back upon such major thoroughfare to avoid unnecessary ingress or egress. 
Sec. 21-68. - Variances and waivers. 
(a)  Administrator's authority. The administrator may waive or grant variances to the requirements of this Article VI, subject to review by the planning commission and city council, after the administrator determines the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  The entire parcel of land proposed for subdivision and subject to the request for a waiver or variance is located within an area zoned I-1 (industrial) as defined by the zoning ordinance of the City of Manassas Park, as amended, and 
(2)  The waiver or variance sought will not adversely affect public health, safety or welfare and is in keeping with the overall intent and objectives of the subdivision ordinance. 
(b)  Review by the city council. Any person aggrieved by the administrator's decision to grant or deny a variance or waiver of any of the requirements of Article VI, may appeal the decision at issue to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the administrator's decision. 
(c)  Submission requirements. The administrator shall require any applicant for a variance or waiver of the requirements of Article VI to submit: 
(1)  A written statement detailing the reasons for the requested variance or waiver, and 
(2)  Evidence demonstrating that the grant of the requested variance or waiver will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(d)  Application to extend time. An application for a variance or waiver under this section shall extend the time allowed to the administrator or planning commission to act upon the submitted subdivision plat by a period equal to the time necessary to issue a decision on the variance or waiver application, including any appeals. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-222, § 1, 7-5-83) 
Secs. 21-69-21-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - APPROVAL OF PLATS 

Sec. 21-81. - Preliminary sketch. 
    Prior to the preparation of preliminary or final plats, the subdivider may submit two (2) copies of a preliminary sketch to the administrator. The purpose of a preliminary sketch is to permit the administrator to advise the subdivider whether his plans are generally in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The administrator may mark the preliminary sketch indicating necessary changes and any such marked sketch shall be returned to the subdivider. 
(1)  Sketch requirements: The preliminary sketch shall be drawn on white paper or on a print of a topographic map of the property. It shall be drawn to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch. It shall show the name, location and dimensions of all streets entering the property, adjacent to the property or terminating at the boundary of the property to be subdivided. It shall show the location of all proposed streets, lots, parks, playgrounds and other proposed uses of the land to be subdivided, and shall include the approximate dimensions. 
(2)  Part of tract: Whenever part of a tract is proposed for platting and it is intended that additional parts will be subdivided in the future, a sketch plan for the entire tract shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. This sketch is merely for informational purposes and is not binding on the subdivider or the governing body. 
Sec. 21-82. - Submission of preliminary plat. 
    The subdivider shall present to the planning commission five (5) prints of a preliminary layout at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch as a preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall include the following information: 
(1)  Identification: Name of subdivision, owner, subdivider, person preparing drawing, date of drawing, number of sheets, north point and scale. If true north is used, method of determination must be shown. 
(2)  Location of subdivision: Location of proposed subdivision by an inset map at a scale of not less than two (2) inches equal one (1) mile showing adjoining roads, their names and numbers, towns, subdivisions, watershed areas, other landmarks and, where appropriate, the existing zoning of the land and adjoining property. 
(3)  Boundaries of subdivision: The boundary survey or existing survey of record provided such survey shows a closure with an accuracy of not less than one in twenty-five hundred (1:2,500), with reference to a known, permanent monument, total acreage, acreage of subdivided area, number and approximate area and frontage of all building sites, existing buildings within the boundaries of the tract, names of owners and their property lines within the boundaries of the tract and adjoining such boundaries. 
(4)  Streets, utilities and other data: All existing, platted and proposed streets, their names, numbers and widths; existing utility or other easements; public areas and parking spaces; culverts, drains and watercourses, their names; flood profile and other pertinent data. 
(5)  Storm drainage: The complete storm drainage layout, including all pipe sizes, types, drainage easements and means of transporting the drainage to a well-defined open stream which is considered natural drainage, or to another approved drainage-control facility. 
(6)  Water and sewer: Proposed connections with existing sanitary sewers and existing water supply or alternate means of sewage disposal and water supply. The location, type, profile, percentage of slope, pipe size and location of manholes for all sewers shall be shown. The distance between manholes shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet. The location, type and sizes of all water lines shall be shown as well as the location of necessary control valves and fire hydrants. 
(7)  Street construction: A cross section showing the proposed street construction, depth and type of base, type of surface, etc. 
(8)  Grades: A profile or contour map showing the proposed grades for the streets and drainage facilities, including the elevations of existing and proposed ground surface at all street intersections, and at points of major grade change along the center of streets together with the proposed connecting grade lines. 
(9)  Location map: A location map tying the subdivision into the present road system by using either aerial photographs or topographic maps of the U.S. Geological Survey. 
(10)  Dedication: All parcels of land to be dedicated for public use and the condition of dedication. 
Sec. 21-83. - Approval of preliminary plat. 
    The administrator shall discuss the preliminary plat with the subdivider in order to determine whether or not the preliminary plat generally conforms to the requirements of the subdivision, zoning and soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinances of the City of Manassas Park, and any other appropriate ordinances, rules or regulations. Within sixty (60) days of the preliminary plat submission, the commission shall direct the administrator to advise the subdivider in writing, by formal letter or by legible markings on the preliminary plat, of any additional data that may be required, the character and extent of public improvements that will have to be made, and an estimate of the cost of construction or improvements and the amount of the performance bond which will be required as a prerequisite to approval of the final subdivision plat. In determining the cost of required improvements and the amount of the performance bond, the administrator may consult with the governmental engineer who shall prepare these data for the administrator, or may require a bona fide estimate of the cost of improvements to be furnished by the subdivider. 
Sec. 21-84. - No guarantee. 
    Approval of the preliminary plat does not guarantee approval of the final plat. 
Sec. 21-85. - Six months' limit. 
    Within six (6) months after receiving approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall file with the administrator a final subdivision plat in accordance with this chapter. Failure to do so shall make the preliminary approval null and void. The administrator may, on written request by the subdivider, grant an extension not to exceed ninety (90) days. Any extensions thereafter must be approved by the commission. 
Sec. 21-86. - Submission of final plat. 
    The subdivision plats submitted to the commission for final approval and subsequent recording shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink upon stable and reproducible plastic or linen material at a scale not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to the inch on sheets having a size of not more than twenty (20) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. In addition to the requirements of the preliminary plat, the final plat shall include the following: 
(1)  Approval space: A blank space three (3) inches by five (5) inches shall be reserved for the use of the approving authority. 
(2)  Certificates of title: Certificates signed by a surveyor or engineer setting forth the source of title of the owners of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. 
(3)  Owner's statement: A statement to the effect that the subdivision as it appears on this plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, which shall be signed by the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgements of deeds. 
(4)  Identification of tracts: When the subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the various tracts shall be indicated by dashes and the identification of the respective tracts shall be placed on the plat. 
(5)  Streets, public uses, utilities: The accurate location and dimensions by bearings and distances with all curve data on all lots and streets, boundaries of all proposed or existing easements; parks; school sites; all existing public and private streets, their names, numbers and widths; existing utilities and those to be provided such as sanitary sewers, storm drains, water mains, manholes and underground conduits including their size and type; watercourses and their names; and names of owners and their property lines, both within the boundary of the subdivision and adjoining said boundaries. 
(6)  Accuracy: Distances and bearings must balance and close with an accuracy of not less than one in ten thousand (1:10,000). 
(7)  Street curves: The data of all curves along the street frontage shall be shown in detail at the curve data table containing the following: Delta, radius, arc, tangent, chord and chord bearings. 
Sec. 21-87. - Approval of final plat. 
    The plat shall not be approved by the commission until the subdivider has complied with the general requirements and minimum standards of design in accordance with this chapter, and has made satisfactory arrangements for performance bond, cash or cash bond to cover the cost of necessary improvements, in lieu of construction, to the satisfaction of the administrator. Approval of final plat shall be written on the face of the plat by the administrator and no plat shall be recorded until approval has been made. 
(1)  Procedure for approval or disapproval: The completed plat shall be submitted to the administrator for approval. Upon the approval by the administrator, the plat will be signed by the administrator or his designated representative, marked approved, and returned to the subdivider who will cause the plat to be recorded in the clerk's office, City of Manassas Park, Virginia. If not approved, the administrator will return the plat to the subdivider with corrections to be made by the subdivider indicated thereon. 
Secs. 21-88-21-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EFFECTUAL CLAUSES 

Sec. 21-101. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot or parcel of land so subdivided or transferred or sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. 
Sec. 21-102. - Validity. 
    Should any article, section, subsection or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 21-103. - Amendments. 
    This chapter may be amended in whole or in part by the governing body, provided that any such amendment shall either originate with or be submitted to the planning commission for recommendation; and further provided that no such amendment shall be adopted without a public hearing having been held by the governing body. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall have been given in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.1-431, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
Sec. 21-104. - Adoption and effective date. 
    This chapter was duly considered, following a required public hearing held on May 23, 1979, and was adopted by the city council of Manassas Park, Virginia, at the regular meeting held on October 2, 1979. This chapter shall be effective on and after 12:01 a.m., October 3, 1979. 
Secs. 21-105-21-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - COMMON OPEN SPACE AND COMMON IMPROVEMENT REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 91-1700-442, adopted May 21, 1991, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Art. VIII, §§ 21-88-21-92. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. IX, §§ 21-111-21-114 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 21-111. - Applicability. 
    The regulations set forth in this article shall apply to the following features in all residential developments where such features are proposed to be dedicated or conveyed for public use or are to be held in common ownership by the person residing in the development: 
(1)  All lands in common open space, not a part of individual lots, designed for the mutual benefit of a group of persons residing in the development, where such lands are not to be dedicated or conveyed for public use, whether or not such lands are required by the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance; and 
(2)  All private streets, driveways, parking bays, uses, facilities, and buildings or portions thereof, as may be provided for the common use, benefit and/or enjoyment of the occupants of the development, whether or not such improvements are required by the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
(3)  Where a condominium development is proposed, such shall be established and regulated in strict accordance with the provisions of the Condominium Laws of Virginia. 
(4)  All lands to be deeded or conveyed for public use. 
(Ord. No. 91-1700-442, 5-21-91) 
Sec. 21-112. - General requirements. 
    All lands and improvements set forth in subparagraphs (1), (2), and (3) of section 21-111 above shall be established and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant or developer shall provide for and establish a nonprofit organization or other legal entity under the laws of Virginia for the ownership, care and maintenance of all such lands and improvements. 
(2)  Such organization shall be created by covenants and restrictions running with the land and shall be composed of all persons having ownership within the development. Such organization shall be responsible for the perpetuation, maintenance, and function of all common lands, uses and facilities. 
(3)  All lands and improvements shall be described and identified as to location, size, use and control in a restrictive covenant, and such covenants shall set forth the method of assessment for the maintenance of such land. These restrictive covenants shall be written so as to run with the land and be in full force and effect for a period of not less than twenty (20) years, and shall be automatically extended for successive periods of twenty (20) years unless terminated in a manner set forth hereinafter. These covenants shall become part of the deed to each lot or parcel within the development. 
(4)  Such restrictive covenant and organization shall continue in effect so as to control the availability of the facilities and land thereby provided, to maintain the land and facilities for their intended function, and to protect the development from additional and unplanned densities of use. Such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall such organization conceived and organized to own and maintain the common open space, without first offering to dedicate the same to the city or other appropriate governmental agency. 
(5)  No lands in common open space shall be denuded, defaced nor otherwise disturbed in any manner at any time without the approval of the zoning administrator. 
(6)  If the zoning administrator shall determine that the public interest requires assurance as to adequate maintenance of common open space areas and improvements, the zoning administrator may require that the covenants creating such organization, shall at any time after establishment of the development fail to maintain the common open space/improvements in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the approved plans, the city may serve notice in writing upon such organization or upon the residents of the development setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the common open space/improvements in reasonable condition, and said notice shall contain a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within thirty (30) days thereof and shall state the date and place of a public hearing thereon which shall be held within twenty (20) days of the notice. 
(7)  At such hearing the city may modify the terms of the original notice as to the deficiencies and may grant an extension of time within which they shall be cured. 
(8)  If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modifications thereof shall not be cured within said thirty (30) days or any extension thereof, the city, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the development and to prevent the common open space/improvements from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open space and maintain the same for one year. 
(9)  Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the common open space/improvements except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners. 
(10)  Before the expiration of said one-year period, the city shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the common open space/improvements, call a public hearing upon notice in writing to such organization or to the residents of such development, to be held by the city council, at which hearing the organization shall show cause why such maintenance by the city shall not, at the election of the city council, continue for a succeeding one-year period. 
(11)  If the city council shall determine that such organization is ready and able to maintain the common open space/improvements in reasonable condition, the city shall cease to maintain the common open space/improvements at the end of said one-year period. 
(12)  If the city council shall determine that such organization is not ready and able to maintain the common open space/improvements in a reasonable condition, the city may, in its discretion, continue to maintain the common open space/improvements during the next succeeding year, and subject to a similar hearing and determination in each year thereafter. 
(13)  The covenants creating such organization shall further provide that the cost of such maintenance by the city shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space/improvements, and shall become a charge on said properties, and such charge shall be paid by the owners of said properties within thirty (30) days after receipt of a statement therefor. 
(Ord. No. 91-1700-442, 5-21-91) 
Sec. 21-113. - Submission requirement. 
(a)  Prior to the dedication or conveyance of those features described in sections 21-88 and 21-89 above, the following documents shall be submitted to and approved by the city. 
(1)  The articles of incorporation or other organizational documentation for the nonprofit organization. 
(2)  The bylaws of the nonprofit organization. 
(3)  The covenants or restrictions related to the use of common property, including the system and amounts of assessments for perpetuation and maintenance. 
(4)  A fiscal program for a minimum of ten (10) years, including adequate reserve funds for the maintenance and care of all lands, streets, facilities, and uses under the purview of the nonprofit organization. 
(5)  A document granting the right of entry upon such common property to the city and county law enforcement officers, rescue squad personnel, and the firefighting personnel while in the pursuit of their duties; and, in the case of private streets and common driveways, permitting the enforcement of cleared emergency vehicle access. 
(6)  A complete listing of all land, buildings, equipment, facilities, and other holdings of the nonprofit organization, as such is proposed, and a complete description of each. 
(7)  A recommended time schedule for the maintenance of major facilities, including streets, street signs, pools, sidewalks, parking areas and buildings. 
(8)  A copy of the proposed notice that will be given to prospective buyers regarding the organization, assessments and fiscal program. 
(9)  A copy of the deed of conveyance and a title certificate or, at the discretion of the city manager, a commitment for a policy of title insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia, assuring unencumbered title for all lands proposed to be conveyed to the city, or other appropriate governmental agency, or other organization, including the nonprofit organization. 
(b)  The documents set forth in subparagraph (a) above shall be reviewed and approved by the city manager and the city attorney, and such approval shall be obtained before any final subdivision plat is recorded. Such documents, once approved, shall become part of the recorded subdivision plat. 
(c)  In no event shall a final inspection of the improvements be made or the agreement bond be released in accordance with the provisions of section 31-43 of Chapter 31 until it is substantiated that the nonprofit organization has elected officers from its member homeowners. 
(Ord. No. 91-1700-442, 5-21-91) 
Sec. 21-114. - Payments in lieu of providing developed recreational facilities. 
    In those instances where a developer in a Planned Unit Development (PUD) district provides cash in lieu of developed recreational facilities, pursuant to proffers accepted with the rezoning regulations, such payment shall be made before a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
    Payment shall be made into a trust account set up for the organization, so established to hold the funds until the majority of the association/organization membership is comprised of individual homeowners, at which time such funds shall be released unless the organization shall determine that the funds should be held to some subsequent specified time; provided, however, that where a given development is to be staged over a period in excess of three (3) years, such funds can be released upon the request of the organization, based on the number of units occupied, as a given stage is completed. 
(Ord. No. 91-1700-442, 5-21-91) 
Sec. 21-115. - City not responsible for maintenance. 
    Except as provided in subparagraph (8) of section 21-112 above, the city shall not be responsible for the maintenance of any of the common open space and common improvements required by this article or any rezoning associated therewith. Where the city becomes the owner of such open space and improvements, under the provisions of subparagraph (4) of section 21-112 above, there shall accrue to the city or other appropriate governmental agency no responsibility except to the general public of the entire city. 
(Ord. No. 91-1700-442, 5-21-91) 
Chapter 22 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 96-1700-543, adopted May 8, 1996, amended Ch. 22, Arts. I-IX, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Ch. 22 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1971 and the following ordinances: 
Ord. No. Date 74-1700-64 9-17-74 74-1700-67 11- 8-74 74-1700-68 11- 8-74 75-1700-71 3- 4-75 75-1700-75 6- 4-75 75-1700-77 8- 5-75 75-1700-78 12-16-75 76-1700-79 1- 1-76 76-1700-86 8-17-76 76-1700-87 8- 3-76 77-1700-110 10-20-77 77-1700-111 10-20-77 78-1700-114 2- 7-78 80-1700-161 10-17-80 80-1700-162 10-17-80 81-1700-171 3- 3-81 81-1700-185 12- 1-81  
Ord. No. Date 84-1700-237 5-15-84 84-1700-238 6-19-84 84-1700-251 11-20-84 86-1700-346 10- 7-86 86-1700-350 12-16-86 87-1700-351 2-17-87 91-1700-431 1-15-91 91-1700-432(a) 2-15-91 91-1700-434 3- 5-91 91-1700-437 4-16-91 91-1700-443 5-21-91 92-1700-458 4- 7-92 92-1700-465 7- 7-92 92-1700-472 10- 6-92 94-1600-504 5- 2-94 94-1700-504 5- 2-94  
Charter reference- Authority of city relative to taxation, § 2.1. 
Cross reference- Tax levies not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-6(4); general duty of city treasurer with respect to collection of taxes, § 2-121; license tax on dogs, § 5-38; licenses generally, Ch. 14; costs of removal of accumulations of garbage and trash and growth of grass and weeds to be added to property owner's tax bill and collected as taxes are collected, §§ 17-48, 17-49. 
State Law reference- Taxation, Code of Virginia, title 58.1; local tax levies, § 58.1-3000 et seq.; general authority of city relative to taxes and assessments, § 15.2-1104. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Tax year. 
    The tax year of the city shall begin on the first day of January of each year and end on the thirty-first day of December of each year. Effective January 1, 2009, a short calendar year real estate tax shall begin January 1, 2009, and end on June 30, 2009. Effective July 1, 2009, and thereafter, however, the tax year for real property shall be the first day of July each year and end on the thirtieth day of June each year. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 08-1700-860, § 3, 11-18-08) 
Cross reference- Fiscal year, § 2-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia §§ 58.1-3010; 58.1-3281. 
Sec. 22-2. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
    Should any tax or taxes become delinquent, the city treasurer shall proceed promptly to collect the same in such manner as may be prescribed by the provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city or by state law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Delinquent taxes, Code of Virginia §§ 58.1-3919; 58.1-3919.1;and 58.1-3934. 
Sec. 22-3. - Sale or lease of personal property and real property for taxes due thereon. 
    The city treasurer may sell or lease any personal property or real property for taxes due thereon or from the owner thereof in the same manner and under the same procedures as may be prescribed by the provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city or by state law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Tax sales, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3940 et seq. 
Sec. 22-4. - Interest charge on late taxes. 
    Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the first day following the day such taxes are due shall be assessed and collected upon the principal and penalties of all taxes then remaining unpaid, which interest shall be collected and accounted for by the city treasurer, along with the principal amount of such taxes, as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Interest, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 22-5. - Penalty for late filing. 
    Any person who fails to file an application, return or report required by this chapter on or before the due date established therefor shall be assessed a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax assessable on such application, return or report or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, which penalty shall be added to the amount of tax due from such person. The city treasurer shall proceed with the collection of such penalty as provided by law. This penalty for failure to file an application, return or report shall be assessed on the day after such application or return is due. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Penalty, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 22-6. - Penalty for late payment. 
    Any person who fails to pay any tax or installment required by this chapter on or before the due date established therefor shall be assessed a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax assessable or a sum of ten ($10.00) dollars, whichever is greater, which penalty shall be added to the amount of tax due from such person. The city treasurer shall proceed with the collection of such penalty as provided by law. This penalty for failure to pay a tax or installment shall be assessed on the day after the first installment is due. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Penalty, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 22-7. - Administrative costs, attorney's fees and collection agency's fees. 
    A fee is hereby imposed upon each person chargeable with delinquent taxes or other delinquent charges in an amount necessary to cover the city's administrative costs and reasonable attorney's or collection agency's fees. The attorney's or collection agency's fees shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the taxes or other charges so collected. The administrative costs shall be in addition to all penalties and interest, and shall not exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) for taxes and other charges collected subsequent to thirty (30) or more days after notice of delinquent taxes or charges but prior to the taking of any judgment with respect to such delinquent taxes or charges, and thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to judgment. If the collection activity is to collect on a nuisance abatement lien, the fee for administrative costs shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or twenty-five (25) percent of the cost, whichever is less; however, in no event shall the fee be less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 11-1700-902, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-1700-902, § 1, adopted Apr. 19, 2011, repealed former § 22-7, and enacted a new § 22-7 as set out herein. Former § 22-7 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 96-1700-543, adopted May 8, 1996. 
Sec. 22-8. - Criminal penalties. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to willfully fail or refuse to file a return, application or report at the time or times required by this Chapter 22 or to make a false statement with intent to defraud in such returns. The penalty for such misdemeanor shall not exceed those prescribed by general law for (a) a Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return, application or report is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, or (b) a Class 1 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3916.1. 
Sec. 22-9. - Refund of taxes erroneously paid. 
    If the commissioner of the revenue determines that any taxes provided by this Chapter 22 are erroneously paid and such erroneous payment was not caused by willful failure or refusal of the taxpayer to furnish the tax-assessing authority with the necessary information, as required by law, then such taxes may be refunded or exonerated to the extent they are erroneous. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3990. 
Secs. 22-10-22-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX ON REAL PROPERTY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinances levying and prescribing the rate for real estate taxes for specific years are not included in this Code and, under the terms of § 1-6, are not affected by the Code or the ordinance adopting the Code. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-16. - When and where due and payable; tax bills. 
    Taxes accruing on real property in the city shall be due and payable at the office of the treasurer on or before the fifth day of each June and December of each year, except as provided below. Tax bills shall be rendered on or before the fifth day of each May and November of each year. 
    Second half real property taxes for tax year 2000 shall be due and payable at the office of the treasurer on or before December 15, 2000. This provision shall only be effective for the tax year 2000. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 97-1700-560, 4-22-97; Ord. No. 01-1700-649, § 1, 2-6-01) 
State Law reference- Authority of governing body to establish time for payment of taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 22-17. - Collection. 
    The city treasurer shall commence to receive any and all taxes and other amounts payable with respect to real property as soon as he receives copies of the commissioner's books. The city treasurer, after the due date of any tax, shall proceed to collect such tax from the person chargeable therefor by distress or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Collection, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3910 et seq. 
Sec. 22-18. - Release of lien on portion of real property. 
    When an individual purchases or acquires a portion of a tract of real property located in the city, the individual may apply to the commissioner of the revenue to determine the amount of any tax or assessment that is properly chargeable against such portion of real property. The city treasurer shall release such portion of real property from any lien for delinquent taxes upon receipt of payment for the total amount of taxes and penalty and interest due on such portion of real property. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3226.1. 
Secs. 22-19-22-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXEMPTION FOR THE ELDERLY AND DISABLED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07-1700-834, § 1, adopted June 19, 2007, amended the title of Div. 2 to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 2 was entitled, "Exemption for the Elderly." 
State Law reference- Authority for ordinance set out in this division, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3210 et seq. 

Sec. 22-26. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  Total combined income means the income received from all sources during the immediately preceding calendar year by owners of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence and owners' relatives who live in the dwelling, provided that the following amounts shall be excluded from total combined income: (a) the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of income of each relative who is not the spouse of an owner living in the dwelling and who does not qualify for the exemption provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3211.1.b. 
(2)  Net combined financial worth means the present value of all assets of the owners of the dwelling, and of the spouse of any owner, including equitable interests, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land in an amount not to exceed one (1) acre upon which it is situated. For purposes of this definition, the term assets shall not include furniture, household appliances, and other items typically used in a home. 
(3)  First-time applicant means an applicant for the tax exemption provided by this division who did not receive such exemption during the previous calendar year. 
(4)  Hardship means a situation where an applicant, through no fault of his or her own, was unable to reasonably meet the deadline for filing listed in section 22-28. Examples of hardships include, but are not limited to, extended severe illness and extended hospitalization. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 06-1700-801, § 1, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 07-1700-834, § 1, 6-19-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3211. 
Sec. 22-27. - Eligibility for exemption. 
    Any person who is at least sixty-five (65) years of age or is permanently and totally disabled as of July 1 of a tax year and who owns and occupies a dwelling as the sole dwelling of that person, shall be eligible for, and may apply for, an exemption from real property taxes on such dwelling and the land, in an amount not to exceed one (1) acre, on which it is situated; provided, that: 
(1)  The total combined income received from all sources during the immediately preceding calendar year cannot exceed the greater of sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00). 
(2)  The net combined financial worth, as of December 31 of the immediately preceding calendar year, cannot exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00). 
(3)  If a person qualifies for an exemption under this division, and if that person can prove by clear and convincing evidence that the person's physical or mental health has deteriorated to the point that the only alternative to permanently residing in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home or other facility for physical or mental care is to have a relative move in and provide care for the person, and if a relative does then move in for that purpose, none of the income of the relative or the relative's spouse shall be counted towards total combined income, provided the owner of the residence has not transferred assets in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) without adequate consideration within a three-year period prior to or after the relative moves into such residence. 
(4)  For the purpose of this section, the term "permanently and totally disabled" shall mean unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 00-1700-618, § 1, 2-15-00; Ord. No. 02-1700-687, § 1, 6-4-02; Ord. No. 04-1700-739, § 1, 2-17-04; Ord. No. 07-1700-824, § 10, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 10-1700-889, §§ 1, 2, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 14-1700-963, § 1, 12-2-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3217. 
Sec. 22-28. - Application for exemption, affidavit, late filing. 
    The person claiming an exemption shall file an application annually not later than April 1 prior to each tax year for which exemption is sought with the commissioner of the revenue on forms provided for that purpose. Notwithstanding the provisions in the preceding sentence, a person claiming an exemption who either qualifies as a first-time applicant or who can convincingly demonstrate a hardship may file an application after April 1 prior to each tax year for which exemption is sought. The application shall be accompanied by an affidavit setting forth (i) the names of the related persons occupying such dwelling, and (ii) that the total combined income, and the net combined financial worth of the persons specified in Section 58.1-3211 of the Code of Virginia do not exceed the limitations set forth in section 22-27. 
    If such person is under sixty-five (65) years of age, such application form shall have attached thereto a certification by the Social Security Administration, the department of veterans affairs or the railroad retirement board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two (2) medical doctors who are either licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth or are military officers on active duty who practice medicine with the United States armed forces, to the effect that the person is permanently and totally disabled. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall also make any other reasonably necessary inquiry of persons seeking such exemption, requiring answers under oath, to determine qualifications herein, including qualification as permanently and total disabled. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 02-1700-687, § 2, 6-4-02; Ord. No. 06-1700-801, § 1, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 07-1700-834, § 1, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 10-1700-889, § 3, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 14-1700-963, § 2, 12-2-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3213. 
Sec. 22-29. - Applicant may be interrogated or required to produce income tax returns. 
    The commissioner of the revenue may require an applicant for exemption under this division to answer questions under oath as to his qualifications under this division and to produce for inspection certified tax returns for the preceding three (3) years, to establish the income or net combined financial worth as hereinbefore defined. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3213. 
Sec. 22-30. - Effect of applicant residing in hospital, nursing home, etc., for extended periods. 
    The fact that persons who are otherwise qualified for tax exemption pursuant to this division 2 are residing in hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes or other facilities for physical or mental care for extended periods of time shall not be construed to mean that the real property for which tax exemption is sought does not continue to be the sole dwelling of such persons during such extended periods of other residence so long as such real property is not used by or leased to others for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3214. 
Sec. 22-31. - Amount of exemption. 
    Real property described in section 22-16 shall be exempt from real property taxes for any tax year in which proper application is made under this division 2 and the owner qualifies therefor; provided, that if the ownership of the property for which application for exemption is made is not held solely by the applicant, or jointly with the applicant's spouse, then the amount of the tax exemption hereunder shall be in proportion to the applicant's ownership interest in the subject real property, as the ownership interest may appear, and any exemption under this division 2 is limited as follows: 
(1)  Total combined income less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00): Total exemption on house and lot not to exceed one (1) acre. 
(2)  Total combined income between and including fifty thousand and one dollars ($50,001.00) and sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00): Exemption up to fifty (50) percent on house and lot not to exceed one (1) acre. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 00-1700-618, § 2, 2-15-00; Ord. No. 01-1700-675, § 1, 7-17-01; Ord. No. 02-1700-687, § 3, 6-4-02; Ord. No. 04-1700-739, § 2, 2-17-04; Ord. No. 06-1700-801, § 1, 3-14-06; Ord. No. 10-1700-889, § 4, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 14-1700-963, § 3, 12-2-14) 
Sec. 22-32. - Changes in ownership, income or financial worth. 
(a)  Any change in respect to total combined income, net combined financial worth, ownership of the property, or other factors occurring during the tax year for which an affidavit is filed under this division 2 and which has the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions of this division 2 shall nullify any exemption for the remainder of the current tax year and the taxable year immediately following. 
(b)  Any change in ownership to a spouse, when such change results solely from the death of the qualifying individual, or a sale of the property shall result in a prorated exemption for the then-current tax year. Such prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction wherein the number of complete months of the tax year such property was properly eligible for such exemption is the numerator and the number twelve (12) is the denominator. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 10-1700-889, § 5, 5-18-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3215. 
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN REHABILITATED RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE 

Sec. 22-33. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
(a)  Assessor means the city's real estate assessor or designee. 
(b)  Base value means the assessed value of the structure January 1 of the year in which the rehabilitation begins. 
(c)  Residential use means use as a detached single-family dwellings, not to include mobile homes. 
(d)  Substantially rehabilitated structure means an existing structure, no less than twenty-five (25) years of age, which has been improved so as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than twenty (20) percent. As used in this section, the terms "rehabilitated" or "rehabilitation" do not include situations in which a structure has been completely demolished. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-624, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 00-1700-629, § 1, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 03-1700-701, § 1, 3-4-03) 
Sec. 22-34. - Exemption authorized. 
    Residential use real property on which a structure no less than twenty-five (25) years of age has been substantially rehabilitated for residential use shall be partially exempt from taxation in accordance with the provisions of this Division. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-624, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 00-1700-629, § 1, 6-20-00) 
State Law reference- State code authorization § 58.1-3220 et seq. 
Sec. 22-35. - Eligibility. 
    Any owner of real estate upon which there exists a structure of no less than twenty-five (25) years of age, proposed to be substantially rehabilitated for residential use, shall be eligible to apply for a partial exemption as authorized in section 22-34 above. The exemption shall be granted only after the requirements of this division have been satisfied. 
    Effective October 1, 2004, the city will no longer accept applications for eligibility for the partial tax exemption authorized in section 22-34 above. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, the owner of real estate that is currently receiving a partial exemption shall continue to receive such exemption through the tenth year of eligibility. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-624, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 00-1700-629, § 1, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 03-1700-701, § 1, 3-4-03; Ord. No. 04-1700-764, § 1, 9-21-04) 
Sec. 22-36. - Application process and fee. 
(a)  Applications for exemptions shall be filed with the commissioner of the revenue or designee on forms provided for that purpose no later than the last business day of the tax year in which rehabilitation of a substantially rehabilitated structure has been completed. For the purpose of this section, rehabilitation is deemed to have been completed at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the building official. A separate application shall be submitted for each structure. 
(b)  No application for partial tax exemption under the provisions of this division shall be approved unless: (i) A building permit issued in accordance with section 31-45 of [Chapter 31,] Article VIII of this Code was obtained by the owner or owners of the substantially rehabilitated structure prior to commencement of the rehabilitation and (ii) the base value was determined prior to commencement. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue or designee may require the applicant for partial tax exemption to submit all documentation deemed necessary to establish eligibility for an exemption. No application will be considered complete or will be processed until receipt of such information. 
(d)  A processing fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid to the city treasurer with each application. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-624, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 00-1700-629, § 1, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 03-1700-701, § 1, 3-4-03) 
Sec. 22-37. - Inspections; notification of completion. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application for an exemption, the assessor or designee shall inspect the structure. 
(b)  The owner shall promptly notify the assessor or designee in writing when the rehabilitation is complete. For the purpose of this section, rehabilitation is deemed to have been completed at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the building official. 
(c)  The real estate assessor or designee may inspect the structure before, during or after the rehabilitation. 
No structure shall be eligible for exemption if such access for the purposes of assessing the structure and determining whether the requirements of this division have been met is denied. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-624, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 00-1700-629, § 1, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 03-1700-701, § 1, 3-4-03) 
Sec. 22-38. - Amount, commencement and duration of exemption. 
(a)  The partial exemption shall be the amount of real estate taxes resulting from the increase in assessed value attributable to the rehabilitation of the structure as determined by the assessor or designee, adjusted in accordance with the schedule in this section. An increase in an assessment occurring after the first year of the exemption shall not result in an increase in the exemption. In no case shall an exemption be permitted if the assessed value falls below the base value in any given year. 
(b)  The exemption shall commence on January 1 of the year following completion of the rehabilitation provided that the assessor or designee verifies that the rehabilitation described in the application has been completed and that the requirements of this division have been met. 
(c)  The exemption shall be for a period of ten (10) years, or until the real estate is sold or transferred, which ever happens first, in accordance with the following schedule: 
Amount of 
Exemption
Year      Percentage 
First through fifth\100 
Sixth\50 
Seventh\50 
Eighth\50 
Ninth\25 
Tenth\25 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-624, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 00-1700-629, § 1, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 03-1700-701, § 1, 3-4-03) 
Sec. 22-39. - Land books. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to permit the treasurer to list on the land book any reduced value due to the exemptions provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 00-1700-624, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 00-1700-629, § 1, 6-20-00) 
Secs. 22-40-22-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAX ON TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY, MACHINERY AND TOOLS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Local taxation of tangible personal property, machinery and tools, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3500 et seq. 

Sec. 22-43. - Tax levied; rate. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city a tax on the value of all tangible personal property and machinery and tools with a situs in the city as of January first of each year at the rate or rates established annually by the governing body. Property subject to tax shall include personal property separately classified by sections 58.1-3505 and 58.1-3506 of the Code of Virginia but shall exclude personal property separately classified by section 58.1-3504 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-44. - Assessment generally. 
    Tangible personal property and machinery and tools and all taxes thereon shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. The tax so assessed shall be as of January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3515. 
Sec. 22-45. - Situs for assessment and taxation. 
(a)  Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the situs for the assessment and taxation of tangible personal property and machinery and tools shall be the taxing jurisdiction in which such property is physically located on January first of each year. 
(b)  The situs for purposes of assessment of motor vehicles, travel trailers, boats and airplanes as personal property shall be the taxing jurisdiction where the vehicle is normally garaged, docked or parked; provided, however, that any person domiciled in another state, whose motor vehicle is principally garaged or parked in this city, shall not be subject to personal property tax on such vehicle upon a showing of sufficient evidence that such person has paid a personal property tax on the vehicle in the state in which he is domiciled. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3511. 
Sec. 22-46. - Tangible personal property tax rate for motor vehicles owned or leased by active members of volunteer rescue squads and volunteer fire departments. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3506, the city is authorized to specially classify and levy a personal property tax on one (1) motor vehicle which is owned or leased by a member of a volunteer rescue squad or volunteer fire department at a rate different from the personal property tax levies on other tangible personal property. 
(b)  The Manassas Park governing body hereby adopts a tax rate of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be levied upon one (1) motor vehicle which (i) is owned by an active member of a volunteer rescue squad or volunteer fire department who resides in the city, or (ii) is leased by an active member of a volunteer rescue squad or volunteer fire department who resides in the city if the member is obligated by the terms of the lease to pay tangible personal property tax on the motor vehicle; provided that (1) the motor vehicle is regularly used by the member to respond to emergency calls, (2) the member shall be entitled to the special personal property tax rate for one (1) motor vehicle only, and (3) by January 31 of each year, the member shall furnish the commissioner of the revenue with a certification by the chief of the volunteer rescue squad or volunteer fire company that said member is a member of the volunteer rescue squad or volunteer fire company who regularly responds to calls or regularly performs other duties for the volunteer rescue squad or volunteer fire department, and the subject motor vehicle owned or leased by the member is identified. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 17-1700-1000, § 1, 4-19-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3506. 
Sec. 22-47. - Personal property tax on motor vehicles, trailers and boats. 
    There shall be a personal property tax on all motor vehicles, trailers and boats with a situs in the city on January 1 (the "tax day") of each year at a rate established annually by resolution of the city's governing body. 
    Taxes on all motor vehicles, trailers and boats with a situs in the city on the tax day shall be paid on or before October 5. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 04-1700-757, § 1, 8-17-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3516. 
Sec. 22-48. - Exemptions. 
    All household goods and personal effects are hereby exempt from taxation. For the purpose of this section, household goods and personal effects are hereby defined and classified as follows: 
(1)  Bicycles. 
(2)  Household and kitchen furniture, including gold and silver plates, plated ware, watches and clocks, sewing machines, refrigerators, automatic refrigerating machinery of any type, vacuum cleaners and all other household machinery, books, firearms and weapons of all kinds. 
(3)  Pianos, organs, and all other musical instruments; phonographs, record players, and records to be used therewith; and radio and television instruments and equipment. 
(4)  Oil paintings, pictures, statuary, curios, articles of virtue and works of art. 
(5)  Diamonds, cameos or other precious stones and all precious metals used as ornaments or jewelry. 
(6)  Sporting and photographic equipment. 
(7)  Clothing and objects of apparel. 
(8)  All other tangible personal property used by an individual or a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
The classification set forth in this section shall apply only to such property owned and used by an individual or by a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3504. 
Sec. 22-49. - Returns. 
(a)  Every person or entity owning or leasing any tangible personal property or machinery and tools subject to taxation under this Article III shall file with the commissioner of the revenue on or before April 15 of every year a tangible personal property tax return on forms prescribed therefor. 
(b)  Any person owning or leasing a motor vehicle who has previously filed a personal property tax return with the commissioner of the revenue for that motor vehicle shall not be required to file another personal property tax return for that vehicle unless one of the following has occurred: 
(1)  A change in the name or address of the person or persons owning or leasing the motor vehicle; 
(2)  A change in the situs of the motor vehicle; 
(3)  Any other change affecting the assessment or levy of the personal property tax on the motor vehicle for which a tax return has been filed previously; or 
(4)  Any change in which a person acquires one or more motor vehicles for which no personal property tax return has been filed. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue shall prescribe the various forms to be used for filing the returns required by this section and the information to be provided therein. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 17-1700-1000, § 2, 4-19-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia §§ 58.1-3518, 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 22-50. - When tax due and payable. 
    The tax levied by this Article III shall be due and payable on or before December 5 of each year. Beginning October 5, 2002, the tax levied by this Article III shall be due and payable on or before October 5 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 97-1700-565, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 98-1700-587, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 2000-1700-641, § 1, 12-19-00) 
Secs. 22-51-22-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX 

Sec. 22-62. - Definitions. 
(a)  Bank: Any bank, banking association or trust company organized by or under the authority of the laws of this commonwealth and as further defined in section 58.1-1201 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  Branch bank: A bank which has a branch or affiliate located within the city, but whose principal office is located outside the boundaries of the city. 
(c)  Net capital shall mean a bank's net capital computed pursuant to section 58-485.07 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-1201. 
Sec. 22-63. - Imposition of bank franchise tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed upon each bank and/or branch located within the boundaries of the city, a tax on net capital equal to eighty (80) percentum of the state rate of bank franchise tax on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the net capital of such bank located in the city. 
(b)  Any branch extension or affiliate of the principal office located within the boundaries of the city shall be taxed upon only such proportion of the taxable value of the net capital under Section 58.1-1204 of the Code of Virginia as the total deposits of such bank, or offices located inside the city, bears to total deposits as of the end of the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-64. - Filing of return and payment of tax. 
(a)  On or after the first day of January of each year, but not later than March first of such year, each bank with a principal office located within the city shall prepare and file in duplicate with the commissioner of the revenue a return as provided by section 58.1-1207 of the Code of Virginia, which shall set forth the tax on net capital as computed under Chapter 12 of title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. The commissioner of the revenue shall certify a copy of the bank's return and schedules and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state Department of Taxation. 
(b)  If the principal office of a bank is located outside the boundaries of the city and such bank has one or more branch offices located within the city, then in addition to the filing requirements set forth in subsection (a) hereof, such bank shall file with the commissioner of the revenue of this city a copy of the real property deductions schedules and the apportionment under section 58. 1-1211 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  Each bank on or before the first day of June of each year shall pay into the treasurer's office of this city, all taxes imposed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 58.1-1207. 
Secs. 22-65, 22-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAX ON PURCHASE OF UTILITY SERVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-17-00-637, § 1, adopted Oct. 17, 2000, amended former Art. V, §§ 22-77-22-83, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 87-1700-367, 12-1-87; Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96. 
Charter reference- Authority of city to levy and collect consumer or subscriber tax on amount paid for utility services and to provide that such tax be added to and collected with bills rendered for such services, § 2.3. 

Sec. 22-77. - Definitions. 
    As used within this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
    Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas services in this jurisdiction. 
    Gas utility means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in Virginia. 
    CCF means the volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
    Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered means one thousand (1,000) watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Virginia Code §56-594, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company or other entity. 
    Pipeline distribution company means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. 
    Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
    Service provider means a person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer. 
    Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-637, § 1, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 22-78. - Electric utility consumer tax. 
(a)  In accordance with Virginia Code §58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: Such tax shall be twenty (20) percent times the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the rate of $.01641 on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by the service provider not to exceed three dollars ($3.00) monthly. 
(2)  Non-residential consumers: Such tax shall be twenty (20) percent times the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the rate of $.021683 on each kWh delivered monthly up to one thousand five hundred (1,500) kWh plus the rate of $.017462 on each kWh delivered monthly in excess of one thousand five hundred (1,500) kWh, not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this section to monthly kWh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions: The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the tax imposed by this section: 
(1)  Any public safety agency as defined in Virginia Code §58.1-3813. 
(2)  The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the electric consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Virginia Code §58.1-3814, paragraphs F. and G., and Virginia Code §58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. 
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if submitted twelve (12) times per year of approximately one (1) month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately sixty (60) days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the kWh will be divided by 2; (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated 
using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by two (2); (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax". 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-637, § 1, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 22-79. - Local natural gas utility consumer tax. 
(a)  In accordance with Virginia Code §58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in Virginia Code §58.1-3814 J., as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be twenty (20) percent times the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the rate of $0.193 per CCF delivered monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed three dollars ($3.00) per month. 
(2)  Non-residential consumers: Such tax shall, for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility, be twenty (20) percent times the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the rate of $0.1557 on each CCF delivered monthly up to two hundred (200) CCF plus the rate of $0.1530 on each CCF delivered monthly in excess of two hundred (200) CCF, not to exceed one hundred fifty ($150.00) per month. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this ordinance to monthly CCF delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following consumers of natural gas shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section: 
(1)  Any public safety agency as defined in Virginia Code § 58.1-3813. 
(2)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Virginia Code § 58.1-3814, paragraphs H. and I., and Virginia Code § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for natural gas billed but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for gas service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. 
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if submitted twelve (12) times per year of approximately one (1) month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately sixty (60) days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the CCF will be divided by two (2); (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by two (2); (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax". 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-637, § 1, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 22-80. - Telephone utility consumer tax. 
(a)  Residential purchases. There is hereby imposed and levied by the city a tax upon each and every residential consumer of telephone utility services at the rate of twenty (20) percent of the monthly amount to such consumer (exclusive of any federal or state tax thereon) with a maximum tax of three dollars ($3.00) per month. 
(b)  Commercial or industrial purchases. There is hereby imposed and levied by the city a tax upon each and every commercial or industrial consumer of telephone utility services at the rate of twenty (20) percent of the monthly amount charged to such consumer (exclusive of federal and state tax thereon) with a maximum tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month. 
(c)  [Exceptions.] The tax imposed and levied by this section on consumers with respect to telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local telephone exchange service, except as follows: 
(1)  Coin box telephones. No tax shall be imposed on telephone service paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones. 
(2)  Flat rate service. With respect to flat rate and flat message rate service, the tax shall apply only to the amount payable for local area service, and shall not apply to any specific charge for calls to points outside Prince William County or to any general charge or rate differential payable for the privilege of calling points outside Prince William County. 
(3)  Message rate service. Where purchasers of telephone service are charged on a message rate basis, the tax shall apply only to the basic charge for such service and shall not apply to any charge for additional message units. 
(4)  Local service not federally taxed. Local telephone service of a type not taxed by the United States as of July 16, 1968. 
(d)  [Enhanced 9-1-1 tax.] In addition to the tax imposed by subsections 22-80(a) through (d), the city hereby imposes a three-dollar ($3.00) tax per month per telephone access line in the city for the enhanced 9-1-1 telephone service. 
(e)  [Mobile local telecommunications service tax.] In addition to the taxes imposed by subsections 22-80(a) through (d), there is hereby imposed and levied by the city, upon each purchaser of mobile local telecommunications service (defined as any two-way mobile or portable local telecommunications service, including cellular mobile radio telecommunications service and specialized mobile radio) with a consumer service address located within the city, a tax in the amount of ten (10) percent of the monthly gross charge to a consumer of mobile local telecommunication; provided that such tax shall not be applicable to any amount so charged in excess of thirty dollars ($30.00) per month for each mobile service consumer. No tax shall be levied on any local, state or federal government agency. 
(f)  Exemptions. The following consumers of telephone utility services shall be exempt from the taxes imposed by this section: 
(1)  Any public safety agency as defined in Virginia Code § 58.1-3813. 
(2)  The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(g)  Billing and collection of taxes. The taxes imposed by this section shall be collected by the seller from the consumer and shall be paid by the consumer to the seller, for the use of the city, at the time the purchase price or charge for the utility service shall become due and payable under the agreement between the consumer and seller. 
(h)  Remittance of taxes. Taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each seller to the city, and each seller shall remit the amount of tax shown by such report to have been collected to the city, on or before the last day of the first calendar month thereafter, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay his tax. The reports shall be on a form required by the city. Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-637, § 1, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 02-1700-682, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-02; Ord. No. 05-1700-780, 5-31-05) 
Sec. 22-81. - Seller's records. 
    Every seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases of utility services in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof and the amount of tax imposed under this article. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make transcripts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-637, § 1, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 22-82. - Penalties. 
    Any consumer of electricity, natural gas or telephone service failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied under this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-637, § 1, 10-17-00) 
Secs. 22-82-22-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SALES TAX 

Sec. 22-95. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the governing body in adopting this article to levy the general retail sales tax authorized to be levied by Section 58.1-605 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-96. - Imposed; to be added to state tax; price brackets; discounts. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed, a general retail sales tax at the rate of one (1) percent to provide revenue for the general fund. such tax shall be added to the rate of the state retail sales tax imposed by Chapter 6, Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act) and shall be subject to all the provisions of said chapter, and all amendments thereof, and the rules and regulations published with respect thereto, except that the applicable brackets of prices shall be as prescribed in section 58.1-628 of the Code of Virginia for the combined tax, and except that no discount under section 58.1-622 of the Code of Virginia shall be allowed on the tax levied by this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Secs. 22-97-22-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RECORDATION TAX 

Sec. 22-108. - Imposed. 
    There is hereby imposed a city recordation tax in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state recordation tax collectible for the Commonwealth of Virginia upon the first recordation of each taxable instrument in the circuit court of Prince William County relating to property located within the city, except in a case in which the state recordation tax is fifty cents ($0.50) specifically. Where a deed or other instrument conveys, covers or relates to property located partly in the city and partly in another county or city, or in other counties or cities, the tax imposed under the authority of this section shall be computed and collected only with respect to that portion of the property located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia §§ 58.1-3800, 58.1-3801. 
Sec. 22-109. - Collection by circuit court clerk. 
    The clerk of the circuit court of Prince William County shall collect the tax imposed under this Article VII. The clerk shall pay the same into the treasury of the city and shall be entitled to compensation for such service in an amount equal to five (5) percent of the amount so collected and paid over. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia §§ 58.1-3803, 58.1-3804. 
Secs. 22-110-22-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MEALS TAX 

Sec. 22-120. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have, for the purposes of this article, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cater. The furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
    City. The City of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
    Collector. The commissioner of the revenue, treasurer or designee. 
    Commissioner/treasurer. The commissioner of the revenue, treasurer and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspector or other employees. 
    Food. All food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Food establishment. Any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the city, including but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
    Meal. Meal shall mean any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 00-1700-627, § 1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 22-121. - Levy. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city on each person a tax at the rate of four (4) percent on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 00-1700-627, § 1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 22-122. - Collection of tax by seller. 
    Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this ordinance from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made; provided, however, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the Department for the Visually Handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. 
    All tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust for the City. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 00-1700-627, § 1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 22-123. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person required by this ordinance to pay to the city, the taxes imposed by this article to make a monthly report thereof setting forth such information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this ordinance, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. Such records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five (5) years. The commissioner of the revenue or his/her duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. The monthly reports shall be delivered to the commissioner of the revenue on or before the twentieth day of the calendar month following the month being reported. Each report shall be accompanied by a remittance of the full amount of meals tax due made payable to the city and sent to the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 00-1700-627, § 1, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 00-1700-631, § 1, 7-5-00) 
Sec. 22-124. - Discount. 
    For the purpose of compensating sellers for the collection of tax imposed by this article, every seller shall be allowed two (2) percent of the total amount of the meals tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his or her monthly return; provided, the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-125. - Procedure when tax not reported or collected. 
    If any person or entity whose duty it is to collect, report and remit meals tax imposed by this article shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and make within the time provided herein any report and remittance required, the commissioner shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner has secured whatever facts and information he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any meals tax due and payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the meals tax and penalty and interest provided for and shall notify such person by registered mail, sent to his or her last known address, of the amount of such tax and penalty and interest. The total amount thereof shall be payable within ten (10) days of the mailing of such notice. The commissioner shall have the power to examine such records for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-126. - Preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person and entity liable for collection and remittance of the meals tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve for a period of two (2) years suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of meals tax required to be collected by this article. The commissioner of the revenue shall have the power to examine such records, at reasonable times and without reasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-127. - Cessation of business; tax due immediately. 
    Whenever any person or entity required to collect and pay to the city a meals tax imposed by this article shall cease to operate, go out of business or otherwise dispose of his business, any and all meals tax shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-128. - Advertising payment or absorption of tax prohibited. 
    No seller shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that all or any part of a meals tax imposed under this article will be paid or absorbed by the seller or by anyone else, or that the seller or anyone else will relieve any purchaser of the payment of all or any part of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-129. - Gratuities and service charges. 
    Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this ordinance, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 00-1700-627, § 1, 6-6-00) 
Sec. 22-130. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this ordinance shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature. 
(2)  Factory-prepackaged donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and items of essentially the same nature; 
(3)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on premises consumption (e.g. a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
(4)  Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers. 
(5)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children. 
(6)  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. § 2012, as amended except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the Federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and non-factory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (c) (3), (4) and (5) herein below. 
(b)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(c)  The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees. 
(3)  Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States. 
(4)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof. 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private non-profit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)  Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, by a non-profit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for non-profit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(7)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 00-1700-627, § 1, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 00-1700-631, § 1, 7-5-00) 
Sec. 22-131. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a restaurant or caterer in the city liable for the collection of the meals tax imposed by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make the reports and remittances required by this article. The commissioner of the revenue may have issued a summons for such person, and the summons may be served upon such person by any city police officer in the manner provided by law. One (1) return of the original summons shall be made to the general district court for the city. 
(b)  In the event the purchaser of any meal refuses to pay the tax imposed by this article, the seller may call upon the police department for assistance; and the investigating officer may, when probable cause exists, issue the purchaser a summons returnable to the general district court as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-132. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Virginia Code § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 00-1700-627, § 1, 6-6-00) 
Secs. 22-133-22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CIGARETTE TAX 

Sec. 22-151. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Board means the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board (NVCTB). 
    Carton means any container in which ten (10) packages of twenty (20) cigarettes are placed. 
    Cigarette means any roll of any size or shape for smoking, whether filtered or unfiltered, with or without a mouthpiece, made wholly or partly of cut, shredded or crimped tobacco or other plant or substitute for tobacco, whether the same is flavored, adulterated or mixed with another ingredient, if the wrapper or cover is made of any material other than leaf tobacco or homogenized leaf tobacco, regardless of whether the roll is labeled or sold as a cigarette or by any other name. 
    Commissioner means the commissioner of the revenue of the City of Manassas Park or the commissioner's designee. 
    Dealer means every manufacturer, manufacturer's representative, self-wholesaler, wholesaler, retail dealer, vending machine operator, public warehouseman or other person who shall sell, receive, store, possess, distribute or transport cigarettes within or into the city. 
    Package means any container in which separate cigarettes are placed without such cigarettes being placed into any container within the package. Packages are those containers of cigarettes from which individual cigarettes are ordinarily taken when they are consumed by their ultimate user. Ordinarily, a package contains twenty (20) cigarettes; however, "package" includes those containers in which fewer or more than twenty (20) cigarettes are placed. 
    Person means any individual, firm, unincorporated association, company, corporation, joint stock company, group, agency, syndicate, trust or trustee, receiver, fiduciary, partnership, limited liability company, and conservator. The word "person" as applied to a partnership, unincorporated association or other joint venture means the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation, shall include all the officers and directors thereof. 
    Place of business means any place where cigarettes are sold, placed, offered for sale or displayed for sale or where cigarettes are brought or kept for the purpose of sale, consumption or distribution, including vending machines, by dealers within the city. 
    Registered agent means every dealer and other person who shall be required to report and collect the tax on cigarettes under the provisions of this article. 
    Retail dealer means every person who, in the usual course of business, purchases or receive cigarettes from any source whatsoever for the purpose of sale within the city to the ultimate consumer; or any person who, in the usual course of business, owns, leases or otherwise operates within such place of business, one (1) or more cigarette vending machines for the purpose of sale within the city of cigarettes to the ultimate consumer; or any person, who, in any manner, buys, sells, stores, transfers or deals in cigarettes for the purpose of sale within the city to the ultimate consumer, who is not licensed as a wholesaler or vending machine operator. 
    Sale or sell means every act or transaction, regardless of the method or means employed, including barter, exchange or the use of vending machines or other mechanical devices or a criminal or tortious act whereby either ownership or possession, or both, of any cigarettes shall be transferred within the city from a dealer as herein defined to any other person for consideration. 
    Stamp means a small, gummed piece of paper or decalcomania used to evidence provision for payment of the tax as authorized by the city or its designee, required to be affixed to every package of cigarettes sold or used within the city. 
    Store or storage means the keeping or retention of cigarettes in this city for any purpose except sale in the regular course of business. 
    Treasurer means the treasurer of the city or any of the duly authorized deputies or agents. 
    Use means the exercise of any right or power over any cigarettes or packages of cigarettes incident to the ownership or possession of those cigarettes or packages of cigarettes including any transaction where possession is given or received or otherwise transferred, other than a sale. 
    User means any person who exercises any right or power over any cigarettes or packages of cigarettes incident to the ownership or possession of those cigarettes or packages of cigarettes or any transaction where possession is given or received or otherwise transferred, other than a sale. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-152. - Levied; amount. 
    In addition to all other taxes of every kind now or hereafter imposed by law, there is hereby levied and imposed by the city upon every person who sells cigarettes within the city, from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, an excise tax ("tax") equivalent to seventy-five cents ($0.75) for each package of cigarettes sold within the city. The tax shall be paid and collected in the manner and at the time hereinafter prescribed; provided, that the tax payable for each cigarette or cigarette package sold within the city shall be paid but once. The tax hereby levied shall not apply to free distribution of sample cigarettes in packages containing five (5) or fewer cigarettes. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96; Ord. No. 03-1700-707, § 1, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 04-1700-748, § 1, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 17-1700-1004, § 1, 6-6-17, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 22-153. - Methods of collection. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by the use of a stamp affixed to each package of cigarettes and shall be paid by each dealer or other person liable for the tax under a reporting method prescribed by the commissioner to carry out the provisions of this article. The stamps shall be affixed to each package of cigarettes in such a manner that their removal will require continued application of water or steam. Every dealer or other person liable for the tax shall examine each package of cigarettes to ensure that the stamp has been affixed thereto prior to offering them for sale. Each dealer or other person liable for the tax is hereby required, and it shall be such dealer's duty, to collect and pay the tax and report on forms prescribed for this purpose: 
(1)  The quantity of cigarettes sold or delivered during the preceding calendar or fiscal month to: 
a.  Each registered agent in the city for which the tax was collected; 
b.  Each manufacturer's representative; and 
c.  Each separate person and place of business within the city. 
(2)  The quantity of stamps on hand, both affixed and unaffixed on the first and last day of the preceding calendar or fiscal month and the quantity of stamps or stamped cigarettes received during the preceding calendar or fiscal month. 
(3)  The quantity of cigarettes on hand to which the stamp has not been affixed on the first and last day of the preceding calendar or fiscal month and the quantity of cigarettes received during the preceding calendar or fiscal month to which the stamps had not been affixed. 
(4)  Such further information as the commissioner may require for the proper administration and enforcement of this article for the determination of the exact number of cigarettes in the possession of and/or sold by each dealer or user. 
(b)  Each dealer or other person liable for the tax shall file such reports with the commissioner and pay the tax due to the commissioner between the first and twentieth day after the close of each calendar or fiscal month, and shall furnish a copy of any cigarette tax reports submitted to the Virginia State Department of Taxation for the previous month. 
(c)  When, upon examination and audit of any invoices, records, books, canceled checks or other writing touching on the purchase, sale, receipt, storage or possession of cigarettes taxed pursuant to this article, any dealer or other person liable for the taxes is unable to furnish evidence to the commissioner of sufficient tax payments and stamp purchases to cover cigarettes which were sold, used, stored, received, purchased or possessed, the prima facie presumption shall arise that such cigarettes were received, sold, used, stored, purchased or possessed without the proper tax having been paid. The commissioner shall, from the results of such examination and audit based upon such direct or indirect information available, assess the tax determined to be due and unpaid and impose a penalty for late payment of ten (10) percent per month and interest of three quarters (3/4) percent per month of the gross tax due. 
(d)  When any dealer or other person liable for the tax files a false or fraudulent report or fails to file a report or fails to perform any act or performs any act to evade payment of the tax, the commissioner shall administratively assess the tax due and unpaid and impose a penalty of fifty (50) percent and interest of three-quarters (3/4) percent per month of the gross tax due. The penalty and interest is in addition to any other penalties that may be imposed. 
(e)  The dealer or other person liable for the tax shall be notified by registered mail, sent to his or her last known address, of such deficiency and such tax, penalty and interest assessed shall be due and payable within ten (10) days after notice of such deficiency has been issued. 
(f)  Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who shall receive cigarettes not bearing the stamp shall, within one (1) hour of receipt of such cigarettes, commence and with all reasonable diligence continue to affix the stamp to every package of cigarettes until all unstamped packages of cigarettes have been stamped with the stamp and before offering such cigarettes for sale. Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who has notified the commissioner that such dealer or other person is engaged in interstate or intrastate business shall be permitted to set aside such part of such dealer's or other persons's stock as may be legally kept for the conduct of such interstate or intrastate business (that is, cigarettes held for sale outside the jurisdiction of the city) without affixing the stamps required by this article. Any such interstate or intrastate stock shall be kept entirely separate and apart from the stamped stock in such a manner as to prevent the commingling of the interstate or intrastate stock with the stamped stock. Any dealer or other person liable for the tax found to have had untaxed cigarettes which have been lost, whether by negligence, theft or any other unaccountable loss, shall be liable for and shall pay the tax due thereon. 
(g)  Each dealer or other person liable for the tax shall maintain and keep for a period of three (3) years, not including the current calendar year, records of all cigarettes received, sold, stored, possessed, transferred or handled in any manner whatsoever, whether the same were stamped with the stamp or unstamped, to make all such records available for audit, inspection and examination and to make available at all reasonable times, the means, facilities and opportunity for making such audit, inspection or examination upon demand of the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-154. - Application to qualify as registered agent. 
(a)  Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who shall sell, use, store, possess, distribute or transport cigarettes within or into the city shall first make application to the commissioner to qualify as a registered agent. Such application blank, which shall be supplied by the commissioner of the revenue upon request, shall require such information relative to the nature of the business engaged in by said applicant as is deemed necessary by the commissioner. Such applicant shall provide a surety bond to the city of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the average monthly tax liability or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), whichever is less, with a surety company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Such bond shall be so written that, on timely payment of the premium thereon, it shall continue in force from year to year. Any applicant whose place of business is outside the city shall automatically, by filing his application, submit to the city's legal jurisdiction and appoints the commissioner as such person's agent for any service of lawful process. 
    Upon receipt of the properly completed application, and the required surety bond executed, the commissioner shall issue to said applicant a permit to qualify the applicant as a registered agent to purchase, sell, use, store, possess, distribute or transport within or into the city, cigarettes stamped with the stamp. 
(b)  Registered agents shall agree to the reporting and payment requirements placed upon them by this article and the rules and regulations as from time to time may be promulgated by the commissioner. In reporting and payment of the tax, the registered agent shall be allowed a discount, as the commissioner may determine, not to exceed 0.175 cent per carton sold or delivered by the registered agent. When any registered agent's monthly report and payment of the tax is not received within the dates prescribed, the commissioner shall disallow any discount taken up to a maximum amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and shall impose a late reporting penalty of ten (10) percent of the gross tax due or ten dollars ($10.00) whichever is greater but in no event more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The commissioner may also require such registered agent to provide proof that the agent has complied with all applicable state laws to legally conduct such business and to file financial statements showing all assets and liabilities. The commissioner may revoke any registered agent's permit if such bond, as required, is impaired for any reason. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this article to the contrary, the commissioner of the revenue may elect to require each dealer or other person liable for the cigarette tax to pay in advance for any stamps provided to the dealer or other person pursuant to this article. The commissioner may, in such event, waive the requirement of a surety bond for registered agents. The commissioner shall, in such event, establish procedures for the refund of payments made for unused stamps which are returned by a registered agent. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-155. - Notice of intention by retail dealers. 
(a)  Retail dealers who shall sell, offer for sale, store, possess, distribute, purchase, receive or transport cigarettes in or into the city shall notify the commissioner in writing of the supplier of such cigarettes and the name and address and the state retail sales and use certificate registration number for each separate place of business of the retail dealer. Possession of a state retail sales and use tax certificate and, where applicable, both a retail business license and a retail tobacco license issued by the city for each separate place of business by a retail dealer, shall be considered sufficient written notification to the commissioner. 
(b)  No retail dealer, as defined herein, who shall have complied with the provisions of this section and who purchases only cigarettes with the tax paid stamped for each separate place of business shall be required to qualify as a registered agent. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-156. - Presumption of illegality; seizure of contraband goods; sealing of machines; marking of machines. 
(a)  Any dealer or other person liable for the tax found to possess any cigarettes without the tax paid stamp affixed who is not in the process of affixing such stamps thereto shall be presumed to be in possession of untaxed cigarettes in violation of this article. 
(b)  Any cigarettes placed in any coin-operated vending machines shall be presumed for sale within the city. Any vending machine located within the city containing cigarettes upon which the stamp has not been affixed or containing cigarettes placed so as to not allow visual inspection of the stamp through viewing area as provided for by the vending machine manufacturer shall be presumed to contain untaxed cigarettes in violation of this article. 
(c)  Any cigarettes, coin-operated vending machines, counterfeit stamps or other property found in violation of this article shall be declared contraband goods, shall be subject to forfeiture, and may be seized by the city and sold. In addition to any tax due, the dealer or other person liable for the tax possessing such untaxed cigarettes shall be subject to civil and criminal penalties provided in this article. 
(d)  In lieu of seizure, the city-may seal such vending machines to prevent continued illegal sale or removal of such cigarettes. The removal of such seal from the vending machine by any unauthorized person shall be a violation of this article. Nothing in this article shall prevent the seizure of any vending machine at any time after it is sealed. 
(e)  All cigarette vending machines shall be plainly marked with the name, address and telephone number of owner of said machine. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-157. - Illegal acts. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any dealer or other person liable for the tax: 
(1)  To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof, or to fail to refuse to perform any of the duties imposed under the provisions of this article or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which may be issued under this article; 
(2)  To falsely or fraudulently make, or cause to be made, any invoices or reports, or to falsely or fraudulently forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp, or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps; 
(3)  To sell, offer for sale, or authorize or approve the sale of any cigarettes upon which the stamp has not been affixed; 
(4)  To possess, store, use, authorize or approve the possession, storage or use of any cigarettes in quantities of more than sixty (60) packages upon which the stamp has not been affixed; 
(5)  To transport, authorize or approve the transportation of any cigarettes if such cigarettes are not accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating the true name and address of the consignor or seller and of the consignee or purchaser, and the brands and quantity of cigarettes so transported, or are in transit and accompanied by a bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent, in whole or in part; 
(6)  To transport, authorize or approve the transportation of any cigarettes in quantities of more than six (6) cartons within the city if such cigarettes are accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating: 
a.  A consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such tobacco products on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been paid unless the tax of the jurisdiction of destination has been paid and said cigarettes bear the tax stamps of that jurisdiction; or 
b.  A consignee or purchaser in the Commonwealth of Virginia but outside the taxing jurisdiction who does not possess a Virginia sales and use tax certificate, a Virginia retail cigarette license and, where applicable, both a business license and a retail cigarette license issued by the local jurisdiction of destination; 
(7)  To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which cigarettes have been removed, for which the tax imposed has been theretofore paid; or 
(8)  To remove from any package any stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be used after the same has already been used, or to buy, sell, or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps to any person, or to reuse any stamp which had theretofore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed by this article or to sell, or offer to sell, any stamp provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-158. - Delegation to the Northern Virginia cigarette tax board. 
(a)  The city may delegate any of its administrative and enforcement authority under this article to the Northern Virginia cigarette tax board upon due resolution by the city governing body, and execution of the board's agreement and may adopt regulations regarding the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The commissioner is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Department of Taxation under which a wholesaler, qualified to purchase Virginia revenue stamps, may qualify to purchase dual city stamps from the Department of Taxation either at its Richmond, Virginia office or its Northern Virginia branch office. 
(c)  The city may appoint certain employees as tobacco revenue agents, who shall be required to carry proper identification while performing their duties and shall have the power to seize or seal any coin-operating vending machines, seize any cigarettes, counterfeit stamps or other property found in violation of this article and shall have the power of arrest upon reasonable and probable cause that a violation of this Article has been committed. The city is authorized to provide its tobacco revenue agents with: 
(1)  Firearms for their protection; 
(2)  Emergency equipped vehicles while on duty; and 
(3)  Other equipment deemed necessary and proper. 
(d)  The city may exchange information relative to the sale, use, transportation or shipment of cigarettes with an official of any other jurisdiction entrusted with the enforcement of the cigarette tax laws of such other jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-159. - Jeopardy assessment. 
    If the commissioner determines after reasonable justification that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid under this article will be jeopardized by delay, the commissioner shall make an assessment of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected and shall mail or issue a notice of such assessment to the taxpayer together with a demand for immediate payment of the tax or of the deficiency in tax declared to be in jeopardy including penalties and interest. In the case of a current period, for which the tax is in jeopardy, the commissioner may declare the taxable period of the taxpayer immediately terminated and shall cause notice of such finding and declaration to be mailed or issued to the taxpayer together with a demand for immediate payment of the tax based on the period declared terminated and such tax shall be immediately due and payable, whether or not the terms otherwise allowed by this section for filing a return and paying the tax has expired. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-160. - Erroneous assessment, notices and hearings in event of sealing of vending machines or seizure of contraband property. 
(a)  Any person assessed by the commissioner with a cigarette tax, penalties and interest or any person whose cigarettes, vending machines and other property have been sealed or seized under process of this section, who has been aggrieved by such assessment, seizure or sealing may file a request for a hearing before the commissioner for the board for a correction of such assessment and the return of such property seized or sealed. 
(b)  If holders of a property interest in cigarettes, vending machines or other property are known at the time of seizure or sealing, notice of such seizure or sealing shall be sent to them by certified mail within twenty-four (24) hours of the seizure or sealing. Where such holders of property interests are unknown at time of seizure or sealing, it shall be sufficient notice to such unknown interest holders to post such notice to a door or wall of the room or building which contained such seized or sealed property. Any such notice of seizure or sealing shall include procedures for an administrative hearing for return of such property seized or sealed as well as affirmative defenses set forth in this article which may be asserted. 
(c)  Such hearing shall be requested within ten (10) days of the notice of such assessment, seizure or sealing and shall set forth the reasons why said tax, penalties and interest and cigarettes, vending machines or other property should be returned or released. Within five (5) days after receipt of such hearing request the commissioner shall notify the petitioner by certified mail of a date and time for the informal presentation of evidence at a hearing to be held within fifteen (15) days of the date notification is mailed. Any such request for hearing shall be denied if the assessed tax, penalties and interest have not been paid as required or if the request is received more than ten (10) days from first notice to the petitioner of such seizure or sealing. Within five (5) days after the hearing, the commissioner shall notify the petitioner, by registered mail, whether petitioner's request for a correction has been granted or refused. 
(d)  Appropriate relief shall be given by the commissioner if the commissioner is convinced by the preponderance of the evidence that the illegal sale or use of such seized cigarettes or vending machines or other property was not intentional on the part of the petitioner, and that such seized cigarettes were in the possession of a person other than the petitioner without the petitioner's consent at the time such cigarettes, vending machines or other property were seized or sealed or that petitioner was authorized to possess such untaxed cigarettes. If the commissioner is satisfied that the tax was erroneously assessed, the commissioner shall refund the amount erroneously assessed together with any interest and penalties paid thereon and shall return any cigarettes, vending machines or other property seized or sealed to the petitioner. Any petitioner who is dissatisfied with the written decision of the commissioner may within thirty (30) days of the date of such decision, appeal such decision to the appropriate court in the jurisdiction where the seizure or sealing occurred. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-161. - Disposal of seized property. 
    Any seized and confiscated cigarettes, vending machines and other property used in the furtherance of any illegal evasion of the tax may be disposed of by sale or other method deemed appropriate by the commissioner after any petitioner has exhausted all administrative appeal procedures. No credit from any sale or other disposition of cigarettes, vending machines or other property seized shall be allowed toward any tax and penalties assessed. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-162. - Extensions of time. 
    The commissioner of the revenue, upon a finding of good cause, may grant an extension of time to file a tax report upon written application therefor, until the end of the calendar or fiscal month in which any tax report is due hereunder, or for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. In no case shall a request for an extension of time to file a tax report be granted by the commissioner when such request is not received within the due date for filing such tax report. Except as hereinafter provided, no interest or penalty shall be charged, assessed or collected by reason of the granting of such an extension. Where such extension is granted beyond the end of the calendar or fiscal month in which any tax report is due, interest of the tax at a rate of three-quarters (3/4) of one (1) percent per month shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-163. - Penalty for violations of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or imprisonment for not more than twelve (12) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such fine and/or imprisonment shall not relieve any such person from the payment of any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-164. - Separate offenses; continuing violations. 
    Each sale of any quantity or the use, possession, storage or transportation of more than sixty (60) packages of cigarettes upon which the stamp has not been affixed shall be and constitute a separate violation. Each continuing day of violation shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Secs. 22-165-22-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - TAX ON TRANSIENT ROOM RENTALS 

Sec. 22-175. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commissioner: The commissioner of the revenue of the City of Manassas Park and his or her duly designated deputies, assistants, inspectors, clerks or other employees. 
    Hotel: Any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, rooming house or other lodging place within the city offering lodging, as defined in this section, for compensation to any transient, as hereinafter defined in this section. 
    Lodging: Room or space furnished any transient. 
    Person: Any individual, corporation, company, limited liability company, association, firm, partnership or any group of individuals acting as a unit. 
    Transient: Any person who, for a period of not more than ninety (90) consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging or the use of any space at any hotel, for which lodging or use of space a charge is made. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-176. - Levy of tax on transient room rentals; collection generally. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied upon every transient obtaining or occupying lodging within the city, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed by law, a tax equivalent to four (4) percent of the amount charged for such lodging. The tax shall be collected from transients in the manner and at the time provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-177. - Collection from transients; when payable. 
    Every person receiving any payment for lodging or the use of space with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax so imposed from the transient on whom such tax is levied, or from the person paying for such lodging, at the time payment for such lodging is made. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until the same shall have been remitted to the city as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-178. - Report of collection and remittance of tax. 
    The person collecting any tax as provided in this article shall make out a report thereof, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner may prescribe and require, showing the amount of lodging, charges collected and the tax required to be collected and shall sign and deliver such reports with the remittance of such tax to the commissioner. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month covering the amount of tax due and collected during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-179. - Discount. 
    For the purpose of compensating persons required to collect such taxes for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, every person required to collect such taxes shall be allowed three (3) percent of the total amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his or her monthly return; provided, the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-180. - Failure to collect and report tax. 
    If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make within the time provided herein any report and remittance required, the commissioner shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner has secured whatever facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax due and payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalty and interest as provided for in this article and shall notify such person by registered mail, sent to his last place of known address, the amount of such tax and penalty and interest. The total amount thereof shall be payable within ten (10) days of mailing of such notice. The commissioner shall have the power to examine such records for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-181. - Preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and remittance of the taxes imposed by this article to keep and preserve for a period of two (2) years such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the city. The commissioner shall have the power to examine such records, at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make copies and transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-182. - Cessation of business; tax due immediately. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax imposed by this article shall cease to operate, go out of business or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax then payable to the city shall become immediately due and payable, and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due to the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-183. - Exceptions for governmental employees on official business. 
    No tax shall be payable hereunder with respect to any payment for lodging or the use of space paid by or for any federal, Virginia or city official or employee when on official business. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-184. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner to ascertain the name of every hotel offering lodging to a transient in the city, liable for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, which fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make the reports and remittances required by this article. The commissioner may have issued a summons to such person responsible for the hotel offering lodging to a transient, and the summons may be served upon such person by any city police officer in the manner provided by law. One (1) return of the original summons shall be made to the general district court for the city. 
(b)  In the event the purchaser of any transient room rental refuses to pay the tax imposed by this article, the hotel operator may call upon the police department for assistance; and the investigating officer may, when probable cause exists, issue the purchaser a summons returnable to the general district court as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Sec. 22-185. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of (1) a Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, or (2) a Class 1 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed is more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. Each violation or failure shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 96-1700-543, 5-8-96) 
Secs. 22-186-22-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX RELIEF[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-1700-806, § 1, adopted May 16, 2006, added Art. IV, consisting of §§ 22-51-22-54 to the Code. Inasmuch as said article and sections already existed, these provisions have been codified as Art. XI, §§ 22-201-22-204 at the editor's discretion and with the approval of the city. 

Sec. 22-201. - Purpose; definitions; relation to other provisions in Code. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide for the implementation of the changes to the Personal Property Tax Relief Act of 1998 (the "PTRA") effected by enactment of chapter 1 of the Acts of Assembly, 2004 Special Session I, and of item 503 of the 2005 Session Revisions to the 2004-06 Appropriations Act (together, the "2005 Appropriations Act"). 
(b)  Terms used in this article that have defined meanings set forth in the PPTRA shall have the same meanings as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3523, as amended. 
(c)  To the extent that the provisions of this article conflict with any other provision of this Code or other ordinances of the city, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 06-1700-806, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 22-202. - Method of computing and reflecting tax relief. 
(a)  For tax years commencing in 2006, the annual budget of the city shall provide for a reduced personal property tax rate to apply to qualifying vehicles, in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3524(C), as amended by chapter 1 of the Acts of Assembly of 2004, Special Session 1. 
(b)  The governing body shall, by resolution, set the rate of tax relief at a level that it anticipates will fully use all available state PPTRA relief funds provided to the city. Any amount of PPTRA relief funds not used within the city's fiscal year shall be carried forward and used to increase the funds available for personal property tax relief in the following fiscal year. 
(c)  Personal property tax bills shall set forth on their face the specific dollar amount of relief credited with respect to each qualifying vehicle, together with an explanation of the general manner in which relief is allocated. 
(Ord. No. 06-1700-806, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 22-203. - Allocation of relief among taxpayers. 
(a)  Allocation of PPTRA relief shall be provided in accordance with the general provisions of this section, as implemented by the specific provisions of the city's annual budget relating to PPTRA relief. 
(b)  Relief shall be allocated in such as manner as to eliminate personal property taxation of each qualifying vehicle with an assessed value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less. 
(c)  Relief with respect to qualifying vehicles with assessed values of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be provided at a rate, annually fixed in the city budget and applied to the first twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) in value of each such qualifying vehicle, that is estimated fully to use all available state PPTRA relief funds provided to the city. The rate shall be established annually as a part of the adopted budget for the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-1700-806, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 22-204. - Transitional provisions. 
(a)  Pursuant to authority conferred in item 503.D of the 2005 Appropriations Act, the city treasurer is authorized to issue a supplemental personal property tax bill, in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of tax due without regard to any former entitlement to state PPTRA relief, plus applicable penalties and interest, to any taxpayer whose taxes with respect to a qualifying vehicle for tax year 2005 or any prior tax year remain unpaid on September 1, 2006, or such date as state funds for reimbursement of the state share of such bill have become unavailable, whichever earlier occurs. 
(b)  Penalty and interest with respect to bills issued pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be computed on the entire amount of tax owed. Interest shall be computed at the rate provided in section 22-4 of this Code from the original due date of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 06-1700-806, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Secs. 22-205-22-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - INCENTIVES 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-210. - Purpose. 
    The city finds that the development of its non-residential tax base requires incentives, and has determined that an appropriate method of offering such incentives is to create and establish (i) one (1) or more redevelopment districts in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3219.4; (ii) one (1) or more local economic revitalization zones in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1129.2; (iii) one (1) or more local technology zones in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3850; and (iv) one (1) or more local defense production zones in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3853. The city believes that the creation and establishment of such districts and zones will improve the economic conditions of the city, which will in turn benefit the welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 22-211. - Administration. 
(a)  The administrator of the districts and zones created and described in this article shall be the city manager or his designee(s). The administrator, in consultation with the commissioner of the revenue, shall determine and publish the procedures for obtaining the benefits created by this article and for the administration of this article. 
(b)  The administrator shall be the single point-of-contact for qualified businesses to take advantage of the incentives described in this article, and shall provide recommendations as necessary to streamline the processes for a business to qualify for and obtain the incentives. Each business desiring to receive one (1) or more of the incentives described in this article must first submit an application to the administrator describing which incentives are desired and the proposed performance measures. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 22-212. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BPOL tax: The business, professional and occupational license tax imposed and collected by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
    Business: A corporation, limited liability company, partnership, sole proprietorship or other form of entity organized under the relevant provisions of the Code of Virginia or otherwise authorized to conduct business in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Completed; completion: All development and construction required for tenant or owner occupancy has been accomplished, as evidenced by the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the building official. 
    Defense production zone: A zone created to implement the incentives authorized by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3853 for defense production businesses, the boundaries of which are defined in the city's comprehensive plan. 
    Economic revitalization zone: A zone created to implement the incentives authorized by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1129.2 for targeted businesses, the boundaries of which are defined in the city's comprehensive plan. 
    Eligibility date: The first day of the month following the day on which a business has become an eligible business. 
    Eligible business: A business that has fully met both the general eligibility requirements set forth in section 22-213 below and the specific eligibility requirements for the desired incentive(s). 
    Incentive period: The period of time established in a performance agreement during which an eligible business will receive one (1) or more of the tax exemptions described in this article. For real estate property tax exemptions, the incentive period will be based on a fiscal year (i.e., July 1 through June 30); for BPOL tax exemptions, the incentive period will be based on a calendar year (i.e., January 1 through December 31). No real estate property tax incentive period shall extend beyond June 30, 2022; no BPOL tax incentive period shall extend beyond December 31, 2021. 
    Incentive period commencement date: 
(1)  For BPOL tax exemptions-January 1. 
(2)  For real estate property tax exemptions-July 1. 
    Incentive zoning district: One (1) of the following zoning districts, which have been created for the purpose of providing one (1) or more of the incentives described in this article: 
(1)  MU-D Downtown mixed-use district, as defined in section 31-17.A. 
(2)  B-3 Gateway business district, as defined in section 31-19.A. 
(3)  I-2 Light industrial district, as defined in section 31-20.A. 
    Non-residential uses: Uses of property that do not include dwellings, as that term is defined in section 31-6. 
    Performance agreement: An agreement entered into by a business and the city in which the business commits to certain performance measures in order to be eligible for one (1) or more of the incentives described in this article. 
    Performance measure: An eligibility measure that must be maintained throughout an incentive period by a business to continue receiving the tax exemption(s) described in a performance agreement. Performance measures are as follows: 
(1)  The expansion or establishment, and continued operation throughout the incentive period, of a qualifying defense production business; 
(2)  The expansion or establishment, and continued operation throughout the incentive period, of a qualifying technology business; 
(3)  Each multiple of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of new construction or improvements dedicated to non-residential uses, and continued operation of the business throughout the incentive period; 
(4)  Each multiple of ten (10) new employees hired for non-residential uses, with continued employment by the business throughout the incentive period; 
(5)  Each multiple of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in additional assessed value of real estate for the subject real property that is attributed to non-residential uses, maintained throughout the incentive period; and 
(6)  Each multiple of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in new or additional gross receipts for the business that are attributed to non-residential uses, maintained throughout the incentive period. 
    Qualifying defense production business: A company or identifiable subdivision of a company that is engaged in, or performs functions ancillary to or in support of, the design, development, or production of materials, components, or equipment required to meet the needs of national defense and that expands or locates in a defense production zone. In no case shall a use be permitted by a defense production business that is likely to be dangerous or offensive because of odor, dust, fire, explosion, or other reasons, or that uses equipment and/or processes that are likely to produce objectionable noise, vibration, explosion, fire, smoke, or other effect. 
    Qualifying technology business: A company or identifiable subdivision of a company that has fifty (50) percent or more of its gross receipts derived from research, development, manufacturing or rendering of advanced technological products or services and that expands or locates in a technology zone. In no case shall the use of computers or telecommunication services by a company or identifiable subdivision of a company in its administrative operations qualify such company or subdivision as a technology business. 
    Real estate property tax: The ad valorem tax on real property imposed and collected by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
    Redevelopment district: A district created to implement the incentives authorized by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3219.4, the boundaries of which are defined in the city's comprehensive plan. 
    Technology zone. A zone created to implement the incentives authorized by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3850 for technology businesses, the boundaries of which are defined in the city's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12; Ord. No. 13-1700-942, § 1, 4-16-13) 
Sec. 22-213. - General eligibility requirements. 
(a)  In addition to the specific eligibility requirements established for each of the districts and zones described in this article, a business applying for one (1) or more of the incentives described in this article must enter into a performance agreement with the city in which it commits to one (1) or more performance measures. 
(b)  If a business applying for any of the incentives described in this article intends to develop a project in one (1) or more phases, the governing body may, in its sole discretion and upon written request by the business, authorize the business to apply for incentives for each phase or combination of phases, in which case (i) a separate performance agreement must be entered into for each phase or combination of phases, (ii) each phase or combination of phases must qualify for the incentive(s) on its own, and (iii) the incentive period and performance measures for each phase or combination of phases must be distinct from those of the other phases or combinations of phases. 
(c)  If an individual phase of a project includes a residential component and, as a result, does not qualify for incentives on its own, the governing body may, in its sole discretion and upon written request by the business, choose to escrow all or a portion of BPOL taxes and/or real estate property taxes that are collected for the non-residential component of a project, or the non-residential component of a combination of phases if allowed pursuant to subsection (b) above, that otherwise qualifies for the tax exemption described in section 22-214 (i.e., all other requirements for a tax exemption have been met). If taxes are so escrowed, such escrowed taxes will be held by the city treasurer for a period of time equal to one-half (1/2) the incentive period for the project or combination of phases, as applicable (the "escrow period"), and either (i) refunded to the eligible business, upon request, following completion of such non-residential component within the escrow period, or (ii) deposited into the city's general fund if such non-residential component has not been completed within the escrow period. The decision to escrow all or a portion of BPOL taxes and real estate property taxes, and the period for which such taxes will be escrowed, will be memorialized in the performance agreement for the development. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12; Ord. No. 13-1700-942, § 2, 4-16-13) 
Sec. 22-214. - Calculation of tax exemption. 
(a)  Amount eligible for tax exemption. 
(1)  Real estate property tax exemption. Eighty (80) percent of the additional assessed value of real estate attributed to new construction and/or improvements for non-residential uses on real property within a redevelopment district shall be eligible for exemption from real estate property tax pursuant to the formula described in subsection (b) below. To determine the additional assessed value, the city assessor will compare (i) the assessed value of the subject real estate attributed to non-residential uses on the July 1 immediately preceding the completion of such construction and/or improvements (the "baseline assessment") with (ii) the assessed value of the subject real estate attributed to non-residential uses on the subsequent July 1. For each subsequent year, if any, in an incentive period, the city assessor will compare the assessed value of the subject property attributed to non-residential uses to the baseline assessment to determine the additional assessed value that is eligible for the real estate property tax exemption. 
(2)  BPOL tax exemption. Eighty (80) percent of the additional or new gross receipts attributed to any of the following shall be eligible for exemption from BPOL tax pursuant to the formula described in subsection (b) below: 
a.  New development for non-residential uses on assembled parcels of land within an economic revitalization zone; 
b.  A qualifying technology business; or 
c.  A qualifying defense production business. 
To determine the additional gross receipts for a business, the commissioner of the revenue will compare (i) the gross receipts of the business attributed to non-residential uses for the year immediately preceding the year in which the business became an eligible business (the "baseline gross receipts"), to the gross receipts of the business attributed to non-residential uses in the first year of the incentive period. For each subsequent year, if any, in an incentive period, the commissioner of the revenue will compare the gross receipts of the business attributed to non-residential uses to the baseline gross receipts to determine the additional gross receipts that are eligible for the BPOL property tax exemption. 
(b)  Each eligible business will receive a declining real estate property tax exemption and/or BPOL tax exemption for an incentive period(s) that will be determined using a point system, as follows: 
(1)  One (1) point will be awarded for each performance measure achieved by the eligible business. The number of points awarded will correspond to the number of years in the incentive period. A business shall not be awarded more than ten (10) points. 
Example: A new technology business has located in a technology zone. It hires ten (10) new employees, expands an existing structure by ten thousand (10,000) square feet, increases the assessed value of the real estate by ten thousand dollars ($100,000.00), and is awarded four (4) points for performance measures. Assuming all eligibility requirements had been met, the length of the incentive periods for a real estate property tax exemption and a BPOL tax exemption would each be four (4) years. 
(2)  For the first year of an incentive period, the amount exempt from real estate property tax and/or BPOL tax shall be the amount eligible for tax exemption pursuant to subsection (a) above. 
Example: The new technology business had fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in new gross receipts and increased the assessed value of the real estate by one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). In year 1 the amount of new gross receipts exempt from BPOL tax would be forty thousand dollars ($40,000) (eighty (80) percent of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)) and the amount of new assessed value exempt from real estate property tax eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00) (eighty (80) percent of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)). 
(3)  For subsequent years, if any, in an incentive period, the amount exempt from real estate property tax and/or BPOL tax shall be incrementally reduced by a pro rata amount each year, said amount to be determined by dividing the amount exempt in the first year by the number of years in the incentive period. 
Example: If the incentive period is four (4) years in length and the new gross receipts exempt from BPOL tax in the first year is forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), the amount exempt in each subsequent year would be reduced by ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) (forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) ÷ four (4), so that in year 2 the amount exempt would be thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00); in year 3 the amount exempt would be twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); and in year 4 the amount exempt would be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Similarly, if the additional assessed value exempt from real estate tax in the first year is eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00), the amount exempt in each subsequent year would be reduced by twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) (eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00) ÷ four (4)), so that in year 2 the amount exempt would be sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00); in year 3 the amount exempt would be forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00); and in year 4 the amount exempt would be twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). After the expiration of the incentive period, the business would be taxed on the full amount of both the additional assessed value of real estate and the new gross receipts. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 22-215. - Performance agreement. 
(a)  Each performance agreement shall include a requirement, throughout the incentive period, that the business annually certify its eligibility for each tax exemption. If the stated performance measures are not maintained throughout the incentive period, the administrator shall review the eligibility for tax exemptions and will either (i) recalculate the exemption if the businesses still meets at least one (1) performance measure, or (ii) terminate the exemption if the business is no longer an eligible business. In cases where the tax exemption is either recalculated or terminated, the administrator is authorized to re-establish the tax exemption for subsequent years at the rate set forth in the performance agreement if the business once again becomes eligible and/or performance measures are once again met. 
(b)  Prior to entering into a performance agreement with a business, the administrator shall (i) confirm with the treasurer that no taxes, fees or other moneys, including penalties and interest, owed to the city by the business or any related business are outstanding, and (ii) confirm with the commissioner of the revenue and the city assessor that the business and any related business have complied with all requests for information as needed to develop initial assessments for real and personal property and as needed to comply with the requirements of this article. For purposes of this article, a related business is a business' full or partial (i) owner, whether a shareholder, partner, member, sole proprietor or other ownership interest; (ii) parent business; (iii) sister business; or (iv) subsidiary, division, branch or other subunit. The city shall not enter into a performance agreement with a business unless and until all such taxes, fees and other moneys, together with any penalties and interest, have been paid in full by the business and all related businesses. 
(c)  Failure of a business or a related business to pay in full by the due date any taxes, fees or other moneys owed to the city shall result in the loss of the tax exemption(s) unless and until all such taxes, fees and other moneys, together with any penalties and interest, have been paid in full. The city reserves the right to withdraw tax exempt eligibility from any business that is not compliant, or which has a related business that is not compliant, with any city ordinance, regulation or other legal requirement. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
DIVISION 2. - REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 22-216. - Redevelopment districts created. 
    There are hereby created three (3) redevelopment districts, the boundaries of which are defined in the city's comprehensive plan, as follows: 
 City Center Redevelopment District. 
 Conner Center Redevelopment District. 
 Four Corners Redevelopment District. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 22-217. - Incentive. 
    A business shall, upon application and after meeting both general and specific eligibility requirements, receive a limited exemption of real estate property tax on a portion of the additional assessed value of its real estate within a redevelopment district that is attributed to new construction and/or improvements, pursuant to section 22-214 above. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 22-218. - Specific eligibility requirements for tax exemption. 
(a)  In addition to the general eligibility requirements set forth in section 22-213 above, to be eligible for the tax exemption described in this division, the following are required: 
(1)  The business must construct new structures on or make other improvements to real estate that is located in one (1) of the redevelopment districts described in section 22-216 above. 
(2)  The subject real estate must be zoned to the appropriate incentive zoning district. This requirement shall in no way be deemed to obligate or require the planning commission to recommend approval of a rezoning or other land use application or otherwise limit its discretionary advisory authority, or to obligate or require the governing body to approve a rezoning or other land use application or otherwise limit its discretionary legislative authority. 
(b)  The new construction and/or improvements must be described in the performance agreement and must be completed prior to the business becoming fully eligible for the incentives described in this division. 
(c)  An application for a real property tax exemption must be submitted to the administrator. Once the construction and/or improvements have been completed, the business must notify the administrator. Once the administrator has confirmed that all general and specific requirements have been met, he will then instruct the city assessor to determine the new assessed value of the real estate in accordance with subsection 22-214(a)(1) above, which amount will be used to determine the amount of the tax exemption in accordance with subsection 22-214(b) above. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
DIVISION 3. - ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION ZONES 

Sec. 22-219. - Economic revitalization zones created. 
    There are hereby created three (3) economic revitalization zones, which are coextensive with the three (3) redevelopment districts described in section 22-216 above. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 22-220. - Incentives. 
    A business shall, upon application and after meeting both general and specific eligibility requirements, receive a limited exemption of BPOL tax on a portion of the additional gross receipts attributed to new development on its assembled parcels of land within an economic revitalization zone, pursuant to section 22-214 above. In addition, once all general and specific eligibility requirements have been met, the following will be refunded to the business upon the city manager's receipt of a written request: 
(a)  Fees for rezoning the subject property; 
(b)  Fees for site plan review; and 
(c)  Site development and building permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 22-221. - Specific eligibility requirements for incentives. 
(a)  In addition to the general eligibility requirements set forth in section 22-213 above, to be eligible for the incentives described in this division, the following are required: 
(1)  The business must assemble one (1) or more parcels suitable for economic development in one (1) of the economic revitalization zones described in section 22-219 above. 
(2)  The subject real estate must be zoned to the appropriate incentive zoning district. This requirement shall in no way be deemed to obligate or require the planning commission to recommend approval of a rezoning or other land use application or otherwise limit its discretionary advisory authority, or to obligate or require the governing body to approve a rezoning or other land use application or otherwise limit its discretionary legislative authority. 
(b)  A description of the economic development proposed for the assembled parcels of land must be included in the performance agreement and must be completed prior to the business becoming fully eligible for the incentives described in this division. 
(c)  An application for incentives must be submitted to the administrator. Once the economic development on the assembled parcels has been completed, the business must notify the administrator. Once the administrator has confirmed that all general and specific requirements have been met, he will then request that the commissioner of the revenue determine the amount of new gross receipts attributable to the new economic development in accordance with subsection 22-214(a)(2) above, which amount will be used to determine the amount of the tax exemption in accordance with subsection 22-214(b) above. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
DIVISION 4. - TECHNOLOGY ZONE 

Sec. 22-222. - Technology zone created. 
    There is hereby created a technology zone, which is coextensive with the City Center Redevelopment District and the Conner Center Redevelopment District described in section 22-216 above. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 22-223. - Incentives. 
    A qualifying technology business shall, upon application and after meeting both general and specific eligibility requirements, receive a limited exemption of BPOL tax on a portion of the new or additional gross receipts attributed to the qualifying technology business, pursuant to section 22-214 above. In addition, once all general and specific eligibility requirements have been met, the following will be refunded to the business upon the city manager's receipt of a written request: 
(a)  Fees for rezoning the subject property; 
(b)  Fees for site plan review; and 
(c)  Site development and building permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 22-224. - Specific eligibility requirements for incentives. 
(a)  In addition to the general eligibility requirements set forth in section 22-213 above, to be eligible for the incentives described in this division, the following are required: 
(1)  The business must expand or establish a qualifying technology business in the technology zone described in section 22-222 above. 
(2)  The subject real estate must be zoned to the appropriate incentive zoning district. This requirement shall in no way be deemed to obligate or require the planning commission to recommend approval of a rezoning or other land use application or otherwise limit its discretionary advisory authority, or to obligate or require the governing body to approve a rezoning or other land use application or otherwise limit its discretionary legislative authority. 
(b)  A description of the qualifying technology business proposed must be included in the performance agreement. The expansion or establishment of the qualifying technology business must be completed prior to the business becoming fully eligible for the incentives described in this division. 
(c)  An application for incentives must be submitted to the administrator. Once the expansion or establishment of the qualifying technology business has been completed, the business must notify the administrator. Once the administrator has confirmed that all general and specific requirements have been met, he will then request that the commissioner of the revenue determine the amount of new gross receipts attributable to the expanded or newly established qualifying technology business in accordance with subsection 22-214(a)(2) above, which amount will be used to determine the amount of the tax exemption in accordance with subsection 22-214(b) above. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
DIVISION 5. - DEFENSE PRODUCTION ZONE 

Sec. 22-225. - Defense production zone created. 
    There is hereby created a defense production zone, which is coextensive with the Conner Center Redevelopment District described in section 22-216 above. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 22-226. - Incentives. 
    A qualifying defense production business shall, upon application and after meeting both general and specific eligibility requirements, receive a limited exemption of BPOL tax on a portion of the new or additional gross receipts attributed to the qualifying defense production business, pursuant to section 22-214 above. In addition, once all general and specific eligibility requirements have been met, the following will be refunded to the business upon the city manager's receipt of a written request: 
(a)  Fees for rezoning the subject property; 
(b)  Fees for site plan review; and 
(c)  Site development and building permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Sec. 22-227. - Specific eligibility requirements for incentives. 
(a)  In addition to the general eligibility requirements set forth in section 22-213 above, to be eligible for the incentives described in this division, the following are required: 
(1)  The business must expand or establish a qualifying defense production business in the defense production zone described in section 22-225 above. 
(2)  The subject real estate must be zoned to the appropriate incentive zoning district. This requirement shall in no way be deemed to obligate or require the planning commission to recommend approval of a rezoning or other land use application or otherwise limit its discretionary advisory authority, or to obligate or require the governing body to approve a rezoning or other land use application or otherwise limit its discretionary legislative authority. 
(b)  A description of the qualifying defense production business proposed must be included in the performance agreement. The expansion or establishment of the qualifying defense production business must be completed prior to the business becoming fully eligible for the incentives described in this division. 
(c)  An application for incentives must be submitted to the administrator. Once the expansion or establishment of the qualifying defense production business has been completed, the business must notify the administrator. Once the administrator has confirmed that all general and specific requirements have been met, he will then request that the commissioner of the revenue determine the amount of new gross receipts attributable to the expanded or newly established qualifying defense production business in accordance with subsection 22-214(a)(2) above, which amount will be used to determine the amount of the tax exemption in accordance with subsection 22-214(b) above. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-917, § 1, 2-7-12) 
Chapter 23 - TELEPHONES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License tax for telephone companies, § 14-95; fraudulent use of pay telephones, § 17-28; interfering or tampering with property of telephone company, § 17-35; tax on purchase of telephone service, § 22-77 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Use to give false information concerning third person. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously advise or inform another, over any telephone in this city, of the death of, accident to, injury to, illness of or disappearance of some third party, knowing the same to be false. 
(Code 1971, § 27-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-428. 
Sec. 23-2. - Causing telephone to ring with intent to annoy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without intent to converse but with intent to annoy any other person, to cause any telephone not of his own to ring. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to permit or condone the use of any telephone under his control for such purpose. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 27-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-429. 
Sec. 23-3. - Use of obscene, profane, threatening, etc., language over telephone. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use obscene, vulgar, profane, lewd, lascivious or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature, or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate or harass any person, over any telephone in this city. 
(Code 1971, § 27-1) 
Cross reference- Obscenity generally, Ch. 16; public profanity, § 17-16. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-427. 
Sec. 23-4. - Duty of telephone company to furnish information as to violations of chapter. 
    It shall be the duty, on pain of contempt of court, of each telephone company to furnish immediately, in response to a subpoena issued by a circuit court, such information as it, its officers and employees, may possess which, in the opinion of the court, may aid in the apprehension of persons suspected of violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 27-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-431. 
Secs. 23-5-23-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY CALLS 

Sec. 23-16. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, "telephone party line" means a subscribers' line circuit consisting of two (2) or more main telephone stations connected therewith, each station with a distinctive ring or telephone number and "emergency call" means a call to report a fire or summon police, or for medical aid or ambulance service, in a situation where human life or property is in jeopardy and the prompt summoning of aid is essential. 
(Code 1971, § 27-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions. Code of Virginia, § 18.2-426. 
Sec. 23-17. - Relinquishing party line in emergency. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to relinquish a telephone party line after he has been requested to do so to permit another to place an emergency call. A violation of this provision shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any person who is himself using the telephone party line for an emergency call. 
(Code 1971, § 27-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-424. 
Sec. 23-18. - Requesting relinquishment of party line on pretext. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to request another to relinquish a telephone party line on the pretext that he must place an emergency call, knowing such pretext to be false. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1971, § 27-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-425. 
Chapter 24 - TRAFFIC CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Bicycles, Ch. 6; establishment of fire lanes, § 9-2; for-hire vehicles, Ch. 11; vehicle licenses, § 14-114 et seq.; noise from vehicles, § 15-6 et seq.; injuring, tampering with, etc., vehicles, § 17-36; police, Ch. 18; railroads, Ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 20; limitation on stopping vehicles used on streets for sale of beverages, ice cream, etc., § 20-6; washing, greasing, etc., vehicles on street, § 20-7. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic generally, Code of Virginia, Title 46.2; general authority of city to regulate traffic, § 46.2-1300 et seq. (see also, § 15.2-2028). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Title; citation. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the "Traffic Code of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1971, § 16-1) 
Sec. 24-2. - Compliance with chapter; general penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto. Unless otherwise specifically provided, any such violation shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Code 1971, § 16-33; Ord. No. 01-1700-678, § 1, 11-20-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions applicable to violations of state traffic laws, Code of Virginia, § 46.1-16.01; city prohibited from imposing penalty for traffic violation which is greater than penalty imposed by state for similar offense, Code of Virginia, § 46.1-180. 
Sec. 24-3. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of section 46.2-1313 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and in force on the date of the adoption of this Code, except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can have no application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the city. References to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person, within the city, to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia which is adopted by this section; provided, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  In addition, the provisions of article 2 (section 18.2-266 et seq.) of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia, as amended and reenacted are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(c)  All definitions of words and phrases contained in the state law hereby adopted shall apply to such words and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless clearly indicated to the contrary. 
(Code 1971, § 16-2; Ord. No. 82-1700-203, 8-17-82; Ord. No. 83-1700-227, 12-29-83; Ord. No. 84-1700-239, 6-5-84; Ord. No. 85-1700-285, 7-2-85; Ord. No. 86-1700-340, 6-17-86; Ord. No. 89-1700-400, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 89-1700-408, 10-18-89; Ord. No. 90-1700-422, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 90-1700-429, 12-4-90; Ord. No. 91-1700-447, 7-2-91; Ord. No. 92-1700-466, 7-7-92; Ord. No. 93-1700-490, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 95-1700-525, 2-7-95; Ord. No. 95-1700-534, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 96-1700-546, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 97-1700-563, 7-1-97; Ord. No. 98-1700-586, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 99-1700-609, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 00-1700-630, § 1, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 01-1700-670, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 02-1700-688, 7-2-02; Ord. No. 03-1700-719, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 04-1700-750, 7-1-04; Ord. No. 04-1700-751, 7-1-04; Ord. No. 05-1700-783, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 06-1700-807, 6-29-06; Ord. No. 07-1700-833, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 08-1700-854, 6-17-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 09-1700-876, 6-16-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10-1700-891, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 11-1700-910, 6-21-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 13-1700-945, 7-16-13; Ord. No. 14-1700-953, 6-3-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 18-1700-1016, 6-19-18, eff. 7-1-18) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, § 24-35. 
Sec. 24-4. - Authority of fire department officials to direct traffic. 
    Officers of a fire department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of a fire and, while so acting, shall have all the authority of police officers. 
(Code 1971, § 16-4) 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 9-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Direction of traffic by police officers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1309. 
Sec. 24-5. - Permit for parades, marches, processions, motorcades and other organized public assemblies on city streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  Permit required for use of city streets. Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, no parade, march, procession, motorcade or other organized public assembly (referred to in this section as an "event") shall be conducted, allowed or maintained in or upon any city street without first obtaining a permit therefor issued by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Use of sidewalks. The use of city sidewalks shall not require a permit unless the number of participants expected for an event will exceed fifty (50) persons and/or the event is reasonably expected to obstruct or impede vehicles and/or nonparticipating pedestrians. 
(c)  Application. An application for a permit to use city streets or sidewalks for an event shall be filed with the city manager or his designee not less than thirty (30) days in advance of the proposed date of the Event and shall set forth: 
(1)  The name of the applicant; 
(2)  The requested date, time, duration, nature and route or location of the event; 
(3)  An estimate of the number of persons expected to attend; 
(4)  A statement or description of equipment and facilities to be used; and 
(5)  Any other information required by the permit application form. 
The city manager or his designee is authorized to consider applications filed less than thirty (30) days in advance of the proposed date of an Event upon a showing of good cause by the applicant. 
(d)  Issuance; grounds for denial. The city manager or his designee shall, without unreasonable delay and subject to the provisions of this section, issue a permit on proper application unless: 
(1)  A prior application for a permit for the same time and place or overlapping times and places has been made that has been or will be granted and the activities authorized by that permit do not reasonably allow multiple occupancy of that particular area; 
(2)  It reasonably appears that the event will incite a riot, threaten tangible public or private property, or otherwise present a clear and present danger to the public health, safety and/or welfare; 
(3)  The event is of such nature or duration that it cannot reasonably be accommodated along the particular route or in the particular location applied for, considering such things as damage to city streets and/or sidewalks, impairment of a protected area's atmosphere of peace and tranquility, conflict with events already granted permits in nearby areas, and interference with program activities or impairment of public facilities; or 
(4)  The application is for a route/location and/or duration that exceed(s) the reasonable needs of the applicant. In cases covered under this paragraph (4), the city manager or his designee shall issue a permit for such route/location and or duration as is needed for the size of the applicant's event. 
(5)  The event would violate subsection (h) below. 
(e)  Bond. As a condition of permit issuance for an event, the city manager or his designee may require the filing of a bond, payable to the City of Manassas Park, in an amount adequate to cover costs such as restoration, rehabilitation and cleanup of the public areas used and other costs resulting from the proposed use. In lieu of a bond, a permittee may elect to deposit with the city cash equal to the amount of the required bond. 
(f)  Litter and refuse. No event in which the participants litter the streets or sidewalks shall be held in the city unless the person or group holding the event ensures the city that such littering or refuse caused by the event shall be cleaned up immediately upon the termination of the event. 
(g)  Disclaimer regarding views expressed. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall clearly state that the views expressed are those of the Event participants and not necessarily those of the city. 
(h)  Obscenity or immorality. No obscene or immoral event shall be held in the city. 
(i)  Notice of denial. If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be so informed in writing with the reason for the denial set forth. 
(j)  Authorized locations. The city manager or his designee shall determine the availability of city streets and/or sidewalks requested for events on a case-by-case basis. City streets and sidewalks may be designated as not available if activities related to an event would: 
(1)  Cause injury or damage to the city streets, sidewalks or neighboring areas; 
(2)  Unreasonably impair the atmosphere of peace and tranquility maintained in residential, commercial, natural or historic areas or zones; 
(3)  Unreasonably interfere with any interpretive, visitor service or other program activities, or with the governmental, proprietary or administrative activities of the city; 
(4)  Substantially impair the operation or public use of public areas or services of the city; or 
(5)  Present a clear and present danger to the public health, safety and/or welfare. 
(k)  Conditions. The city manager or his designee may impose conditions on the permit which are reasonably consistent with protection and use of the city streets, sidewalks and neighboring areas for the purposes for which they are established. The city manager or his designee may also impose reasonable limitations on the equipment used and the time, duration and route/location for each event. 
(l)  Term. No permit shall be issued for a period in excess of one (1) day, provided that permits may be extended for like periods upon a new application, unless another applicant has requested the use of the same route/location for the same time. 
(m)  Obstructing pedestrians or vehicles; harassment. It is prohibited for persons engaged in activities covered under this section to obstruct or impede pedestrians or vehicles outside the event route or location or to harass individuals with physical contact. 
(n)  Local, state and federal laws. All persons engaged in activities covered under this section shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(o)  Revocation. The city manager or his designee is authorized to revoke a permit under any of those conditions listed in subsection (d) above that constitute grounds for denial of a permit, for violation of subsection (m) or (n) above, or for violation of the terms and conditions of the permit. Such a revocation shall be made in writing with the reason for revocation clearly set forth, except under emergency circumstances when an immediate verbal revocation or suspension may be made, to be followed by written confirmation sent no later than two (2) business days following revocation. 
(p)  Violation of terms of permit. Violation of the terms and conditions of this section or of a permit issued in accordance with this section may result in the suspension or revocation of the permit. More than one (1) violation of the terms and/or conditions of this section or of an issued permit within a one-year period shall result in the suspension of the privilege to apply for a permit for a period of one (1) year commencing on the date written notice is given by the city manager or his designee. 
(q)  Date of application; overlapping applications; city priority. No permit shall be granted for any event beginning more than four (4) months after the date of application. If there are two (2) or more equally timely applications for overlapping routes or locations, then the city manager or his designee will attempt to accommodate all applicants' needs. If this is not possible, the permit for the overlapped route or location shall be awarded by lot. 
(r)  City priority in emergency; cancellation of permit. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, in the event of an emergency the city shall have priority over any permittee for the use of city streets and sidewalks. Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle, the participants in an event shall break ranks or maneuver so as to allow such vehicle to continue on its way. For large, extensive or prolonged emergencies the city manager or his designee shall be authorized to cancel an event. If an event is cancelled because of an emergency, the city manager or his designee will work with the permittee in an effort to reschedule the event. 
(s)  Appeals. Within five (5) business days following any adverse decision in the application of this section, an applicant may file an appeal with the city manager. After appropriate notice to interested parties, the city manager shall hear and decide the appeal. Within three (3) business days following the city manager's decision on the appeal, an applicant may further appeal any adverse decision to the governing body. After appropriate notice to interested parties, the governing body shall hear and decide the appeal at its next regularly-scheduled public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 09-1700-878, § 1, 9-15-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-1700-878, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2009, deleted former § 24-5, and enacted a new § 24-5 as set out herein. The former § 24-5 pertained to permit for parades and processions. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 24-6. - Identification of vehicles in funeral processions. 
    All motor vehicles participating in a funeral procession, when proceeding to any place of burial, shall display illuminated head lamps thereon and such other identification as the chief of police may prescribe. 
(Code 1971, § 16-9) 
Sec. 24-7. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1971, § 16-10) 
Sec. 24-8. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1971, § 16-11) 
Sec. 24-9. - Tail gates to be kept raised; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, trailer or other vehicle equipped with a tail gate to lower or open the tail gate thereon, or to suffer or permit such tail gate to be lowered or opened, except during the time the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded, and except during the time the load on the vehicle necessitates a lowered or opened tail gate as a support for the load. It shall be the duty of the operator of any such vehicle to see that the tail gate on such vehicle is kept closed or raised, except during the times hereinbefore specified. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1971, § 16-14) 
Sec. 24-10. - Removal of vehicles involved in accidents. 
    Whenever a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer involved in an accident is found upon the streets in the city and is so located as to impede the orderly flow of traffic, the police may remove such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer from the streets to some point in the vicinity where such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer will not impede the flow of traffic. 
(Code 1971, § 16-32; Ord. No. 01-1700-678, § 2, 11-20-01) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1212. 
Sec. 24-11. - Arrest procedure for violations of chapter-Generally. 
(a)  Whenever any person is arrested, including an arrest on a warrant, for a violation of any provision of this chapter, except section 24-35, the arresting officer shall, except as otherwise provided in section 24-13 or any other section of this chapter, take the name and address of such person and the license number of his motor vehicle and issue a summons or otherwise notify him in writing to appear at a time and place to be specified in such summons or notice, such time to be at least five (5) days after such arrest, unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing, and such person shall, if he so desires, have a right to an immediate hearing, or a hearing within twenty-four (24) hours, at a convenient hour as before a court having jurisdiction. Such officer shall thereupon and upon the giving by such person of his written promise to appear at such time and place, forthwith release him from custody. 
(b)  Any person refusing to give such written promise to appear shall be taken immediately by the arresting or other police officer before the nearest or most accessible judicial officer or other person qualified to admit to bail having jurisdiction under this chapter. 
(c)  Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear, given in accordance with this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of, and in addition to, the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(d)  Any officer violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office and subject to removal therefrom upon complaint filed by any person in a court of competent jurisdiction. This section shall not be construed to limit the removal of a police officer for other misconduct in office. 
(Ord. No. 73-1700-53, 3-20-73) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-396. 
Sec. 24-12. - Same-Issuance of warrant upon failure to comply with summons; suspension of license for failure to appear. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any person to comply with the terms of a summons or notice as provided in section 24-11, the court may direct the arresting officer to obtain a warrant for his arrest or for the violation of his written promise to appear given in accordance with such section and serve, or cause to be served, or attempt, or cause to be attempted, to serve such warrant on the person. The warrant shall be returnable to the court having jurisdiction of the offense and shall be accompanied by a report by the arresting officer which shall clearly identify the person arrested, specifying the section of this chapter violated, the location of the offense, a description of the motor vehicle and its registration or license number. 
(b)  If the warrant is returned to the court with the notation "not found" or the person named in the warrant does not appear on the return date thereof, the court shall forward a certificate of the fact of nonservice or nonappearance, with a copy of the report specified in subsection (a), to the commissioner, who shall forthwith suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of such person. The order of suspension shall specify the reason for the suspension. Such suspension shall continue until such time as the court has notified the commissioner that the defendant has appeared before the court under the terms of the summons or notice and the warrant. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-938. 
Sec. 24-13. - Same-When arrested person to be taken before judicial officer. 
    If any person arrested for a violation of this chapter is believed by the arresting officer to be likely to disregard a summons issued under section 24-11, the arresting officer shall take such person forthwith before the nearest or most accessible judicial officer or other person qualified to admit to bail, in lieu of issuing the summons required by section 24-11, and such judicial officer or other person shall determine whether or not probable cause exists that such arrested person is likely to disregard a summons, and may issue either a summons or warrant, as he shall determine proper. 
(Ord. No. 73-1700-53, 3-20-73) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-940. 
Sec. 24-14. - Designation of certain private roads as highways for law enforcement purposes. 
(a)  Private roads located in any residential development within the city containing one hundred (100) or more lots or residential dwelling units are hereby designated as highways for law enforcement purposes. 
(b)  The city police department shall enforce all provisions of the City Code and the Code of Virginia regarding motor vehicles and traffic on such private roads. Any law enforcement officer of the city properly enforcing such laws shall not be subject to any civil or criminal action for trespass while enforcing such laws upon any such private road. 
(c)  The designation herein of certain private roads as highways for law enforcement purposes shall not constitute acceptance of any such private road for public ownership or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-758, § 1, 8-17-04) 
Secs. 24-15-24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 24-26. - Stop and yield intersections. 
(a)  The city manager (or such other officer as may be designated) may designate intersections at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way and may cause to be erected appropriate signs or markers at such intersections so that an ordinarily observant person will be aware of the existence of such regulations. 
(b)  No person shall violate the instructions indicated by signs and markers erected pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1971, § 16-3) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301. 
Sec. 24-27. - One-way streets. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the validity of any ordinance establishing or designating any one-way street in the city and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(b)  Whenever the council has established and designated any street as a one-way street, it shall, except as otherwise provided in this section, be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven or moved on such street in a direction other than as designated. This subsection shall become effective as to any such one-way street when signs have been provided therefor as set out in subsection (c). 
(c)  The chief of police is authorized and directed to provide such signs on one-way streets as will apprise an ordinarily observant person of such one-way streets. 
(d)  When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the chief of police that the strict enforcement of subsection (b) will cause an unreasonable hardship on some particular person relative to the loading or unloading of trucks or other vehicles on a one-way street, then in such event the chief of police is authorized to issue a special permit to such person permitting a variance from the provisions of subsection (b). Any such special permit shall be in writing and shall specify the nature of such variance and the place and period of time when such variance shall be permitted. Such permit shall only be issued when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the chief of police that the granting of such permit will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience to the person who seeks such permit. 
(e)  The following public streets shall be designated as one-way streets: 
Evans Street; 
Forrest Street; 
Kent Drive, from Travis Street to Meeker Street; 
Martin Drive from Manassas Drive to Courtney Drive; 
Polk Drive, from Cabbel Drive to Manassas Drive; and 
Scott Drive. 
(Code 1971, §§ 16-16, 16-17; Ord. No. 01-1700-650, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 93-1700-731, § 1, 11-18-03) 
Sec. 24-28. - Speed limits. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the maximum speed limit within the city shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(b)  The maximum speed limit on all one-way streets shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(c)  The maximum speed limit in the vehicle traffic area of the Manassas Park Shopping Center shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(d)  The speed limit on the following public streets shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour: 
Baker Street; 
Colfax Court; 
Courtney Drive, from Manassas Drive to Polk Drive; 
Greenshire Drive; 
Hedgeford Street; 
Kent Drive from Manassas Drive to Cabbel Drive; 
Kirby Street; 
Mace Street; 
Martin Drive from Manassas Drive to Courtney Drive; 
Morton Court; 
Moseby Drive, from Cabbel Drive to Manassas Drive; and 
Travis Street. 
(e)  The speed limit on the following public streets shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour: 
Manassas Drive from Railroad Drive to its easternmost terminus. 
(Code 1971, § 16-18; Ord. No. 85-1700-305, 10-15-85; Ord. No. 98-1700-585, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 99-1700-606, 6-1-99; Ord. No. 2000-1700-636, § 1, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 01-1700-650, § 2, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 02-1700-692, § 1, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 03-1700-731, § 2, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 10-1700-888, § 1, 4-20-10) 
Sec. 24-28.1. - Reduction of speed limits in work areas and areas where roads are under construction or repair. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to reduce, for a temporary period not to exceed sixty (60) days, without an engineering and traffic investigation, the maximum speed limit on any portion of any city highway (as that term is defined in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, as the same may be amended from time to time) on which work is being done or where the highway is under construction or repair (a "highway work zone"). 
(b)  When the city manager has set the maximum speed limit in a highway work zone pursuant to this section, and one (1) or more signs or markers have been placed in conformity with section 46.2-1300 of the Code of Virginia, as the same may be amended from time to time, and such signs or markers are not missing, substantially defaced, or obscured so that an ordinarily observant person under the same circumstances would not be aware of the existence of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in excess of such maximum speed limit. Operation of a motor vehicle in excess of a maximum speed limit established pursuant to this section shall be unlawful and constitute a traffic infraction. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the preceding subsection (b), when workers are present and when a highway work zone is indicated by appropriately placed signs displaying the maximum speed limit and the penalty for violations, operation of any motor vehicle in excess of a maximum speed limit established pursuant to this section shall be unlawful and constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the prosecution or conviction for reckless driving of any motor vehicle operator whose operation of any motor vehicle in a highway work zone, apart from speed, demonstrates a reckless disregard for life, limb, or property. 
(Ord. No. 09-1700-869, § 1, 4-21-09) 
Sec. 24-29. - Police escort for funeral processions; right-of-way for such processions. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to provide a police escort for funeral processions. 
(b)  Funeral processions traveling under police escort shall have the right-of-way in any street through which they may pass. 
State Law reference- Right-of-way for funeral processions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-828. 
Sec. 24-30. - Driving in funeral processions. 
    Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as is practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1971, § 16-8) 
Sec. 24-31. - Driving through funeral or other processions. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or animals comprising a funeral or other authorized procession, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1971, § 16-8) 
Sec. 24-32. - Limitations on backing. 
    The operator of a vehicle in the city shall not back such vehicle, unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1971, § 16-19) 
Sec. 24-33. - Blocking intersections or marked cross-walks. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless there is sufficient space beyond such intersection or crosswalk, in the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding, to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1971, § 16-20) 
Sec. 24-34. - Driving over curbs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over a curb, except for the purpose of parking such vehicle in accord with the provisions of section 24-53. 
Sec. 24-34.1. - Truck traffic prohibited on certain streets. 
(a)  The operator of every truck passing through the city at any point shall only proceed through the city on the truck route or routes depicted in blue on a map on file at city hall and designated within this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck on a street in the city that has been posted with signs prohibiting the passage of trucks. It shall be unlawful for any truck operator to deviate from those streets designated and marked as truck routes; provided, however, that deviations therefrom and return thereto may be made by the most direct routes reasonably possible for the purpose of making or receiving truck deliveries. 
    The word "truck" as used in this section shall mean every motor vehicle meeting any one (1) or more of the following specifications: 
Having more than two (2) axles; 
Having more than six (6) wheel surfaces in contact with the street surface; 
Having a total length that exceeds twenty-four (24) feet; 
Having a registered weight on record with any state agency of motor vehicles that exceeds ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight. 
    The following streets are hereby designated as truck routes within the city: 
Centreville Road [State Route 28]; 
Digital Drive; 
Enterprise Court; 
Euclid Avenue; 
Euclid Court; 
Hardee Drive 
Industry Drive; 
Manassas Drive; 
Mathis Avenue; 
Owens Drive; 
Vassau Court; and 
Venture Court. 
    The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to government or emergency vehicles or to such other vehicles that carry a written permit issued by the chief of police of the city. The chief of police shall issue such permits only where it is clearly demonstrated to him or his authorized agent that such permit will alleviate a hardship or will promote better flow of traffic through the city. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to provide and maintain signs which will apprise an ordinarily observant person of the prohibitions and requirements of this section and which will conform substantially in size, design and color to those erected for the same purpose by the Virginia Department of Transportation. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-740, § 1, 2-17-04) 
Sec. 24-35. - Driving while under influence of alcohol or drugs; adoption of state law. 
    The provisions of article 2 (section 18.2-266 et seq.) of chapter 7 of title 18.2, as amended and reenacted, of the Code of Virginia are hereby adopted and incorporated mutatis mutandis as a part of this chapter to the same extent as if set out at length herein and it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail or refuse to comply with any such provision. 
(Ord. No. 76-1700-84, 8-3-76; Ord. No. 82-1700-203, 8-17-82; Ord. No. 83-1700-227, 12-20-83; Ord. No. 84-1700-239, 6-5-84; Ord. No. 85-1700-285, 7-2-85; Ord. No. 86-1700-340, 6-17-86; Ord. No. 87-1700-360, 6-2-87; Ord. No. 88-1700-381, 6-21-88; Ord. No. 89-1700-400, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 90-1700-422, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 90-1700-429, 12-4-90; Ord. No. 91-1700-447, 7-2-91; Ord. No. 92-1700-466, 7-7-92; Ord. No. 93-1700-490, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 94-1700-509, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 95-1700-525, 2-7-95; Ord. No. 95-1700-534, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 96-1700-546, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 97-1700-563, 7-1-97; Ord. No. 98-1700-586, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 99-1700-609, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 00-1700-630, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 01-1700-670, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 02-1700-688, 7-2-02; Ord. No. 03-1700-719, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 04-1700-750, 7-1-04; Ord. No. 04-1700-751, 7-1-04; Ord. No. 05-1700-783, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 06-1700-807, 6-29-06; Ord. No. 07-1700-833, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 08-1700-854, 6-17-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 09-1700-876, 6-16-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10-1700-891, 6-15-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 11-1700-910, 6-21-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 13-1700-945, 7-16-13; Ord. No. 14-1700-953, 6-3-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 18-1700-1016, 6-19-18, eff. 7-1-18) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt state law on above subject, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313. 
Sec. 24-36. - Operating motor vehicles on or over curbs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause the said vehicle to travel on or over any curb adjoining any public road, street or highway. 
    For the purpose of interpreting this section, "curb" shall be defined as an edging, as of concrete exceeding two (2) inches in height, built along a street to form part of a gutter except at approved driveway entries with aprons. 
    Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 79-1700-146, 12-4-79) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 79-1700-146 amended Code 1971 by adding the provisions included herein as § 24-36. 
Sec. 24-37. - Failure to wear protective bicycle helmet. 
    Any person fourteen (14) years of age or younger riding or being carried on a bicycle within the city on any highway (as defined in Code of Virginia Section 46.2-100), sidewalk, public bicycle path or other public property shall wear a protective helmet. The helmet must be worn on the person's head and must meet the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation. 
    Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). However, such fine shall be suspended (1) for first-time violations and (2) for violators who, subsequent to the violation but prior to the imposition of the fine, purchase helmets of the type required by this section. 
    Violation of this section shall not constitute negligence, assumption of risk, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of operation of any bicycle, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule or procedure pertaining to any civil action. 
(Ord. No. 97-1700-562, 5-20-97) 
Sec. 24-38. - Exceeding speed limit. 
(a)  Operation of any motor vehicle on a highway in any residence district at a speed exceeding that indicated as a maximum speed by signs posted in such district by or on the authority of the governing body through its city manager, which also display the penalty for violation, shall be unlawful and shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), in addition to any other penalties provided by law. The terms "highway" and "residence district" when used in this article shall have the definitions respectively ascribed to them in the Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
(b)  Residents in a residence district may petition the governing body to have one (1) or more signs described in the preceding subsection (a) posted along any street or portion of a street in such residence district. Any such petition must be signed by residents representing more than fifty (50) per cent of the residences on the street or portion of a street that is the subject of the petition. 
(Ord. No. 97-1700-573, 10-21-97; Ord. No. 07-1700-817, § 1, 11-21-06) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 97-1700-573, adopted Oct. 21, 1997, set out provisions intended to create a new section, § 24-37. As § 24-37 already existed in the Code and at the editor's discretion, the provisions of said ordinance were set out as § 24-38. 
Sec. 24-39. - Safety equipment required for mopeds; penalty for violation. 
    Every person operating a moped on a public street or highway in the City of Manassas Park shall wear a face shield, safety glasses, or goggles of a type approved by the superintendent of the Virginia Department of State Police, or have his moped equipped with safety glass or a windshield at all times while operating such vehicle, and operators and passengers thereon, if any, shall wear protective helmets of a type approved by the superintendent. 
    Violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction and shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-706, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 24-40. - Operator to give full time and attention to driving. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the streets or highways of this city without giving his full time and attention to the operation of the vehicle. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction, not reportable to the department of motor vehicles, but punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Ord. No. 15-1700-970, § 1, 6-2-15) 
Sec. 24-41. - Photo and video monitoring systems to enforce law against passing stopped school buses; penalty. 
(a)  The Manassas Park City School Board is hereby authorized to install and operate photo and/or video monitoring systems in or on public schools buses operated by the school board, or to contract with a private vendor to install and operate such systems, for the purpose of recording violations of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-844.A. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "monitoring system" means a system with one (1) or more camera sensors and computers installed and operated on a school bus that produce live digital and recorded photographs or videos of motor vehicles being operated in violation of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859. 
(c)  All monitoring systems installed on public school buses shall, at a minimum, produce a recorded image of the license plate of the motor vehicle and shall record the activation status of at least one (1) warning device as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1090, and the time, date, and location of the school bus when the image is recorded. 
(d)  The driver of a motor vehicle found to be in violation of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859, based on evidence obtained from a photo or video monitoring system, shall be liable for a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) imposed in accordance with this section. 
(e)  Any person who receives a summons or notice of violation from a law enforcement officer pursuant to this section may waive his right to appear in court and be formally tried for the offense pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 16.1-69.40:1.B. The waiver shall be effective when the person pays two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to the Manassas Park Treasurer's Office within thirty (30) business days after receipt of the summons or notice of violation. 
(f)  All penalties collected for violations pursuant to this section shall be paid into the city treasury. The treasurer, after first deducting costs incurred by the police department in reviewing violations, shall remit the remaining balance of funds received to the school board. 
(Ord. No. 17-1700-1001, § 1, 5-2-17; Ord. No. 17-1700-1007, § 1, 8-15-17) 
Secs. 24-42-24-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Parking bicycles at Manassas Park Shopping Center, § 6-4; open storage of inoperative motor vehicles in residential districts, § 17-53; limitation on parking recreational equipment on streets, § 31-32(b)(2). 
State Law reference- General authority of city to regulate parking, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 

Sec. 24-47. - Regulations of city manager relative to parking. 
(a)  The city manager (or such other officer as may be designated) may classify with reference to parking and may designate the time, place and manner such vehicles may be allowed to park on the streets and highways, and may make and enforce such additional rules and regulations as parking conditions may require. When any parking regulation is established pursuant to this section, the city manager (or other designated officer) shall cause to be erected appropriate signs or markers so that an ordinarily observant person, who may be affected by such regulation will be aware of such regulation. 
(b)  When any regulation is made pursuant to this section and when appropriate signs or markers have been erected as required by this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such regulation. 
(Code 1971, § 16-3; Ord. No. 2000-1700-638 § 1, 10-17-00) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 24-48. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(2)  Within an intersection. 
(3)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(4)  On a crosswalk. 
(5)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; provided that, where there is no crosswalk at an intersection, no person shall so park a vehicle within twenty (20) feet from the intersection of curblines or, if none, then within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of property lines. 
(6)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(7)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by official signs or markings. 
(8)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing. [3] 
(9)  Within fifteen (15) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance, when properly signposted. 
(10)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic. 
(11)  On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(12)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway or within a tunnel. 
(13)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(14)  In spaces reserved for handicapped persons. 
(15)  In spaces reserved for residents of the city unless such vehicle displays a valid motor vehicle license decal issued by the city. 
(16)  In a designated fire lane. 
(17)  By a curb which has been painted yellow under the authority of the city manager. 
(18)  In front of or adjacent to a residential mailbox so as to obstruct or retard the passage of the United States mail or any carrier or vehicle carrying the mail. 
(19)  On the side of a street, unless parked parallel to and no farther than six (6) inches from the curb or shoulder, and facing in the same general direction as the flow of traffic. 
(b)  No person, other than a police officer, shall move a vehicle into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1971, § 16-34; Ord. No. 81-1700-182-A, 10-6-81, Ord. No. 2000-1700-638, § 1, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 01-1700-678, § 3, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 07-1700-821, § 3, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 10-1700-885, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Cross reference- Trash and garbage obstructing mailboxes, § 13-2; placing obstructions in or on streets, gutters and sidewalks, § 20-3. 
State Law reference- Parking in front of driveways, near fire hydrants, etc., Code of Virginia § 46.2-1239. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Prohibition against standing vehicle on railroads tracks, § 19-2. 

Sec. 24-49. - Angle parking. 
    Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police may, when in his discretion the public interest so requires, provide for angle parking on any street or portion thereof; provided, that such streets are marked so as to apprise an ordinarily observant person of such regulation. 
(Code 1971, § 16-36) 
Sec. 24-50. - Parking a vehicle having no current city motor vehicle license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer registered in Manassas Park to fail to obtain and display a current city motor vehicle license as described in article III, city vehicle license, of chapter 14, Licenses, of the Code of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor, the penalty for which shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(c)  Local law enforcement officers are authorized to issue citations, summonses, parking tickets, and/or uniform traffic summonses for violations of this section to all residents of Manassas Park to which [whom] a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer is registered. 
(d)  A violation of this section by the registered owner of any vehicle registered in Manassas Park shall not be discharged by payment of a fine except upon presentation of satisfactory evidence that a current city motor vehicle license has been obtained. 
(Code 1971, § 16-35; Ord. No. 79-1700-140, 7-3-79; Ord. No. 79-1700-141, 8-21-79; Ord. No. 03-1700-704, § 1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 11-1700-906, § 1, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 24-51. - Parking of motor trucks prohibited (excluding recreational vehicles); exception. 
(a)  No person shall park on the streets of the city any motor truck meeting any one of the following specifications: 
(1)  Having more than two (2) axles; 
(2)  Having more than six (6) wheel surfaces in contact with street surface; 
(3)  That exceeds a total length of twenty-four (24) feet; 
(4)  Registered with any state agency of motor vehicles exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight. 
(b)  A motor truck meeting any of the four (4) enumerated descriptions above may be parked on the streets of the city for the purpose of receiving loads and making deliveries to city residents. 
(Ord. No. 74-1700-63, 9-3-74; Ord. No. 86-1700-348, 10-21-86; Ord. No. 87-1700-362, 6-2-87) 
Sec. 24-51.1. - Parking when snow emergency plans are in effect. 
(a)  The procedures prescribed in this section are adopted and shall be in effect when a snow emergency has been declared by the mayor or the city council or its delegated agent. 
(b)  In the absence of the mayor and a conclusive decision of the council or its agent, the city manager or the assistant city manager may invoke either of the snow emergency plans in order of the plans. The order of the plans are: Snow emergency plan No. 1; snow emergency plan No. 2. 
(c)  When the proper authorities invoke snow emergency plan No. 1, all vehicles shall be parked on the side of the street on which off numbered houses are located. Any vehicle improperly parked will be issued a warning citation for improper parking and moved to the proper side of the street by the city. Any vehicle improperly parked after the snow emergency plan has been in effect for twenty-four (24) hours or any vehicle having been issued a warning citation and moved, as herein required, will be issued a citation for improper parking. 
(d)  After snow emergency plan No. 1 has been in effect a sufficient length of time to clear the streets and the weather conditions eliminate the further possibility of more snowfall for a reasonable length of time, the proper authorities, may declare snow emergency plan No. 2 in effect. All vehicles parked on the streets will be parked on the side of the street on which even numbered houses are located. Any vehicle improperly parked will be issued a warning citation for improper parking and moved to the proper side of the street by the city. Any vehicle improperly parked after snow emergency plan No. 2 has been in effect for twenty-four (24) hours or any vehicle having been issued a warning citation and moved, as herein required, will be issued a citation for improper parking. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to eliminate or take precedence over any other ordinance concerning parking, except where it is so stated. 
(Ord. No. 78-1700-113, 1-24-78) 
Sec. 24-52. - Parking on unpaved portion of street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on the unpaved portion of any street. 
Sec. 24-53. - Parking on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on or obstruct any portion of a sidewalk which is set aside for the use of the public, unless temporarily in the process of loading or unloading furniture, appliances, building materials and the like. 
(Ord. No. 72-1700-48, 5-2-72) 
Sec. 24-53.1. - Parking for the handicapped; reserved areas; fine. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any nonhandicapped operator of a motor vehicle to park any motor vehicles in a parking space reserved for handicapped persons at privately owned shopping centers and business offices, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. A city police officer, or any other authorized law enforcement officer, may issue a ticket or summons for any violation of this section without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of such shopping center or business office. 
(b)  The following motor vehicles may lawfully park in parking spaces reserved for the handicapped at privately owned shopping centers and business offices: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle registered to a handicapped person which is identified by a decal or distinguishing license plate issued by the division of motor vehicles of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(2)  Any motor vehicle actually being used to transport a handicapped person which displays the distinguishing decal issued by the division of motor vehicles of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(3)  Any motor vehicle which is registered in any state other than Virginia that displays such other state's license plate decal, or other device, indicating that the vehicle is registered to, or being used to transport, a handicapped person. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the distinguishing license plates and decals issued by the division of motor vehicles of the Commonwealth of Virginia shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Disabled veteran (DV0-000). 
(2)  Handicapped person (HP0-000). 
(3)  Handicapped person license plates displaying the international symbol of access. 
(4)  Decals issued by the division of motor vehicles for display on the sun visor of the driver's side of a vehicle, when the vehicle is parked in an area reserved for handicapped parking. 
(d)  For purposes of this section a parking space reserved for handicapped persons shall be any parking space located at a privately owned shopping center or business office that is marked by a sign. A symbol painted on the ground indicating that the parking space is reserved for handicapped persons is optional. Such sign and painted symbol may consist of words or phrases or may consist of the international symbol of access adopted by the Rehabilitation International Assembly. 
(e)  For purposes of this section a "handicapped person" shall be any person by the veterans' administration, social security administration, division of motor vehicles or the Commonwealth of Virginia, or any comparable organization or department of any other state. 
(Ord. No. 81-1700-182, 10-6-81; Ord. No. 89-1700-395, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 91-1700-450, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 2000-1700-638, § 1, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 18-1700-1019, § 1, 6-19-18, eff. 7-1-18) 
Sec. 24-53.2. - Parking reserved for residents of the city; reserved areas; fine. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle to park any motor vehicle in a parking space reserved for residents of the city unless such vehicle displays a valid motor vehicle license decal issued by the city. A city police officer, or any other authorized law enforcement officer, may issue a ticket or summons for any violation of this section. 
(b)  Any person receiving a ticket or summons showing a specific violation of this section may, within twenty-four (24) hours of the issuance of such ticket or summons, pay to the city treasurer the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) as a fine for such violation, and on such payment, he shall be relieved of further prosecution for such violation. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a parking space reserved for residents of the city shall be any parking space that is marked by a sign that provides reasonable notice. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1700-638, § 1, 10-17-00) 
Sec. 24-54. - Backing to curbs. 
    No vehicle shall be backed up to a curb, except during the time actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise therefrom. 
(Code 1971, § 16-37) 
Sec. 24-55. - Manner of using loading zones. 
    Where a loading and unloading zone has been set apart by the city manager, the following regulations shall apply with respect to the use of such areas: 
(1)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. All delivery vehicles, other than regular delivery trucks using such loading zones, shall be identified by the owner's or company's name in letters three (3) inches high on both sides of the vehicle. 
(2)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in a space marked as a curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or bundles, when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or is about to enter such loading space. 
(Code 1971, § 16-38) 
Sec. 24-56. - Manner of using bus stops and taxicab stands. 
    Where a bus stop or taxicab stand has been set apart by the city manager, the following regulations shall apply as to the use thereof: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1971, § 16-39) 
Sec. 24-57. - General regulations governing private property. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any private lot or lot area, without the express or implied consent of the owner thereof. Whenever signs or markings have been erected on any lot or lot area, contiguous or adjacent to a street, thoroughfare or alley, indicating that no vehicles are permitted to stand or park thereon, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle across any curb or lot line or over any driveway from a street or alley into such lot or area for the purpose of standing or parking such vehicle, or for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in such lot or lot area. 
(Code 1971, § 16-43) 
Sec. 24-57.1. - Penalty for violation of parking ordinances or regulations; presumption as to guilt of owner of vehicle; payment of fine; contest of citation; notice of summons for delinquent fines. 
(a)  In the case of any violation of any parking regulation or ordinances contained in this article, or, with the exception of the zoning ordinance, any other ordinance of the City of Manassas Park relative to parking, the penalty therefore shall be a fine of forty dollars ($40.00) for each such violation. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, the fine for a nonhandicapped operator of a motor vehicle parking in a space reserved for handicapped persons as prohibited by section 24-53.1 shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and the fine for violation of subsections (3) and (16) of section 24-48 shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  In any prosecution, for any violation of any ordinance or regulation relative to parking, proof that the vehicle described in the notice of violation was parked in violation of an ordinance or any regulation adopted thereunder, together with proof that the defendant was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a rebuttable presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(d)  In the event that the defendant elects not to contest the notice of violation issued against him pursuant to the provisions of this section, then within thirty (30) days following receipt of said notice of violation, he shall pay the penalty provided for in subsection (a) above to the treasurer of the City of Manassas Park or his designated agent. The treasurer shall collect and account for all sums received in payment of such uncontested citations. 
(e)  If the defendant elects to contest the notice of violation issued against him under the provisions of the ordinance referenced above, he shall, within five (5) calendar days following receipt thereof, notify the chief of police or his designated agent in writing of his intent to contest said citation, whereupon the chief of police or his designated agent shall certify in writing to the clerk of the general district court the defendant's intention to contest said citation. The clerk shall proceed to docket the case as provided by law. 
(f)  In the event that the defendant has not notified the chief of police or his designated agent of his intention to contest the parking citation within the five-day period set forth in subsection (e) above and has failed to pay the fine due within the 30-day period set forth in subsection (d) above, the fines set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above shall be doubled and the chief of police or his designated agent shall notify said person, by letter addressed to the person's last known address or the address shown for such violator on the records of the department of motor vehicles, that he may pay any fine required by law for such violation within thirty (30) days following receipt of said notice, and that if he fails to do so, a summons or other appropriate process may issue against him. The notice required by this section shall be sent in an envelope bearing the words "Law Enforcement Notice" stamped or printed thereon in letters at least one-half (1/2) inch in height. In the event that the defendant does not pay any fine required by law within the 30-day period provided in this subsection (f), the fine shall be deemed delinquent, and either (i) the police officer who issued the notice of violation will then seek the issuance of a criminal summons or other appropriate process, or (ii) the treasurer will proceed to collect the delinquent fine using a third party collection agency or notify the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles that reissuance or renewal of vehicle registration is to be delayed until full payment of the delinquent fine has been made with the treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 78-1700-122, 6-20-78; Ord. No. 79-1700-148, 12-4-79; Ord. No. 81-1700-182A, 10-6-81; Ord. No. 84-1700-230, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 89-1700-395, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 2000-1700-638, § 1, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 01-1700-678, § 4, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 18-1700-1019, § 2, 6-19-18, eff. 7-1-18) 
Sec. 24-57.2. - Removal or immobilization of motor vehicles against which there are outstanding parking violations. 
(a)  Whenever there is found any motor vehicle parked upon a public street or highway or other public ground within the city against which there are three (3) or more outstanding unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking citations or parking violation notices, such vehicle may, by or under the direction of a city police officer, be removed or conveyed, by towing or otherwise, to a place in the city or in an adjacent locality designated by the city chief of police for the temporary storage of such vehicle, or such vehicle may be immobilized in a manner which will prevent its removal or operation except by authorized officers or members of the city police department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the police officer removing or immobilizing a motor vehicle pursuant to this section, or under whose direction such vehicle is removed or immobilized, to inform as soon as practicable the owner of the removed or immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking citations or parking violation notices for which such vehicle was removed or immobilized. In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle under this section, there shall be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, a notice warning that such vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move such vehicle might damage it. 
(c)  The owner of an immobilized vehicle, or other person acting on his behalf, shall be allowed at least twenty-four (24) hours from the time of immobilization to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle. Failure to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle within that time period may result in the removal of such vehicle to a storage area for safekeeping under the direction of a police officer or member of the police department. 
(d)  The owner of a motor vehicle removed or immobilized pursuant to this section, or other person acting on his behalf, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of such vehicle by payment of the outstanding parking fees for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized and by payment of all costs incidental to immobilization, removal and storage of the vehicle, and the efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle. Should the owner fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs, or should the identity or whereabouts of the owner be unknown and unascertainable, the motor vehicle may be sold in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 46.2-1213 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 18-1700-1019, § 3, 6-19-18, eff. 7-1-18) 
Sec. 24-58. - Unattended vehicles-Removal, storage and sale, generally. 
(a)  An "unattended vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof that: 
(1)  Is left unattended on a public highway or other public property and constitutes a traffic hazard; 
(2)  Is illegally parked; 
(3)  Is left unattended for more than ten (10) days on public property, or is left unattended for more than ten (10) days on private property without the permission of the property owner, lessee, or occupant and no sign is posted on such private property as set forth in subsection 24-58(b) herein; or 
(4)  Is immobilized on a public roadway by weather conditions or other emergency situation. 
(b)  Any owner of private property that is normally left open to the public for parking may, upon full compliance with chapter 31 herein, post signs on his property warning that vehicles left on such property for more than seventy-two (72) hours will be towed or removed at their owners' expense. Upon complaint of the owner of such property, any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof that has been left for more than seventy-two (72) hours thereon shall be presumed to be an unattended vehicle and will be disposed in accordance with this section. 
(c)  Any unattended vehicle may be removed for safekeeping, by or under the direction of a law-enforcement officer, to a storage area; provided that no such unattended vehicle shall be so removed from private property without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. 
(d)  Any person at whose request an unattended vehicle is removed from private property pursuant to this section shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of the removal, storage or sale thereof; and any writing requesting the removal of an unattended vehicle from private property shall include language indemnifying the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of the removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(e)  Each removal under this section shall be reported immediately to the police department, and notice thereof shall be given to the owner of the unattended vehicle as promptly as possible. 
(f)  Before obtaining possession of an unattended vehicle removed pursuant to this section, the owner of such unattended vehicle shall pay to the city, and any other parties entitled thereto, all costs incidental to the vehicle's removal and storage and all costs incidental to locating the owner. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay such costs, or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search has been made, and after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the division of motor vehicles of this state against the unattended vehicle, the vehicle shall be treated as an abandoned vehicle and will be disposed in accordance with section 24-60. 
(g)  Any unattended vehicle shall be presumed to be an abandoned vehicle, and will be disposed of in accordance with section 24-60, if it: 
(1)  Lacks either a current license plate, a current county, city or town license plate or sticker, or a valid state safety inspection certificate or sticker; and 
(2)  Has been in a specific location for four (4) days without being moved. 
(Code 1971, §§ 16-40, 16-44; Ord. No. 03-1700-726, § 1, 9-2-03) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213; department of motor vehicles to be notified of removals, § 46.2-1215. 
Sec. 24-59. - Same-Contracts with private persons for removal and storage. 
    The city may enter into contracts with the owners or operators of garages or other storage areas for the removal or storage of unattended vehicles as defined in section 24-58. The contracts shall provide for the payment by the city of reasonable charges for the removal and storage of such unattended vehicles, shall require such owners or operators to deliver such vehicles to the owners thereof or their agents upon demand therefor, provided that such owners or owners' agents first provide satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership or agency and make payment of such removal and storage charges, and shall require the owners or operators of such garages or places of storage to indemnify the owners of such vehicles for injury or damage thereto resulting from the negligent removal or storage thereof, and such owners or operators shall be required to provide themselves with adequate liability insurance to cover such indemnity. 
(Code 1971, § 16-41; Ord. No. 03-1700-726, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 24-60. - Removal and disposition of abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  An "abandoned vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof that: 
(1)  Is inoperable and is left unattended on public property, other than on an interstate highway or primary highway, for more than forty-eight (48) hours; 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours; 
(3)  Is inoperable, left unattended, or both, on an interstate highway; 
(4)  Is inoperable, left unattended, or both, on the shoulder of a primary highway; or 
(5)  Is presumed to be an abandoned vehicle pursuant to the provisions of subsection 24-58(g). 
(b)  An "inoperable abandoned vehicle" shall mean an abandoned vehicle that is inoperable and for which the fair market value, as determined by the city commissioner of the revenue, is less than the cost of its restoration to an operable condition. 
(c)  Any abandoned vehicle, or any vehicle treated as an abandoned vehicle pursuant to subsection 24-58(f), may be taken into custody and disposed of by the police department or an authorized agent of the city acting under the direction of a law enforcement officer ("authorized agent"). 
(1)  The police department or any authorized agent that takes an abandoned vehicle into custody shall, within fifteen (15) days, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, notify the owner of record of the abandoned vehicle and any person of record having a security interest in the vehicle, that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall: 
a.  State the year, make, model, and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle; 
b.  Set forth the location of the facility where it is being held; 
c.  Inform the owner and any person having a security interest therein of their right to reclaim the vehicle within fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice, provided that all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody shall first be paid by the owner or person(s) having a security interest in the vehicle; and 
d.  State that the failure of the owner or person(s) having a security interest in the vehicle to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall constitute (i) a waiver by the owner and any person having a security interest of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and (ii) consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. 
(2)  If records of the department of motor vehicles ("DMV") contain no address for the owner or no address of any person shown by the DMV's records to have a security interest in the vehicle, or if the identity and addresses of the owner and any person having a security interest in the vehicle cannot be determined with reasonable certainty, notice by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice pursuant to this article as to any person who cannot be notified pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this section. Notice by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned motor vehicles. Any notice of this kind shall be within the time requirements prescribed by this section for notice by mail and shall have the same contents required for a notice by mail. 
(d)  If an abandoned vehicle is not reclaimed pursuant to subsection 24-60(b), the police department or authorized agent shall sell it at public auction. The purchaser of the motor vehicle shall take title to the motor vehicle free of all liens and claims of ownership of others, shall receive a sales receipt at the auction, and shall be entitled to apply to and receive from the DMV a certificate of title and registration card for the vehicle. The sales receipt from the sale shall be sufficient title only for purposes of transferring the vehicle to a demolisher for demolition, wrecking, or dismantling, and in that case no further titling of the vehicle shall be necessary. From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle the city or its authorized agent shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to subsection 24-60(b). Any remainder from the proceeds of such sale shall be held for the owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or any person having security interests in the vehicle, as their interests may appear, for ninety days, and then be deposited into the treasury of the locality in which the abandoned motor vehicle was abandoned. 
(e)  Any inoperable abandoned vehicle taken into custody pursuant to the provisions of this section may be disposed of to a demolisher, without title and without the notification procedures set forth in this section, by the city or the person on whose property or in whose possession the inoperable abandoned vehicle is found. The demolisher, on taking custody of the inoperable abandoned vehicle, shall notify the DMV on forms and in the manner prescribed by the commissioner of the DMV. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no other report or notice shall be required in this instance. 
(Code 1971, § 16-42; Ord. No. 03-1700-726, § 1, 9-2-03) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1214. 
Sec. 24-61. - Limitation on towing fees for vehicles located on private property. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this article III, if the owner or representative or agent of the owner of an unattended vehicle subject to removal from private property pursuant to section 24-58 is present and removes the unattended vehicle from such private property before it is actually towed, the unattended vehicle shall not be towed, but the owner or representative or agent of the owner of the unattended vehicle shall be liable for a reasonable fee, not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00), in lieu of towing. 
(Code 1971, § 16-44; Ord. No. 03-1700, 726, § 1, 9-2-03) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1215. 
Sec. 24-62. - Sale of personal property found in vehicles. 
    Any personal property found in any unattended vehicle or abandoned vehicle may be sold incident to the sale of any such vehicle authorized pursuant to section 24-60. 
(Ord. No. 79-1700-142, 8-21-79; Ord. No. 79-1700-143, 8-21-79; Ord. No. 80-1700-167, 11-18-80; Ord. No. 03-1700-726, § 1, 9-2-03) 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1200-46.2-1208. 
Sec. 24-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-1700-726, § 1, adopted Sept. 2, 2003, deleted § 24-63, which pertained to unlawful to keep inoperative motor vehicles; definitions, removal and disposition and derived from Ord. No. 87-1700-358, § 2, adopted April 21, 1987. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-1700-638, § 2, adopted Oct. 17, 2000, repealed former Art. IV, §§ 24-47-24-76, in its entirety which pertained to parking meter zones and derived from Ord. No. 92-1700-464, adopted May 19, 1992. 

Secs. 24-64-24-76. - Reserved. 
Chapter 25 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; plumbing code adopted, § 7-18; erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 8; filling of wells prior to abandonment, § 17-55; covers required on certain wells, § 17-56; subdivision of land, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Public water supply, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167 et seq.; authority of city to establish, maintain and operate waterworks and sewage disposal system, § 15.2-2109 et seq.; authority to regulate sewage disposal, § 15.2-2157. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Developers to furnish plans showing location of water mains and sewers. 
    All developers doing business in or with the city shall be required to furnish the city with an "as built" plan showing the water main, sanitary sewer and storm sewer locations. 
(Ord. No. 74-1700-59, 2-19-74) 
Sec. 25-2. - Approved method of disposal of human excrement-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any house used as a human habitation, any warehouse or any public building or other place where human beings congregate or are employed in the city to use or occupy or to rent or lease the same for use or occupancy by any person, or for any person to use or occupy the same, unless and until the house or building in question shall have been supplied or equipped with an approved method of disposal of human excrement of such construction as will comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 29-15) 
Sec. 25-3. - Same-What constitutes; maintenance. 
(a)  For the purpose of section 25-2, "an approved method of disposal of human excrement" shall be deemed to be either: 
(1)  A flush toilet connected to an approved public or private sewer. 
(2)  A flush toilet connected to an approved, properly installed septic tank system. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant or lessee of any premises properly supplied with an approved method of disposal of human excrement, as defined in this section, to misuse or neglect the same, so as to allow or cause it to cease to be sanitary. 
(Code 1971, §§ 29-16, 29-29) 
State Law reference- Authority to require septic tanks, sewer connections or other means of sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2157. 
Sec. 25-4. - Pit privies prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain a pit privy in the city. 
(Code 1971, § 29-28) 
Sec. 25-5. - Separate toilet facilities required for each family dwelling unit. 
    Any house or structure used as a human habitation shall have separate toilet facilities for each family dwelling unit. 
(Code 1971, § 29-17) 
Sec. 25-6. - When sewer connection required. 
    If a public or private sewer is within three hundred (300) feet of a building, the owner shall connect such building to the public sewer or to the private sewer, if the owner of the private sewer will permit such connection, and no other method of sewage disposal shall be used. 
(Code 1971, § 29-21) 
State Law reference- Authority to require sewer connection, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-876. 
Sec. 25-7. - Purchase and installation of water meter. 
    All persons who desire to connect their premises to the city's water system shall purchase a water meter from the City of Manassas Park. The city shall install such meter and it shall thereafter become and remain the property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-1700-846, 3-4-08) 
Sec. 25-8. - Availability fee for connections. 
(a)  Generally. Any person who is connected or who shall hereafter connect the water and sewerage facilities of any premises to the water and sewerage systems of the City of Manassas Park shall pay or cause to be paid the sums hereinafter provided for the availability of and connection to such systems. The availability fee shall be reserved and restricted for the City of Manassas Park's Water and Sewer (Enterprise) Capital Fund usage. 
(b)  Residential uses. The availability fee for connecting to the water and sewer systems of the City of Manassas Park for each equivalent residential dwelling unit within and outside the City of Manassas Park with standard, five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch meter shall be fourteen thousand, three hundred dollars ($14,300.00). The total availability fee shall consist of sixty-four (64) per cent of the availability fee for sewer connection and thirty-six (36) per cent of the availability fee for water connection. Any variance shall require separate approval of the governing body. 
For the purpose of this section, the following shall constitute an equivalent residential dwelling unit: 
(1)  Each single-family attached or detached house. 
(2)  Each unit in a two-family or townhouse development, whether owned or rented. 
(3)  Each sixteen (16) pupils in a school building. 
(4)  Each trailer space in a trailer court. 
(5)  Each equivalent residential dwelling unit of multifamily dwelling units. 
For the purpose of this section, each one-bedroom multifamily dwelling unit shall constitute 0.60 equivalent residential dwelling unit, each two-bedroom multifamily dwelling unit shall constitute 0.64 equivalent residential dwelling unit and each multifamily dwelling unit containing three (3) or more bedrooms shall constitute 1.0 equivalent residential dwelling unit. 
For the purpose of this section, the term multifamily dwelling unit shall mean a single dwelling unit within a multifamily dwelling, whether rented or owned and shall not include townhouses. 
(c)  All other uses. There are hereby established the following availability fees for connecting to water and sewer systems of the City of Manassas Park for all other uses on the basis of the greater of: (i) the amount based on the number of fixture units as shown in paragraphs (d) and (e) below or (ii) the amount based on the size of the required water meter, as shown in paragraph (f) below. 
(d)  Availability fee based on fixture units. The availability fees shall be calculated based on the number of fixtures units, as shown below: 
(1)  For each fixture unit (including roughed-in fixture units) three hundred dollars ($300.00); however, 
(2)  The fixture unit count for uses discharging continuously or semicontinuously to a drainage system leading to the systems of the city shall be increased by two (2) fixture units for each gallon per minute of such continuous or semicontinuous discharge. The rate of such discharge shall be deemed to be that rate certified by the manufacturer of the fixture, or such rates as the city manager or his designee shall determine; 
(3)  A minimum charge of fourteen thousand, three hundred dollars ($14,300.00) shall be effective February 19, 2008, per premises. 
(e)  Fixture units. For the purposes of this section, the following fixture units shall apply: 
(1)  Automatic clothes washer (2-inch standpipe)-3 units. 
(2)  Bathroom group consisting of water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower stall: 
a.  Flushometer valve closet-8 units. 
b.  Tank type closet-6 units. 
(3)  Bathtub (with or without overhead shower)-2 units. 
(4)  Combination sink and tray with food disposal unit-2 units. 
(5)  Combination sink and tray with 11/2-inch trap-2 units. 
(6)  Combination sink and tray with separate 11/2-inch traps-3 units. 
(7)  Dental unit or cuspidor-1 unit. 
(8)  Dental lavatory-1 unit. 
(9)  Drinking fountain- 1/2 unit. 
(10)  Dishwasher, domestic-2 units. 
(11)  Floor drains with 2-inch waste-2 units. 
(12)  Kitchen sink, domestic, with one 11/2-inch waste-2 units. 
(13)  Kitchen sink, domestic, with food waste grinder-2 units. 
(14)  Lavatory with 1/4-inch waste-1 unit. 
(15)  Laundry tray (one (1) or two (2) compartments)-2 units. 
(16)  Shower stall, domestic-2 units. 
(17)  Showers (group) per head-2 units. 
(18)  Sinks: 
a.  Surgeon's-3 units. 
b.  Flushing rim (with valve)-6 units. 
c.  Service (trap standard)-3 units. 
d.  Service (P trap)-2 units. 
e.  Pot, scullery, etc.-4 units. 
(19)  Urinal, pedestal, syphon jet blowout-6 units. 
(20)  Urinal, wall lip-4 units. 
(21)  Urinal, stall, washout-4 units. 
(22)  Urinal trough (each 6-foot section)-2 units. 
(23)  Wash sink (circular or multiple) each set of faucets-2 units. 
(24)  Water closet, tank-operated-4 units. 
(25)  Water closet, valve-operated-6 units. 
(26)  Fixture drain or trap size: 
a.  11/4-inch and smaller-1 unit. 
b.  11/2-inch-2 units. 
c.  2-inch-3 units. 
d.  21/2-inch-4 units. 
e.  3-inch-5 units. 
f.  4-inch-6 units. 
(f)  Availability fee based on water meter size. The availability fees shall be calculated based on the size of the required water meter, as shown below. The total availability fee shall consist of sixty-four (64) per cent of the fee for sewer connection and thirty-six (36) per cent of the availability fee for water. 
Meter Size Availability Fee 5/8 " $14,300.00 3/4" Low 14,300.00 3/4" High 28,600.00 1" 42,900.00 11/2" 71,500.00 2" 114,400.00 2" Negotiated Fee  
(Code 1975, § 29-1; Ord. No. 72-1700-49, 6-20-72; Ord. No. 77-1700-112, § 1, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 79-1700-145, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 80-1700-170, 12-2-80; Ord. No. 86-1700-337, 6-3-86; Ord. No. 90-1700-411, 1-16-90; Ord. No. 92-1700-459, 4-21-92; Ord. No. 97-1700-571, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 97-1700-575, 12-16-97; 99-1700-605, § 1, 6-15-99; 99-1700-607, § 1, 6-1-99; Ord. No. 01-1700-643, § 1, 1-16-01; Ord. No. 01-1700-672, § 1, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 08-1700-846, 3-4-08) 
Sec. 25-9. - Separate connection for buildings. 
(a)  Except as otherwise allowed by the council, each building shall be separately connected with the public water system and the public sewer system. 
(b)  The water, plumbing and sewer drainage system of every building and each residential dwelling unit shall be separately connected with the public water system and public sewer system of the city at the property line. 
(Code 1971, § 29-2; Ord. No. 77-1700-112, § 2, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 79-1700-145, 11-6-79; Ord. No. 80-1700-170, 12-2-80; Ord. No. 86-1700-337, 6-3-86) 
Sec. 25-10. - Responsibility for breaks and stoppage in sewer lines. 
(a)  The city shall be responsible for any break or stoppage, not due to the property owner's negligence or wilful actions, occurring in the sewer line between the property line and the main sewer line. 
(b)  All property owners shall be responsible for any break or stoppage occurring in a sewer line between the house and the property line. 
(c)  If the underground water line from the city water meter to a private residence or business/commercial account breaks, the city will, upon request and sufficient proof, adjust the sewer charge only of the water/sewer fees. Any such adjustment of fees will be determined by the averaged water usage for the three (3) months previous to the water break. 
(Code 1971, § 29-3; Ord. No. 92-1700-456, 4-7-92) 
Sec. 25-11. - Unlawful use of or damage or injury to property of sewer plant or waterworks. 
    No person shall injure or deface the sewage disposal plant, pump station or any house, wall stopcock, fireplug or any other fixture connected with or pertaining to the sewer plant or waterworks. No person shall, without lawful authority, climb over or get through the enclosure around such plant and waterworks. No person shall place any building material or other things on the stopcock or other fixture of a street water main or other service pipe, so as to obstruct access thereto. No person shall remove or injure any pipe, fireplug, hydrant or stopcock. No person shall use water from city lines for any purpose for which he has neither paid nor obtained permission. 
(Code 1971, § 29-4) 
Sec. 25-12. - Correction of conditions in violation of certain provisions of chapter. 
(a)  If, upon any inspection, the health officer shall find any condition in violation of sections 25-2 through 25-6, or any provision of article III of this chapter, or any provision of a permit issued under such article, he shall direct, by written notice, the person responsible for the violation to make the necessary corrections within such reasonable time as shall be specified in such notice. 
(b)  No person shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of any written notice issued pursuant to this section within the time specified in such notice. 
(Code 1971, §§ 29-18, 29-20) 
Sec. 25-13. - Water conservation regulations. 
(a)  [City manager to declare emergency.] The city manager is hereby authorized to declare an emergency in any or all areas supplied by the city affecting the use of water during any period in which there is a water shortage as determined by the city manager at his discretion. 
(b)  [Written notice.] In declaring any emergency pursuant to this section, the city manager shall advise the governing body of the declaration by written notice, shall post a written notice at the entrance in city hall and on the city's cable-access channel, and shall advise by news release the news media which routinely cover the area in which the emergency has been declared. 
(c)  [Stages of conservation.] Based on the forecast of the continued water supply available to the city, the city manager may order the appropriate stage of water conservation: 
(1)  Stage I. In the event that water supplies are reduced, either voluntarily or involuntarily by the city's outside sources and or mild reductions in well production, the public works department will segregate portions of the city to be serviced water still available from outside sources. The remainder of the city will be serviced by the city's wells. The city will ask the residents to voluntarily conserve water and refrain from filling pools, washing vehicles, watering lawns, or washing sidewalks and driveways. 
(2)  Stage II. In the event that water supplies are very limited, i.e., outside supplies are excessively reduced or become nonexistent, one (1) or more wells become nonproductive, the city shall restrict or curtail less essential uses of water, including but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants or any other vegetation to include plant nurseries, golf course greens and commercial agricultural activities; 
b.  Washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers or any other type of mobile equipment except in facilities operating with a water recycling system approved by the city or except for safety or emergency purposes; provided, however, that any facility operating with a water recycling system must prominently display in public view a sign stating that such a recycling system is in operation; 
c.  Washing of streets, driveways, parking lots, service station aprons, office buildings, exteriors of homes or apartments or other outdoor surfaces, except for emergency or safety purposes or to remove a hazard; 
d.  The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of water; 
e.  The filling of swimming and/or wading pools, or the refilling of swimming and/or wading pools which were drained after the effective date of the order to restrict water usage or any other use of water supply for outdoor recreation; 
f.  The operation of any industrial or commercial activity or process, including construction activity, which uses water beyond the sanitary and drinking needs of employees, customers and visitors; 
g.  The use of water from fire hydrants for any purpose other than fire suppression; 
h.  The operation of any water-cooled comfort air conditioning which does not have water-conserving equipment in operation where interior temperature is less than seventy-eight (78) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(3)  Stage III. In the event that supplies of water are available are critically limited, the city manager is authorized to restrict use of water to purposes which are essential to the preservation of life, health and safety. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section or any order or regulation promulgated by the city manager implementing this section shall upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. In addition, the governing body may seek suspension of water service to any violator, by injunction, abatement or other appropriate legal remedy. 
(e)  Appeals. Whenever the city manager shall issue an order directing restriction of water or curtailment of the use of water as provided herein, or shall seek suspension of water service as a result of a violation of provisions of this section, the subject of the order of suspension shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city manager to the governing body. The governing body may appoint a temporary board of appeals consisting of three (3) or more members of the governing body, or any other designated parties, to act in its place on this matter. The governing body or board of appeals shall grant an appellant a reasonable opportunity to present in writing, or at the option of the governing body or board of appeals in a public meeting, arguments against such decision of the city manager. The decision of the appropriate panel shall be final. 
(f)  Termination of emergency. Based upon receipt of information from water system operators and other pertinent sources, and upon his determination that sufficient water supplies exist to warrant termination of emergency restrictions or curtailments on water usage, in whole or in part, the city manager shall declare the water supply emergency to be ended. The city manager shall notify the governing body and the public of such termination, as prescribed in paragraph (b) above within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 01-1700-681, § 1, 4-16-02) 
Secs. 25-14-25-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 85-1700-277, adopted April 16, 1985, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set forth. Prior to such amendment, Art. II, §§ 25-24-25-32, pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from the following: Code 1971, §§ 29-5-29-12; Ord. No. 75-1700-74, adopted June 3, 1974; Ord. No. 77-1700-97, adopted March 15, 1977; Ord. No. 78-1700-123, adopted June 28, 1978; Ord. No. 79-1700-132, adopted Feb. 27, 197; Ord. No. 79-1700-149, adopted Dec. 5, 1979; Ord. No. 80-1700-164, adopted Oct. 28, 1980; Ord. No. 80-1700-165, adopted Nov. 1, 1980; Ord. No. 81-1700-175-A, adopted June 2, 1981; and Ord. No. 83-1700-220-A, adopted April 20, 1983. 

Sec. 25-24. - Schedule of rates and charges. 
    The charges to be paid on a monthly basis to the city for water and sewer services supplied to the below listed customers, on a regular or prorated basis, will be as follows: 
(a)  Single metered residential accounts. 
(1)  Each single metered residential account will be charged a water rate of three dollars and seventy-five cents ($3.75) per one thousand (1,000) gallons and a sewer rate of six dollars and twenty-five cents ($6.25) per one thousand (1,000) gallons each month for measured usage. 
(2)  Each single metered residential account will be charged a base service fee of forty-six dollars ($46.00) each month to pay for debt service for water and sewer infrastructure, plant improvements and capacity. 
(b)  Master metered residential accounts. 
(1)  Each master metered residential account will be charged a water rate of three dollars and seventy-five cents ($3.75) per one thousand (1,000) gallons and a sewer rate of six dollars and twenty-five cents ($6.25) per one thousand (1,000) gallons each month for measured usage. 
(2)  Each master metered residential account will be charged a base service fee of forty-six dollars and ($46.00) per residential unit each month to pay for debt service for water and sewer infrastructure, plant improvements and capacity. 
(c)  Commercial, industrial and public institution accounts. 
(1)  Each commercial, industrial and public institution account will be charged the following water and sewer rates each month for measured usage: 
Usage (gallons) Water Rate 
(per 1,000 
gallons) Sewer Rate 
(per 1,000 
gallons) 0-10,000 $5.67 + ERU charge* $8.20 10,001-20,000 $6.67 + ERU charge* $9.20 20,001-40,000 $7.67 + ERU charge* $10.20 40,001 and 
above $8.67 + ERU charge* $11.20  
*The ERU charge equals five dollars ($5.00) for each ERU in excess of one (1) ERU, as determined by the table in subsection (f) below. 
(2)  Each commercial, industrial and public institution account will be charged a base service fee of forty-six dollars ($46.00) each month to pay for debt service for water and sewer infrastructure, plant improvements and capacity. 
(d)  Water service customers only. Accounts for all residential customers who receive only water service from the city will be charged according to the rate for water usage listed in subsections (a) and (b) above. Accounts for all commercial, industrial and public institution customers who receive only water service from the city will be charged according to the schedule of rates table for water usage listed in subsection (c) above and the equivalent residential units table listed in subsection (f) below. 
(e)  Sewer service customers only. Accounts for all residential customers who receive only sewer service from the city will be charged according to the rate for sewer usage listed in subsections (a) and (b) above. Accounts for all commercial, industrial and public institution customers who receive only sewer service from the city will be charged according to the schedule of rates table for sewer usage listed in subsection (c) above. 
(f)  Equivalent residential unit. For the purpose of this article, "equivalent residential unit" ("ERU") means the number of typical single-family residential connections that a water and/or sewer connection for a commercial, industrial or public institutional utility account would be equivalent to in terms of gallons per minute of safe maximum operating capacity of the water meter, as shown in the following table: 
Meter Size Equivalent 
Residential 
Unit(s) 5/8 ? 1.0 3/4? 1.5 1? 2.5 11/2? 5.0 2? 8.0 3? 17.5 4? 31.5  
(Ord. No. 85-1700-277, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 91-1700-446, 6-18-91; Ord. No. 92-1700-462, 4-21-92; Ord. No. 93-1700-486, 4-20-93; Ord. No. 94-1700-503, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 95-1700-530, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 2000-1700-634, § 1, 10-3-00; Ord. No. 01-1700-671, § 1, 7-3-01; Ord. No. 08-1700-855, § 1, 7-16-08; Ord. No. 12-1700-927, § 1, 5-15-12; Ord. No. 14-1700-959, § 1, 10-21-14) 
Sec. 25-25. - New connect, reconnect and transfer fees. 
(a)  All requests to have water and sewer service connected, reconnected or transferred shall be made in writing by the owner of the real property to be served by the water and sewer connection (the "property owner"). The written request must be on a form provided by the city's department of public works. 
(b)  In the case of rental property, the tenant may request that the water and sewer account be transferred into the tenant's name and that water and sewer service be connected or reconnected to the rental property if all of the following requirements have been met at the time of each request for a transfer, connection or reconnection: 
(1)  The property owner has completed the form required by subsection (a). 
(2)  The property owner has provided written authorization for the water and sewer account to be transferred into the name of the tenant. The written authorization must be on a form provided by the city's department of public works and will require the property owner to acknowledge that a lien may be placed on the property if the tenant fails to pay any delinquent water and sewer charges. 
(3)  The tenant has provided a security deposit to the city in the amount of two hundred forty dollars ($240.00). 
a.  No security deposit will be required if the tenant presents to the city a landlord authorization letter which has attached documentation showing that the tenant receives need-based local, state, or federal rental assistance. 
b.  The absence of a security deposit as permitted by subparagraph a. above shall not prevent the city from exercising its lien rights as authorized by section 25-32. 
(4)  Water and sewer service must not have been disconnected or shut off prior to the requested date of transfer. Any disconnection of water and sewer service, including but not limited to a disconnection at the request of the property owner or a previous tenant, will require the reconnection of water and sewer service; the new tenant will not qualify for a transfer until after the reconnection has occurred. 
(c)  Any lien that has been recorded against the property owner for delinquent water and sewer fees and charges must be satisfied and all outstanding charges, fees, penalties and interest for water and sewer service must be paid prior to water and sewer service connections or reconnections being made to the subject property. 
(d)  The fee to have water and sewer service connected, reconnected or transferred is as follows: 
(1)  Monday through Friday (except holidays observed by the city) during the hours of 8:30 a.m. through 5:00 p.m.: Thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(2)  Outside the hours listed in paragraph (1) above: Ninety dollars ($90.00). 
(Ord. No. 85-1700-277, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 06-1700-808, § 1, 6-29-06; Ord. No. 14-1700-959, § 1, 10-21-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-987, § 1, 5-3-16) 
Sec. 25-26. - When service to be disconnected. 
    Water and sewer service will be disconnected when requested by the customers of record or by the property owner, when evidence of a court order is presented, or by order of the city manager for reason of customer nonpayment of applicable charges. 
(Ord. No. 85-1700-277, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 14-1700-959, § 1, 10-21-14) 
Sec. 25-27. - When meters are to be read. 
    Water meters for all service customers will be read no sooner than the first day of the previous month of the billing month. Customers will be billed using an actual meter reading. Estimated readings based on past usage history will be billed to customers only when, in the judgment of the city manager, there is inclement weather or other circumstance which makes actual readings of those customers impossible to conduct in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 85-1700-277, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2000-1700-619, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 14-1700-959, § 1, 10-21-14) 
Sec. 25-28. - When bills to be mailed to customers. 
    All bills for water and sewer service will be mailed by the seventh working day of the month. 
(Ord. No. 85-1700-277, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 14-1700-959, § 1, 10-21-14) 
Sec. 25-29. - When bills are due for payment to city. 
    All charges as billed by the city will be due and payable by the last day of the month. In the event the last day of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, the billed charges will be due the next regular business day. 
(Ord. No. 85-1700-277, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 14-1700-959, § 1, 10-21-14) 
Sec. 25-30. - Penalty for failure to pay water and sewer charges and fees when due. 
    Penalty for failure to pay water and sewer charges and fees when due for the January 2016 billing is extended to March 31, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 85-1700-277, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 14-1700-959, § 1, 10-21-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-982, § 1, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 25-31. - Effect of failure to pay water and sewer charges and fees when due. 
(a)  If the fees and charges charged for water service or the use and services of the sewage disposal system by or in connection with any real estate are not paid when due, a penalty and interest shall at that time be owed as provided for by general law, and the owner or tenant, as the case may be, of such real estate shall, until the fees and charges are paid with the penalty and interest to the date of payment, cease to dispose of sewage or industrial waste originating from or on the real estate by discharge thereof directly or indirectly into the sewage disposal system. If the owner or tenant does not pay the full amount of charges, penalty and interest for water provided or cease the disposal within thirty (30) days thereafter, the city shall notify such owner or tenant of the delinquency. If such owner or tenant does not pay the full amount of charges, penalty, and interest for water provided or cease such disposal within sixty (60) days after the delinquent fees and charges charged for water or sewage disposal services are due, or enter into a payment extension plan pursuant to section 15-34 below, the city shall cease supplying water and sewage disposal services thereto unless the Health Director of the Prince William Health District certifies that shutting off the water will endanger the health of the occupants of the premises or the health of others. At least ten (10) business days prior to ceasing the supply of water or sewage disposal services, the city shall provide the owner or tenant with written notice of such cessation. 
(b)  When water service has been discontinued and disconnection made, there will be no reconnection until payment of the total bill, including penalties and interest and a reconnection fee, has been made. 
(Ord. No. 85-1700-277, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 93-170-482, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 14-1700-959, § 1, 10-21-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-987, § 1, 5-3-16) 
State Law reference- Authority for above provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-32.1. 
Sec. 25-32. - Lien for failure to pay water and sewer charges. 
(a)  Fees and charges prescribed by this chapter may be recovered by the city by an action at law or suit in equity, and shall constitute a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes. 
(b)  A lien may be placed on the property in the amount of up to three (3) months of delinquent water and sewer charges, plus any applicable penalties and interest on the delinquent charges, plus reasonable attorney fees and other costs of collection not exceeding twenty percent (20%) of the delinquent charges. In no case shall a lien for less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) be placed against the property. In the case of services to a tenant, unless water is required to be provided pursuant to subsection 25-31(a) above or other applicable law, or a payment extension plan has been entered into pursuant to section 25-34 below, if the city does not cease supplying water to the tenant within sixty (60) days after the bill becomes delinquent, there shall be no lien placed on the property for charges and collection costs beyond the 60-day period and no recourse against the property owner for service beyond the 60-day period. 
(c)  A lien may be placed on the property for water and sewer services used by a tenant only if the city has: 
(1)  Advised the property owner in writing that a lien may be placed on the property if the tenant fails to pay any delinquent water and sewer charges; 
(2)  Mailed by first-class mail to the property owner, or sent electronically if requested by the property owner, at the address listed in the written authorization from the property owner (or such other address as the owner may provide), a duplicate copy of the final bill sent to the tenant at the time of sending the final bill to the tenant; 
(3)  Applied the security deposit held by the city to the payment of the outstanding balance; 
(4)  Employed reasonable collection efforts and practices to collect amounts due from the tenant including filing for the Set-Off Debt Collection Program if the city is a participant; and 
(5)  Provided the property owner with thirty (30) days' written notice with a copy of the final bill to allow the property owner a reasonable opportunity to pay the amount of any outstanding balance and avoid the recordation of a lien against the property. 
If the property owner fails to pay the amount of the outstanding balance within the 30-day period, the city may record a lien in the amount of the outstanding balance against the property owner. Upon payment of the outstanding balance, or any portion thereof, or of any amounts of such fees and charges owed by the former tenant, the property owner shall be entitled to receive any refunds and shall be subrogated against the former tenant in place of the city in the amount paid by the property owner. The city shall execute all documents necessary to perfect such subrogation in favor of the property owner. 
(d)  Unless a lien has been recorded against the property owner, the city shall not deny service to a new tenant who is requesting service at a particular property address based upon the fact that a former tenant has not paid any outstanding fees and charges charged for the use and services in the name of the former tenant. The city shall provide information relative to a former tenant or current tenant to the property owner upon request of the property owner. If the property owner provides the city with a request to be notified of a tenant's delinquent water and sewer bill and provides an email address, the city shall send the property owner notice when a tenant's water and sewer bill has become fifteen (15) days delinquent. 
(e)  The lien shall not bind or affect a subsequent bona fide purchaser of the real estate for valuable consideration without actual notice of the lien until the amount of such delinquent charges is entered in the official records of the office of the clerk of the circuit court for the city. The clerk shall make and index the entries in the clerk's official records for a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per entry, to be paid by the locality and added to the amount of the lien. 
(f)  The lien on any real estate may be discharged by the payment to the city of the total lien amount and the interest which has accrued to the date of the payment. The city shall deliver a fully executed lien release to the person making the payment. The city shall provide the fully executed lien release to the person who made payment within ten (10) business days following the payment if the person who made the payment did not personally appear at the time of the payment. Upon presentation of the lien release, the clerk shall mark the lien satisfied. There will be no separate clerk's fee for the lien release. 
(Ord. No. 14-1700-959, § 1, 10-21-14; Ord. No. 16-1700-987, § 1, 5-3-16) 
Sec. 25-33. - Relief to the elderly and disabled who qualify. 
    Water and sewer customers who qualify for real estate tax relief pursuant to division 2 of article II of chapter 22 of this Code shall be eligible for a reduction of the base service fee for water and sewer services to nineteen dollars and fifty cents ($19.50) per month. The commissioner of the revenue shall certify a listing of those residents who qualify under this program and submit it to the city's water and sewer billing representative by the first day of June of each year. Eligibility will run from July 1 of each year to June 30 of the following year. 
(Ord. No. 85-1700-277, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 91-170-446, 6-18-91; Ord. No. 92-1700-462, 4-21-92; Ord. No. 93-1700-486, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 94-1700-503, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 04-1700-738, § 1, 2-17-04; Ord. No. 14-1700-959, § 1, 10-21-14) 
Sec. 25-34. - Payment extension plan. 
(a)  Any water and sewer customer whose account is delinquent and who cannot pay the amount due prior to service being shut off may extend the due date for payment in accordance with this section by paying, no later than close of business on the day before the shut-off date, an administrative fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) plus thirty percent (30%) of the delinquent amount then due, including penalties and interest, to the city treasurer, and entering into a payment extension plan with the city treasurer for payment of the remaining delinquent amount, including interest that accrues during the payment extension plan period. 
(b)  The payment extension plan will provide for up to six (6) equal monthly payments, payable on the same date each month that regular water and sewer bills are due, with the first payment being due on the due date immediately following the date the payment extension plan has been signed by both the customer and the city treasurer. The amount due each month for the payment extension plan will be in addition to the amount due each month for regular water and sewer service. 
(c)  During the payment extension plan period, if any monthly payment is not made by the due date, or if the customer's account is otherwise not kept current (e.g., if a regular monthly bill for water and sewer service is not paid by the due date), the city shall promptly cease supplying water and sewage disposal services to that customer in accordance with section 25-31. 
(d)  Interest will continue to accrue on the delinquent amount still due on the account until final payment has been made. 
(e)  A water and sewer customer can enter into a payment extension plan only once every two (2) years. The city treasurer shall not enter into a payment extension plan with any customer who has previously entered into a payment extension plan until a period of at least eighteen (18) months has elapsed following the final payment on the previous payment extension plan. 
(Ord. No. 16-1700-987, § 2, 5-3-16) 
Secs. 25-35-25-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEPTIC TANKS 

Sec. 25-45. - Permit to install or repair-Required; application; issuance or denial. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install or repair, have installed or repaired, allow to be installed or repaired, or contract to install or repair for another person, a septic tank system, without first having obtained a permit therefor from the health officer. 
(b)  Any person desiring a permit required by this section shall make application therefor on a form furnished by the health officer. Such application shall contain clearly a description, location and dimensions of the land or lot on which the septic tank, distribution and sewer pipes are to be installed, the dimensions of the purification field, the type of land (such as loam, clay, gravel, etc.) and shall indicate the direction in which the land drains in relation to reservoirs, springs and wells. Such application shall be accompanied by a plat of the land, when required, showing the location of the dwelling house and all other buildings, and the plans and specifications of the whole septic tank system intended to be installed or repaired. 
(c)  Upon approval of an application filed under this section, together with the accompanying plat, plans and specifications, the health officer shall issue a permit to the applicant in question for the installation or repair of the septic tank system in accordance with the application, plat, plans and specifications so approved. 
(d)  If an application, plat, plans and specifications filed under this section are not approved, but the size and location of the lot and the type of soil are suitable for a septic tank system, properly planned, the health officer shall clearly outline proper plans and specifications therefor and issue the permit only according to the plans and specifications so outlined by him. 
(Code 1971, §§ 29-22-29-25) 
Sec. 25-46. - Same-Compliance with provisions. 
    No person shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of any permit issued under section 25-45. 
(Code 1971, § 29-19) 
Sec. 25-47. - Same-Term. 
    All permits for the installation or repair of a septic tank system issued under this article shall automatically become null and void six (6) months after the date of issue thereof, unless renewed in writing by the health officer. 
(Code 1971, § 29-26) 
Sec. 25-48. - State specifications and requirements. 
    The specifications and requirements for septic tanks and their installation and construction shall be in accordance with the specifications and requirements of the state. 
(Code 1971, § 29-27) 
Sec. 25-49. - Requirements for equipment used for cleaning septic tanks. 
(a)  The equipment used in the operation of the business of cleaning septic tanks shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The tank into which the septic tank sludge is pumped or delivered and carried shall be fully enclosed and watertight. 
(2)  All inlets and outlets to such tank shall be fully enclosed and provided with watertight valves. 
(3)  The suction and discharge hose shall be watertight and provision shall be made for carrying such hose in a manner that will prevent any leakage therefrom. 
(4)  All exposed surfaces shall be painted and maintained in a sanitary condition by frequent washings. 
(5)  The name and address of the person owning or operating such equipment shall be painted thereon in letters at least four (4) inches high. 
(b)  No person shall engage in the business of cleaning septic tanks unless the equipment used by such person in connection with the operation of such business has been inspected and approved in writing by the health officer. Such inspection and approval shall be a prerequisite to the obtaining of any license or permit required by the provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city for the conduct of such business. 
(Code 1971, §§ 29-30, 29-31) 
Sec. 25-50. - Disposition of sludge and other material removed from septic tanks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of the sludge and other material removed from septic tanks except by depositing it under the surface of the ground in such manner that it will not be exposed to the atmosphere or endanger the source of any domestic water supply or by depositing into a public sewage system or sewage treatment plant, at such designated locations and under such conditions as may be promulgated by the owners or operators thereof. In any event the sludge or other material shall be carefully deposited and the surface of the ground, manholes, tanks, and the like, into which the deposit is made shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. Any covering of such surface with sludge or other material shall be promptly removed. 
(Code 1971, § 29-32) 
Secs. 25-51-25-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT AND DISCHARGE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 2012, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 25-61-25-63, 25-71-25-78, 25-86-25-99, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 85-1700-310, adopted Nov. 19, 1985. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-61. - Purpose and policy. 
    This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment systems of the publicly owned treatment works within the city and enables the publicly owned treatment works to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act , the Federal General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403), and the Virginia Permit Regulation (9 VAC 25-31-730 et seq.). 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into wastewater systems which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(b)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into wastewater systems that will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(c)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(d)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
(e)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works. 
    This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the wastewater system through the issuance of general permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for other users, authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
    This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of a POTW. Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent of the POTW providing wastewater treatment service to a user shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-62. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BMP: Best management practices. 
BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand. 
CFR: Code of Federal Regulations. 
CIU: Categorical Industrial User. 
COD: Chemical oxygen demand. 
CWA: Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
EPA: Environmental Protection Agency. 
gpd: Gallons per day. 
l: Liter. 
LEL: Lower explosive limit. 
mg: Milligrams. 
mg/l: Milligrams per liter. 
NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system. 
NAICS: North American Industry Classification System. 
NSCIU: Non-significant categorical user. 
POTW: Publicly owned treatment works. 
SIC: Standard industrial classification. 
SIU: Significant industrial user. 
SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq. 
TSS: Total suspended solids. 
U.S.C.: United States Code. 
VPDES: Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-63. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
    Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act (CWA), as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
    Administrator: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or his agents or delegates. 
    Approval authority: The Executive Director of the Virginia State Water Control Board. 
    Authorized or duly authorized representative of industrial user: 
(a)  If the user is a corporation: 
(1)  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(2)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit [or general permit {optional}] requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(b)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(c)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(d)  The individuals described in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this definition may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the written authorization is submitted to the Superintendent. 
    Best management practices (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five (5) days at twenty degrees (20°) centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Building sewer: A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR 405-471. 
    Categorical industrial user: An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD): A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water. 
    City: The City of Manassas Park, a Virginia municipal corporation. 
    Compatible pollutant: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, phosphorus, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit if the serving treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. 
    Composite sample: A sample that is collected over time and is formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. The sample can be collected as either a time composite sample or a flow proportional composite sample, as follows: 
(a)  Time composite sample: composed of discrete sample aliquots in one container taken at constant time intervals, providing representative samples irrespective of stream flow; or 
(b)  Flow proportional composite sample: collected as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to the stream flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases, while maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots. 
    Control authority: The approval authority or the superintendent if the servicing POTW has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Cooling water: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Daily maximum: The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
    Direct discharge: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly into the waters of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Existing source: Any source of discharge that is not a new source. Grab sample: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
    Holding tank waste: Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge: The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW, including holding tank waste discharged into the system. 
    Industrial user: Any nondomestic source discharging pollutants to a POTW. 
    Instantaneous limit: The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference: The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations that contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria, including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA, applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
    Local limit: The specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in section 25-71. 
    Medical waste: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    Monthly average: The sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month. 
    Monthly average limit: The highest allowable average of daily discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit: A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
    National pretreatment standard: Any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits and local limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5. 
    New source: 
(a)  Any source of a discharge, the construction or operation of which is commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c), provided that: 
(1)  No other source is located on that site; 
(2)  The source completely replaces the process or production equipment of an existing source at that site; or 
(3)  The new wastewater generating process is substantially independent of an existing source at that site, and the construction of the source creates a new facility rather than modifying an existing source at that site. 
(b)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of paragraph (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(c)  For purposes of this definition, construction or operation has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(1)  Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
a.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(2)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
    Pass-through: A discharge which exits the treatment plant effluent into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with indirect discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the VPDES permit issued to the city or the authority of which the city is a member, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other entity, and/or its legal representative(s), agent(s) or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    pH: The negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles per litre of solution. 
    Pollutant: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor discharged into water. Pollution: The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and/or radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment or treatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirement: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national categorical pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Pretreatment standards or standard: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges: The absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in the definition of Pretreatment Standard. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW): A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), whether owned by the city or an authority of which the city is a member. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the POTW. POTW shall also refer to the governing body of a POTW, and the authorized agents, officers, and representatives thereof. 
    POTW treatment plant: That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Significant industrial user: Except as provided in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this definition, a significant industrial user is: 
(a)  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(b)  An industrial user that: 
(1)  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
(2)  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
(3)  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement. 
(c)  The city may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The industrial user, prior to city's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(2)  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in section 25-92, together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
(3)  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(d)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in paragraph (b) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance: Violation of one or more of the specific criteria listed in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2). Any user determined to be in significant noncompliance will be included in the annually published list of user in significant noncompliance. 
    Slug load or slug discharge: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 25-71. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
    State: Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC): A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Stormwater: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Superintendent: The person designated by the city or an authority of which the city is a member to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works which provides wastewater treatment service to a user, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. For purposes of this article, a person who is charged with the operation or upkeep of sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW but does not supervise the operation of the POTW itself is not a superintendent. 
    Total suspended solids (TSS): The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other Acts. 
    User: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into a POTW. 
    Wastewater: The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Waters of the state: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water-courses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
    Wastewater discharge permit: As set forth in section 25-87. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Secs. 25-64-25-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 25-71. - General discharge prohibitions. 
    No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater that will pass through, or interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user shall not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(a)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the LEL of the meter, nor shall the closed cup flashpoint be less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the city, POTW, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(b)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: sludge screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(c)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 10.0, unless the POTW is specifically designed to accommodate such wastewater, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
(d)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, cause, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. 
(e)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(f)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(g)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its VPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(h)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(i)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds forty degrees (40°) Centigrade (one hundred four degrees (104°) Fahrenheit) unless the POTW treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature. 
(j)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. 
(k)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(l)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(m)  Any fats or grease, including but not limited to petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through. 
(n)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the control authority. 
(o)  Any wastewater containing pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW (or at any point in the system) in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems. 
(p)  Any material identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR 261 except as may be specifically authorized by the superintendent. 
(q)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent. 
(r)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the superintendent in an individual wastewater discharge permit [or a general permit]. 
(s)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances that might cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
    Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
    When the superintendent determines that a user(s) is contributing to the POTW any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to pass through or interfere with the operation of the POTW, the superintendent shall: (1) advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and (2) develop effluent limitation(s) for such user(s); and/or initiate enforcement action in accordance with sections 25-99 through 25-100.3. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-72. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Users subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR 405-471, which are incorporated in this article. 
(a)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with subsections 25-72(e) and (f). 
(b)  When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the superintendent may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. 
(c)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the superintendent shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(d)  When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the city convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the superintendent. The city may establish equivalent mass limits only if the industrial user meets all the conditions set forth in subparagraphs 25-72(d)(1)a through e. 
(1)  To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user must: 
a.  Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit; 
b.  Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment; 
c.  Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions; 
d.  Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control the discharge; and 
e.  Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial user's request for equivalent mass limits. 
(2)  An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must: 
a.  Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits; 
b.  Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device; 
c.  Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify the superintendent whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than twenty (20) percent from its baseline production rates determined in subparagraph (d)(1)c of this section. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the superintendent will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and 
d.  Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to paragraphs (d)(1)a of this section as long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit. 
(3)  When developing equivalent mass limits, the superintendent: 
a.  Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion factor; 
b.  Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and 
c.  May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the industrial user's actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to section 25-77. The industrial user must also be in compliance with section 25-100.8 regarding the prohibition of bypass. 
(e)  The superintendent may convert the mass limits of the categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR 414, 419, and 455 to concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the superintendent. When converting such limits to concentration limits, the superintendent will use the concentrations listed in the applicable subparts of 40 CFR 414, 419, and 455 and document that dilution is not being substituted for treatment as prohibited by section 25-77. In addition, the superintendent will document how the equivalent limits were derived for any changes from concentration to mass limits, or vice versa, and make this information publicly available. 
(f)  Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived. 
(g)  Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for calculating maximum monthly average, or 4-day average, limitations. Where such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation. 
(h)  Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall notify the superintendent within two (2) business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the superintendent of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long term average production rate. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-73. - Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Where the POTW achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the POTW may apply to the approval authority for modifications of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in ninety-five (95) percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403, "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution" promulgated pursuant to the Act. The POTW may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the national categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-74. - Local limits. 
(a)  All users discharging into the sewer system shall remove all pollutants for which a local limit has been specified by the POTW serving such user to below the local limit. Local limits for each POTW may be obtained by contacting the respective POTW. 
(b)  Limits for pollutants which do not have specified local limit may also be set on a case-by-case basis and listed in a significant industrial user's permit. In this case, the significant industrial user shall remove all such pollutants to below the limit set forth in the user's permit. 
(c)  Dilution of any wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of this section shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(d)  The superintendent may develop BMPs, by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of section 25-71. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-75. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-76. - Right of revision. 
    The city and POTW reserve the right to establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits or in general permits, if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 25-61, and nothing herein or anything done or permitted hereunder shall create any vested rights of any nature in any person or user. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-77. - Dilution of discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the discharge limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city, POTW or state. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-78. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, shall comply with section 25-71, and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired by the user at its expense. 
(b)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-79. - Accidental, batch or slug discharges. 
(a)  Accidental discharge plan. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge, including slug and nonroutine batch discharges, of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the POTW for review, and shall be approved by the POTW before construction of the facility. All existing users shall also complete such a plan. 
    No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the POTW. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. In the case of an accidental discharge, slug discharge or non-routine batch discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, the type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(1)  Notification to superintendent of accidental discharge. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
(2)  Posting of notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(3)  Changes affecting potential for slug discharges. Significant industrial users are required to notify the superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. The significant industrial user shall revise the slug discharge control plan to reflect such changes. 
(b)  Report of changed conditions. Each industrial user is required to notify the superintendent of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations or pretreatment systems which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater. 
(1)  The superintendent may require the industrial user to submit information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater permit application pursuant to section 25-87, if necessary. 
(2)  No industrial user shall implement the planned changed conditions until and unless the superintendent has responded to the industrial users notice. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of ten (10) percent or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants shall be deemed significant. 
(c)  Notice of hazardous discharge. Industrial users shall notify the superintendent, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kg of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: 
(1)  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 
(2)  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during the calendar month; and 
(3)  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
State Law reference- Hazardous waste management, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1426 et seq. 
Secs. 25-80-25-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as Div. 3, §§ 25-86-25-109. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as §§ 25-86-25-100.9. 

Sec. 25-86. - Individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge into the POTW without a valid individual permit or general permit any wastewater except as authorized by the superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit from the superintendent, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 25-87 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The superintendent may require other users to obtain individual wastewater discharge or general permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and shall subject the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this article. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-87. - Issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits. 
(a)  Mandatory permits. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit or general permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall also obtain a wastewater discharge permit 
(b)  Permit application. Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the POTW, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article, and proposed new users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and location, (if different from the address); 
(2)  Contact information; 
(3)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(4)  NAICS number according to the North American Industry Classification System, 2007 Edition, as amended; 
(5)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in division 2 of this article as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 25-90 of this ordinance. Where the Standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the superintendent or the applicable Standards to determine compliance with the Standard; 
(6)  Time and duration of contribution; 
(7)  Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
(8)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation; 
(9)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(10)  A schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes; 
(11)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any applicable POTW, state or federal pretreatment standards, and a certification statement reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a qualified professional indicating whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(12)  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  The schedule shall reflect the minimum reasonable time to complete each increment referred to in subparagraph 25-87(b)(12)a. The superintendent may require changes in the schedule to meet this requirement. 
c.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. 
(13)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or precesses and rate of production; 
(14)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(15)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
(16)  In the case of applications for categorical industries, the following additional information: 
a.  A list of any environmental permits held by the applicant; and 
b.  A schematic showing all regulated and unregulated process streams. 
(17)  The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit; 
(18)  Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge based on paragraph 25-91(c)(4). 
(19)  Any request to be covered by a general permit based on subsection 25-87(d); and 
(20)  Any other information as may be deemed by the superintendent to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(c)  Annual submission. A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user (NSCIU) by the superintendent must annually submit the signed certification statement in subsection 25-92(b). 
(d)  General permits. At the discretion of the superintendent, the superintendent may use general permits to control SIU discharges to the POTW if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All facilities to be covered by a general permit must: 
a.  Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations; 
b.  Discharge the same types of wastes; 
c.  Require the same effluent limitations; 
d.  Require the same or similar monitoring; and 
e.  In the opinion of the superintendent, are more appropriately controlled under a general permit than under individual wastewater discharge permits. 
(2)  To be covered by the general permit, the SIU must file a written request for coverage that identifies its contact information, production processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for monitoring all wastes covered by the general permit, any requests in accordance with paragraph 25-91(3)(d) for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, and any other information the POTW deems appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge is not effective in the general permit until after the superintendent has provided written notice to the SIU that such a waiver request has been granted in accordance with paragraph 25-91(3)(d). 
(3)  The superintendent will retain a copy of the general permit, documentation to support the POTW's determination that a specific SIU meets the criteria in subparagraphs 25-87(4)(a)(1) through (5) and applicable state regulations, and a copy of the user's written request for coverage for three (3) years after the expiration of the general permit. 
(4)  The superintendent may not control an SIU through a general permit where the facility is subject to production-based categorical pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards expressed as mass of pollutant discharged per day or for industrial users whose limits are based on the combined wastestream formula (subsection 25-72(c)) or Net/Gross calculations (subsection 25-72(d)). 
The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(e)  Permit modifications. Within ninety (90) days of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by section 25-87(2), the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the superintendent within ninety (90) days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by paragraphs 25-87(b)(11) and (12). 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-88. - Application signatories and certifications. 
(a)  All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the certification statement in section 25-92. 
(b)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the superintendent prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(c)  A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the superintendent pursuant to section 25-63 must annually submit the signed certification statement in subsection 25-92(b). 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-89. - Individual wastewater discharge permit [and general permit. 
    Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete permit application, the superintendent will determine whether to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit. The superintendent may deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit. 
(a)  Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the POTW and/or the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a POTW; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics including best management practices; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
(6)  Specifications for monitoring programs which shall include an identification of pollutants (or best management practices) to be monitored, and may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number and types of samples, standards for tests and reporting schedules; 
(7)  The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with paragraph 25-91(c)(4); 
(8)  Any applicable compliance schedule; 
(9)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see section 25-91); 
(10)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the superintendent, and affording the POTW and the city access thereto; 
(11)  Requirements for notification of the POTW of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(12)  Requirements to control slug discharges and for notification of slug discharges pursuant to section 25-79; and 
(13)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(14)  A statement of duration; 
(15)  A statement of nontransferability without prior notification to the POTW and provision of a copy of the permit to the new owner or operator; 
(16)  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the superintendent (paragraph 25-91(c)(4)); 
(17)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(18)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
(19)  A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit; 
(20)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city or POTW to ensure compliance with this article, and the accomplishment of its objectives; and 
(21)  Requirements for the user to notify the POTW within twenty-four (24) hours upon discovery of discharge violations and to resample and submit results to the POTW within thirty (30) days. 
(b)  Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date or the occurrence of an event. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. 
(c)  Modification of individual wastewater discharge permit. The superintendent may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since issuance of the individual wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, POTW personnel or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any term or condition of the individual wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or grant of a variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with subsection 25-89(e). 
(d)  Modification of general permit. The superintendent may modify a general permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(3)  To correct typographical or other errors in the general permit; or 
(4)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with subsection 25-89(e). 
(e)  Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the superintendent. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
Individual wastewater discharge permits or coverage under general permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least ninety (90) days advance notice to the superintendent and the superintendent approves the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit coverage transfer. The written transfer notification to the superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing individual wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual wastewater discharge permit or coverage under the general permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(f)  Change of discharge. The permittee shall give written notice to the superintendent ninety (90) days prior to any facility, production, or process modifications which result in changed volume or nature of the discharge. The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation and reissue, or termination, or a modification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not stay any permit conditions. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-90. - Sample collection and analytical requirements. 
    Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements in this ordinance must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsections 25-90(b) and (c), the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Superintendent. Flow-proportional composite sampling may be waived for any user that demonstrates that flow-proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge. 
(b)  Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
(c)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(d)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in paragraph 25-91(c)(3), a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the superintendent may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraph 25-91(c), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements. 
(e)  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the superintendent or other parties approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-91. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Signing and certification of applications and reports. All permit applications and industrial user reports must contain a certification statement as outlined in section 25-92 and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(b)  Compliance date report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable national categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. All compliance date reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall submit to the superintendent during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the superintendent, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In the case of an existing categorical user, the reports shall be required after the compliance date of a pretreatment standard. In the case of a new source or any other significant industrial user, the reports shall be required after commencement of the discharge to the POTW. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in subsection 25-87(2)(g). At the discretion of the superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the reports are to be submitted. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the superintendent or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. For the reports required by subsection 25-91(c), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 25-91(a). 
(2)  The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subparagraph (a) of this paragraph shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator as described in section 25-90. 
(3)  Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be required to submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information required in 40 CFR 403.12. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 25-91(a). 
(4)  The city may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater. 
b.  The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer than five (5) years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit (see paragraph 25-87(b)(18). 
c.  In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes. 
d.  The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed by an authorized or duly authorized representative of the user, and must include the certification statement listed in subsection 25-92(a). 
e.  Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis. 
f.  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the superintendent must be included as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the superintendent for three (3) years after expiration of the waiver. 
g.  Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's permit by the superintendent, the industrial user must certify on each report with the statement in subsection 25-92(c) that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the industrial user. 
h.  In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's operations, the user must immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of subsection 25-91(c) or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the superintendent, and notify the superintendent. 
i.  This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(5)  The city may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance reports to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the state, where the industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following: 
a.  0.01 percent of the POTW's design dry-weather hydraulic capacity , or five thousand (5,000) gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the industrial user discharges in batches; 
b.  0.01 percent of the design dry-weather organic treatment capacity of the POTW; and 
c.  0.01 percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local limits were developed in accordance with section 25-74. 
Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have in the last two (2) years been in significant noncompliance, as defined in section 25-97. In addition, reduced reporting is not available to an industrial user with daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that, in the opinion of the superintendent, decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(6)  All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 25-92(a). 
(7)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(8)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the superintendent, using the procedures prescribed in section 25-90, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(d)  Records of monitoring activities. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices established pursuant to section 25-74. Any industrial user subject to reporting requirements shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities. Such records for all samples shall include: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method and time of sampling, and the names of the persons taking the samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  Who performed the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques or methods used; and 
(5)  The results of the analyses. 
Records shall be retained for a minimum of three (3) years, whether or not such monitoring activities are required. Such records shall be available for inspection and copying by the superintendent. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or when required by the superintendent 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-92. - Certification statements. 
(a)  Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring waiver. The following certification statement is required to be signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance with section 25-88; users submitting baseline monitoring reports under paragraph 25-91(c)(3); users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under subsection 25-91(2); users submitting periodic compliance reports required by subsection 25-91(c), and users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of paragraph 25-91(c)(4). The following certification statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 25-63: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(b)  Annual certification for non-significant categorical industrial users. A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the superintendent pursuant to section 25-63 and subsection 25-88(c) must annually submit the following certification statement signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in section 25-63. This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the superintendent: 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ____________ , I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from ____________ , ____________ to ____________ , ____________ [months, days, year]: 
i.  The facility described as ____________ [facility name] met the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical industrial user as described in the definition of NSCIU in 25-63; 
ii.  The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. 
This compliance certification is based on the following information: 
_____
_____
(c)  Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an approved monitoring waiver based on subparagraphs 25-91(c)(4)(a) through (i) must certify on each report with the following statement that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the user: 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR ____________ [specify applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of ____________ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under subsection 25-91(c). 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-93. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
    All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit [or general permit shall provide appropriate reports to the superintendent as the superintendent may require. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-94. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  A user required to have a wastewater discharge permit shall be required to provide, operate and maintain at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage system. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the superintendent may, when such a location would be impractical or would cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed and located off premises. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's and POTW's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-95. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The superintendent shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being occupied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the superintendent ready access at reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any duties imposed hereunder. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. Unreasonable delays in allowing the superintendent access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. The POTW and the approval authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the POTW and approval authority will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-96. - Search warrants. 
    If the superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the superintendent or designee may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate judicial authority. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-97. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations and shall also comply with local limits (see section 25-74) and the prohibitions set out in section 25-71. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the POTW shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the POTW before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the POTW under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the POTW prior to the user's initiation of changes. 
(b)  All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. 
(c)  The superintendent shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant industrial user (or any other industrial user) that violates paragraph 25-97(c)(3), (4) or (5) and shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in section 25-63; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by section 25-63 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by section 25-63 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the superintendent determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-98. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the superintendent that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act (Va. Code § 2.2-3700 et seq.). Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. In addition: 
(a)  When requested and demonstrated by the person furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
(b)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302, shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction. 
    Information accepted by the superintendent as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public until and unless a ten (10) day notification has been given to the user. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-99. - Harmful contributions. 
(a)  The superintendent may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the superintendent, to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
(b)  Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system, damage to its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the superintendent within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-100. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any user who violates the following conditions of this article, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of sections 25-99 through 25-100.3: 
(1)  Failure to notify the superintendent of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to section 25-89(d); 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the superintendent timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or the general permit or this article. 
(b)  Individual wastewater discharge permits or coverage under general permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a new individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit to that user. 
(c)  Any user subject to permit termination will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and offered an opportunity to show cause, in accordance with section 25-100.2, why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-100.1. - Notification of violation. 
    Whenever the superintendent finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit or general permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the superintendent may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the superintendent by the user. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-100.2. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)  Notice. The superintendent may order a user that has violated, or that continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit, or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the governing body of the city and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(b)  Hearing. The governing body may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any of its officers or employees to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the governing body notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)  Take the evidence; and/or 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the governing body for action thereon. 
(c)  Record. At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(d)  Order. After the governing body has concluded the hearing or reviewed the report and recommendations referred to in paragraph 25-100.2(b)(3), it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-100.3. - Legal action; orders. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into a POTW in violation of the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order authorized hereunder, the superintendent, POTW or the city may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in any circuit court of this commonwealth. In addition, the city may take one or more of the following actions, none of which shall be deemed to be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user and all of which shall be judicially enforceable: 
(a)  Consent orders. The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any violating user. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the violation within a time period specified by the document and shall have the same force and effect as orders issued pursuant to subsections 25-100.3(b) and (c). 
(b)  Compliance orders. When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit, an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may issue an order to the violating user directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. 
(c)  Cease and desist orders. When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit, an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements of this article; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation of this article, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-100.4. - Penalties. 
(a)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit, an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may fine such user in an amount not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not more than thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) per violation, up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per order, or such larger amount as may be consented to by the user. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average violations, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. In addition to fines, an order may include a monetary assessment for actual damages to sewers, treatment works and appurtenances and for costs, attorneys' fees and other expenses resulting from the violation. 
(2)  The city may assess fines under this subsection if (i) the user has been issued at least two (2) written notices of alleged violation by the city for the same or substantially related violations at the same site, (ii) such violations have not been resolved by demonstration that there was no violation, by an order issued by the city, or by other means, (iii) at least one hundred thirty (130) days have passed since the issuance of the first notice of alleged violation, and (iv) there is a finding that such violations have occurred following a hearing conducted in accordance with section 25-100.2. The actual amount of any fine assessed shall be based upon the severity of the violation(s), the extent of any potential or actual environmental harm, the compliance history of the facility or person, any economic benefit realized by the person from the noncompliance, and the ability of the person to pay the penalty. The city shall provide the person with the calculation for the proposed penalty prior to any hearing conducted for the issuance of an order that assesses penalties pursuant to this subsection. Any notice of alleged violation shall include a description of each violation, the specific provision(s) of law violated, and information on the process for obtaining a final decision or fact finding from the city on whether or not a violation has occurred. Nothing in this section shall preclude a user from seeking a final decision or fact finding. Where appropriate, the superintendent may accept mitigation projects in lieu of the payment of fines where the projects provide a valuable service to the POTW or the member jurisdictions and the industrial user's expense in undertaking the project is at least one hundred fifty (150) percent of the civil penalty. 
(3)  Unpaid fines and monetary assessments shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten (10) percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of ten (10) percent per month on the entire amount, including penalties. A lien against the user's property shall be sought for unpaid fines, monetary assessments, penalties and interest. 
(4)  A user desiring to dispute fines and/or monetary assessments must file a written request for the city to reconsider, along with full payment of the amount due, within thirty (30) days after being notified of such fines/or monetary assessments. Where a request has merit, the city may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(5)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Criminal penalties. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit, an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, unless another penalty is expressly provided. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW that causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. This charge shall be in addition to any other civil or criminal action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who that knowingly makes any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit, or an order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit, an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty as provided in subdivision 10b of § 15.2-2122 of the Code of Virginia. In the case of monthly or other long-term average violations, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city and the POTW. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions taken by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-100.5. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit, an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may petition the appropriate court through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit, the general permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including, but not limited to, a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. Filing a petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-100.6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 25-100.7. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph 25-100.7(a)(3) are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; and 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(4)  The user has submitted the following information to the superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset: 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days 
(5)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(6)  Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(7)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 25-71 or the specific prohibitions in subsections 25-71(a) through (s) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(3)  The affirmative defenses outlined under prohibited discharges do not apply to the specific prohibitions in subsections 25-71(a) (pollutants which create fire or explosive hazards), (c) (pH), and (n) (trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points designated by superintendent). 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-100.8. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur that does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections 25-100.8(c) and (d). 
(c)  Bypass notifications. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the superintendent, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the superintendent of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours following the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days following the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain (i) a description of the bypass and its cause, (ii) the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and (iii) steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(d)  Bypass. 
(1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the superintendent may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(2)  The superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the superintendent determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph 25-100.8(d)(1). 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
Sec. 25-100.9. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
    The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program, which may include: 
(a)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(b)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users; 
(c)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(d)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(e)  Fees to recover administrative and legal costs not included in subsection 25-100.9(b) associated with the enforcement activity taken by the superintendent to address industrial user noncompliance; and 
(f)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. Such fees shall relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-936, § 1, 10-2-12) 
ARTICLE V. - INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY SYSTEM 

Sec. 25-101. - Title. 
    The laws embraced in the article should constitute and be cited as the "Industrial Cost Recovery System of the City of Manassas Park." 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-102. - Purpose and scope. 
    This system implements the requirements of Public Law 92-500, Section 204(b)(1)(b), and 40 CFR Part 35, Subpart E, as well as the regulations and guidelines issued pursuant thereto, in order to maintain eligibility for federal grants which provide necessary funds for the construction of waste water treatment works. 
    The scope of this system is to provide for payment by each industrial user of the treatment works, unless otherwise excluded, in addition to the already established system of rates and charges currently in effect, that portion of the cost of construction of such treatment works which is allocable to the treatment of such industrial waste to the extent attributable to the federal share of the cost of construction within the service area of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-103. - Effective date. 
    The industrial cost recovery period shall begin and the provisions of this system shall become effective on the first day of beneficial use by the first industrial user of any element of the treatment works funded by a federal construction grant. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-104. - Definitions. 
(a)  Industrial cost recovery period: A period of thirty (30) years. 
(b)  Segregated domestic wastes: Wastes of substantially the same origin and strength as those typically produced in households. 
(c)  Expansion: An increase in hydraulic capacity. 
(d)  Upgrading: An increase in the quality of effluent water treatment. 
(e)  Authority: The Upper Occoquan Sewage Authority. 
(f)  Political subdivisions: The political subdivisions served by the authority, namely, the City of Manassas, the City of Manassas Park, the County of Fairfax and the County of Prince William. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-105. - Exclusions. 
    An industrial user who would otherwise be subject to industrial cost recovery may be excluded to the extent that such user will discharge only nonprocess, segregated domestic wastes, or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-106. - Reserved capacity agreements. 
    Reserved capacity agreements entered into shall not exclude the industrial user from participation in this system. The industrial user shall pay the full industrial cost recovery payments allocable to the capacity reserved. In the event that the industrial user exceeds its reserved capacity such user shall pay industrial cost recovery payments calculated on its full reserved capacity plus additional industrial cost recovery payments for its use above the limits of its reserved capacity or any element thereof. 
    In the event the treatment works are expanded in the future with Public Law 92-500 grant assistance, an industrial user who has executed a reserved capacity agreement and has made industrial cost recovery payments based upon full reserved capacity, will not incur additional industrial cost recovery charges associated with the cost of expansion until the industrial user's actual use of the treatment works exceeds its reserved capacity. 
    Industrial users with reserve capacity contracts shall pay any additional industrial cost recovery charges associated with the cost of upgrading the treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-107. - Expansion or upgrading of plant. 
    Should it be necessary to expand or upgrade the treatment works in the future, industrial cost recovery allocations shall be modified, utilizing the methods presented herein, to determine all industrial users' contributions to the expanded or upgraded treatment works. Any monies remaining due under the old industrial cost recovery system shall be added to the new payback amount and the costs distributed to all industrial users of the upgraded or expanded treatment works. Prior to allocation of costs, however, the allowable costs for the federal share shall be reduced by an amount equal to the unexpended balance of the amounts retained by the authority for future expansion and upgrading together with interest earned thereon. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-108. - New industry. 
    Should a new industry enter the system, industrial cost recovery payments shall begin on the date use is initiated and shall continue for the unexpired portion of the industrial cost recovery period or until the industry ceases use of the facility, whichever occurs first. No payment shall be required for that portion of the recovery period prior to the user's entry into the system. Total industrial cost recovery recovered from a new industry shall be the federal cost of the capacity used multiplied by the rates of the unexpired period of use to the industrial cost recovery period. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-109. - Appeal procedure. 
    Any industrial user may apply within one year of the effective date of this system for exclusion from participation in the system on the issue of the discharge of primarily segregated domestic waste. New industrial users shall have one year from the date of their initial connection in which to apply for exclusion. Such appeal shall be submitted to the executive director of the authority. An application for exclusion shall include a schematic diagram of the user's process waste pretreatment and conveyance systems and waste strength tests in conformance with authority accepted procedures and guidelines which shall be available on request. All such diagrams shall be certified as accurate by an engineer licensed in this commonwealth and all such test results shall be certified as having been performed in accordance with authority accepted procedures and their accuracy shall be certified by a qualified chemists or laboratory located within the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    An industrial user who is included in this system may file an application for redetermination of assessment with the executive director within thirty (30) days after the mailing date of the industrial cost recovery bill; provided however, there exists a substantial change in the quality or quantity of effluent discharge by such user arising subsequent to the last redetermination. Such changes shall be certified by a qualified chemist or laboratory as having occurred, and such a chemists or laboratory shall also certify that tests indicating the substantial changes were conducted in accordance with authority accepted practice. 
    All applications shall include the industrial user's name, address, sewer service account number and a brief statement of the reasons it is petitioning and the factual basis for the application. Applications shall set forth the names and titles of the individuals who will be appearing at the hearing. Applications shall be filed in three (3) copies and sent by registered mail to the executive director at the offices of the authority. 
    The authority shall notify the applicant by mail of the time and place for the hearing, such notice to be given within thirty (30) days after receipt of any application. The hearing shall be conducted on the application before the executive director of the authority, or his designee, not less than ten (10) days after mailing of such notice. The hearing format shall be an informal consultation and conference at which the industrial user shall present his argument, evidence, data and proof in connection with the issues submitted. A representative of the authority may then present its factual basis for the exclusion or assessment under consideration. The executive director or his designee, shall not be bound by the usual rules of evidence, but may conduct the hearing in such a manner as in his judgment will expeditiously and accurately determine the substantial rights of the industrial user and the authority. The executive director shall make findings of fact and a recommendation to the board of directors of the authority, which board shall make a final determination, the results of which shall be made known to the applicant. 
    Rehearings may be allowed by the authority for good cause shown and the procedure for rehearings shall be substantially the same as outlined above, except that the hearings shall be before the board of directors of the authority which body shall make a final determination. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-110. - Definition of user classes. 
(a)  An industrial user is any nongovernmental user of treatment works owned by the authority as identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions: 
(1)  Division A-Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing; 
(2)  Division B-Mining; 
(3)  Division D-Manufacturing; 
(4)  Division E-Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services; 
(5)  Division I-Services. 
(b)  Industrial users shall be divided into three (3) user classes: 
(1)  Major industrial-Contributing over one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per day; 
(2)  Commercial Class I-Contributing one thousand (1,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per day; and 
(3)  Commercial Class II-Contributing less than one thousand (1,000) gallons per day. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-111. - Monitoring and billing. 
    Monitoring and billing procedures shall be by user class based on waste flows and characteristics as follow: 
(a)  Each major industrial user shall provide continuous metering of its flow and access to such facilities shall be available to the authority. Continuous composite samples, or grab type samples, as deemed appropriate by the authority, shall be taken by the user for measurement of BOD, suspended solids and nitrogen. The user shall provide access to its sampling records by the authority. Waste flows and characteristics shall be reported to the authority on a periodic basis as determined by the authority. If there is a substantial change in the flow or characteristics introduced into the treatment works by a major industrial user, such user's industrial cost recovery payment shall be adjusted accordingly, except as provided in section 25-106. 
(b)  Commercial Class I user flow determinations shall be by measured water use from water supplier records. Applications may be made to the authority by an individual commercial establishment for reduction if it can be shown that a substantial portion of its metered water flow does not enter the sewerage system. Measurement of BOD, suspended solids and nitrogen shall be made by periodic grab sample analysis. Similar operations (such as all laundries) may be considered together and a common level established for all such similar operations. A total cost for industrial payback will be established for each user. 
(c)  Water records will be used to establish total flow for Commercial Class II users. The other factors used to determine the industrial cost recovery charge for commercial Class II users are defined as BOD-Two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, suspended solids-Two hundred (200) mg/l and nitrogen-Twenty (20) mg/l. Each user in this class shall be charged an equal amount for industrial cost recovery. 
(d)  The payment may be made as one lump sum or spread over a thirty-year period with payments to be made annually. If an industrial user fulfills its industrial cost recovery obligation by making a lump sum payment for its entire share of industrial payback, such payment may be accepted by the authority and either processes as a normal industrial cost recovery payment or set aside in a separate account to be drawn on annually for the remainder of the industrial cost recovery period. Lump sum payments shall not relieve an industrial user from the obligation of making additional future payments should its waste flow or characteristics increase. Discounts from the total industrial cost recovery requirement shall not be given to industrial users for making advanced industrial cost recovery payments. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-112. - Payment. 
    Bills for the industrial cost recovery payment shall be sent to the industrial users by the political subdivisions. The industrial user shall make payment to the political subdivision which shall retain five (5) per cent of the payment for administration or such other purposes as the political subdivision shall deem proper in accordance with section 25-115 of this article. 
    Billing to the industrial users shall require payment within thirty (30) days and the political subdivisions shall forward the ninety-five (95) per cent of payments received to the authority within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof. The collection of delinquent accounts shall be the responsibility of the political subdivisions. 
    Each political subdivision shall submit to the authority, on an annual basis, a report of the amount paid by each industrial user and new industrial users added to the system. The political subdivisions and the authority shall maintain the financial information and data used in the preparation or support of charges under this system. The United States Environmental Protection Agency, the comptroller general of the United States, or any of their duly authorized representatives shall have access to such financial information and data for the purpose of inspection, audit and copying. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-113. - Discontinuance of use. 
    Should an industrial user discontinue use of the treatment works, its payment for industrial cost recovery shall cease. There shall be no requirement for other industries using the treatment works to assume the portion of the industrial cost recovery payment which is unrecovered due to the departure of an industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-114. - Computation of industrial cost recovery payments. 
    During the industrial cost recovery period, each industrial user shall pay its share of the total amount of Federal grant funds, including amendments to grants, which are allocable to capacity used or committed for use in the treatment of wastes from industrial users. The payments for each industrial user shall be computed in accordance with the formula set forth in section 25-116 which takes flow, biochemical oxygen demand, concentration of suspended solids and concentration of nitrogen into account as the primary factors which influence the cost of treatment works construction. 
    Any industrial user which discharges into the authority's system, either directly or through the system of a political jurisdiction, shall be subject to the industrial cost recovery system, unless excluded as provided above. The industrial cost recovery charges for such user shall accrue from the date of the user's initial discharge into the system or the effective date of this system, whichever is later, and shall continue to accrue for the unexpired portion of the industrial cost recovery period or until the user ceases to use the authority system, whichever occurs first. 
    If there is a substantial change in the strength, volume, or delivery flow rate characteristics introduced into the treatment works by an industrial user, such user's share shall be adjusted accordingly, when the authority has made such a determination. 
    An industrial user's share shall not include any portion of the grant amount allocable to capacity not used or reserved by such user. 
    An industrial user's share shall not include an interest compound credit. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-115. - Disposition of recovered funds. 
    All funds recovered during the annual accounting period, with the exception of the discretionary portion, shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts which are fully collateralized by obligations of the United States government or by obligations fully guaranteed as to principle and interest by the United States government, or any agency thereof. 
    At no less than annual intervals, no later than four (4) months after the end of the authority's annual accounting period, the authority shall submit to the United States Environmental Protection Agency fifty (50) per cent of all industrial cost recovery collected during such fiscal year together with any interest earned thereon. 
    Forty (40) per cent of any industrial cost recovery revenues together with any interest earned thereon shall be placed in an account entitled "Expansion and Reconstruction Account" Funds in this account shall be expended only for expansion and reconstruction of treatment works within the authority's jurisdiction which are eligible for grant assistance. The authority shall obtain the written approval of the regional administrator of the environmental protection agency prior to committing any of these funds. 
    Five (5) per cent of any industrial cost recovery revenues together with any interest earned thereon shall be retained by the political subdivisions for administration and such other purposes as they shall deem proper, except for construction of industrial pretreatment facilities or rebates to industrial users for costs incurred by such users in complying with federal user charge or industrial cost recovery requirements. 
    The remaining five (5) per cent of any industrial cost recovery revenues together with any interest earned thereon shall be used to administer this system, and for such other purpose as the authority shall deem proper, except for construction of industrial pretreatment facilities or rebates to industrial users for costs incurred by such users in complying with federal user charge or industrial cost recovery requirements. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-116. - Formula for computing payments. 
    ICR = Qf / Qd × QU + BODf / BODd + BOD u × SSf / SSd × SS u + Nf / Nd × N u × ;frac;P 
    Where: 
ICR = Cost to be recovered from an industrial user ($/billing period). Qf = The sum of the federal grant costs allocable to flow capacity ($). Qd = The design flow capacity of the treatment works (gallons/day). Qu = The average quarterly waste water flow contributed by the user during the billing period (gallons/day). BOD f = The sum of the federal grant costs allocable to BOD 5 capacity ($). BOD d = The design BOD 5 capacity of the treatment works (pounds/day). BOD u = The average daily poundage of five-day biochemical oxygen demand twenty (20) degrees contributed by the user during the billing period (pounds/day). SS f = The sum of the federal grant cost allocable to suspended solids capacity ($). SS d = The design suspended solids capacity of the treatment works (pounds/day). SS u = The average daily poundage of suspended solids contributed by the user during the billing period (pounds/day). N f = The sum of the federal grant costs allocable to nitrogen capacity ($). N d = The design nitrogen capacity of the treatment works (pounds/day). N u = The average daily poundage of nitrogen as N contributed by the user during the billing period (pounds/day). P = Length of the billing period (days). R = Length of the cost recovery period (days).  
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Sec. 25-117. - Partial invalidity. 
    If any one or more sections, clauses, sentences or parts of this article shall be adjudged invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remaining provisions thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the specific provisions held invalid, and the inapplicability or invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or part of this article in one or more instances or circumstances shall not be taken to affect or prejudice in any way its applicability or validity in any other instance. 
(Ord. No. 80-1700-151, 3-4-80) 
Secs. 25-118-25-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, adopted Nov. 11, 2004, amended art. VI in its entirety and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The former art. VI, titled Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Prevention, derived from Ord. No. 82-1700-206, §§ 1-7, adopted Oct. 19, 1982. 

Sec. 25-126. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to abate or control actual or potential cross connections and protect the public health. This article provides for establishment and enforcement of a program of cross connection control and backflow prevention in accordance with the Commonwealth of Virginia, State Board of Health, Waterworks Regulations 1995, or as amended. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 25-127. - Authority. 
    The article is authorized under provisions of the Waterworks Regulations, Part II, Article 3, Cross Connection Control and Backflow Prevention in Waterworks, of the Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 25-128. - Administration. 
A.  The director of public works or designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article under the direction of the city manager or designee. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the director of public works or designee to cause assessment to be made of properties served by the waterworks where cross connection with the waterworks is deemed possible. The method of determining potential cross connection with the waterworks and the administrative procedures shall be established by the director of public works or designee in a cross connection control and backflow prevention program (program) approved by the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Health, Division of Water Supply Engineering. 
C.  The responsibility to carry out the program lies with director of public works or designee. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 25-129. - Enforcement. 
A.  [Required information.] Upon request, the owner or occupants of property served shall furnish to the director of public works or designee pertinent information regarding the consumer's water supply system or systems on such property for the purpose of assessing the consumer's water supply system for cross connection hazards and determining the degree of hazard, if any. The refusal of such information, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of a high degree of hazard cross connection. 
B.  Notice of violation. Any consumer's water supply system owner found to be in violation of any provision of this article shall be served a written notice of violation sent certified mail to the consumer's water supply system owner's last known address, stating the nature of the violation, corrective action required and providing a reasonable time limit, not to exceed thirty (30) days, from the date of receipt of the notice of violation, to bring the consumer's water supply system into compliance with this ordinance or have water service terminated. 
C.  Penalties. Any owner of properties served by a connection to the waterworks found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article or any written order of the director of public works or designee in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each violation. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this act shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 25-130. - Cross connection and backflow prevention program adopted. 
    The provisions of the Cross Connection and Backflow Prevention Program of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia, as amended from time to time by the governing body, are hereby adopted and made part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 25-131. - Responsibilities of the department of public works. 
    Effective cross connection control and backflow prevention requires the cooperation of the director of public works or designee, the owner(s) of the property served, the local building official or his designee and the backflow prevention device tester. 
A.  The program shall be carried out in accordance with the Commonwealth of Virginia, State Board of Health, Waterworks Regulations and shall as a minimum provide containment of potential contaminants at the consumer's service connection. 
B.  The City of Manassas Park has full responsibility for water quality and for the construction, maintenance and operation of the waterworks beginning at the water source and ending at the service connection. 
C.  The owner of the property served and the City of Manassas Park have shared responsibility for water quality and for the construction, maintenance, and operation of the consumer's water supply system from the service connection to the free flowing outlet. 
D.  The director of public works or designee shall, to the extent of their jurisdiction, provide continuing identification and evaluation of all cross connection hazards. This shall include an assessment of each consumer's water supply system for cross connections to be followed by the requirement, if necessary, of installation of a backflow prevention device or separation. Assessments shall be performed at least annually. 
E.  In the event of the backflow of pollution or contamination into the waterworks, the director of public works or designee shall promptly take or cause corrective action to confine and eliminate the pollution or contamination. The director of public works or designee shall report to the appropriate Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Health, Office of Water Programs field office in the most expeditious manner (usually by telephone) when backflow occurs and shall submit a written report by the tenth day of the month following the month during which backflow occurred addressing the incident, its causes, effects, and preventative or control measures required 
F.  The director of public works or designee shall take positive action to ensure that the waterworks is adequately protected from cross connections and backflow at all times. If a cross connection exists or backflow occurs into a consumer's water supply system or into the waterworks or if the consumer's water supply system causes the pressure in the waterworks to be lowered below ten (10) psi gauge, the director of public works or designee may discontinue the water service to the consumer and water service shall not be restored until the deficiencies have been corrected or eliminated to the satisfaction of the director of public works or designee. 
G.  In order to protect the occupants of a premises, director of public works or designee should inform the consumer's water supply system owner(s) of any cross connection beyond the service connection that should be abated or controlled by application of an appropriate backflow prevention device or separation. Appropriate backflow prevention device or separation should be applied at each point-of-use and/or applied to the consumer's water supply system, isolating an area, which may be a health or pollution hazard to the consumer's water supply system or to the waterworks. 
H.  Records of backflow prevention devices, separations, and consumer's water supply systems, including inspection records, records of backflow incidents, and records of device tests shall be maintained by director of public works or designee for ten (10) years. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 25-132. - Responsibilities of the consumer's water supply system owner. 
A.  The consumer's water supply system owner(s), at their own expense, shall install, operate, test, and maintain required backflow prevention devices or backflow prevention by separations. 
B.  The consumer's water supply system owner(s) shall provide copies of test results, maintenance records and overhaul records to the director of public works or designee within thirty (30) days of completion of testing or work. Such testing or work shall have been performed by device testers which have obtained a certificate of completion of a course recognized by the American Water Works Association, the Virginia Department of Health or the Virginia Cross Connection Control Association for cross connection control and backflow prevention inspection, maintenance and testing or otherwise be certified by a Commonwealth of Virginia tradesman certification program. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 25-133. - Preventive and control measures for containment. 
A.  Service line protection. Backflow prevention device or separation shall be installed at the service connection to a consumer's water supply system where, in the judgment of the director of public works or designee, a health or pollution hazard to the consumer's water supply system or to the waterworks exists or may exist unless such hazards are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the director of public works or designee 
B.  Special conditions. 
1.  When, as a matter of practicality, the backflow prevention device or separation cannot be installed at the service connection, the device or separation may be located downstream of the service connection but prior to any unprotected takeoffs. 
2.  Where all actual or potential cross connections can be easily correctable at each point of use and where the consumer's water supply system is not intricate or complex, point-of-use isolation protection by application of an appropriate backflow prevention device or backflow prevention by separation may be used at each point of use in lieu of installing a containment device at the service connection. 
C.  [Conditions for installation.] A backflow prevention device or backflow prevention by separation shall be installed at each service connection to a consumer's water supply system serving premises where the following conditions exist: 
1.  Premises on which any substance is handled in such a manner as to create an actual or potential hazard to a waterworks (this shall include premises having auxiliary water systems or having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from a waterworks which are no longer under the control of the waterworks owner). 
2.  Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of the director of public works or designee may not be easily correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to determine whether or not cross connections exist. 
3.  Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make an evaluation of all cross connection hazards. 
4.  Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished. 
5.  Other premises specified by the director of public works or designee where cause can be shown that a potential cross connection hazard not enumerated above exists. 
D.  [Booster, fire pumps.] Premises having booster pumps or fire pumps connected to the waterworks shall have the pumps equipped with a pressure-sensing device to shut off or regulate the flow from the booster pump when the pressure in the waterworks drops to a minimum of ten (10) psi gauge at the service connection. 
E.  [Designated facilities.] An approved backflow prevention device or backflow prevention by separation shall be installed at each service connection to a consumer's water supply system or installed under special conditions, section VII.B serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities: 
1.  Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, veterinary establishments, nursing homes, dental offices and medical buildings; 
2.  Laboratories; 
3.  Piers, docks, waterfront facilities; 
4.  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, or storm water pumping stations; 
5.  Food and beverage processing plants; 
6.  Chemical plants, dyeing plants and pharmaceutical plants; 
7.  Metal plating industries; 
8.  Petroleum or natural gas processing or storage plants; 
9.  Radioactive materials processing plants or nuclear reactors; 
10.  Car washes and laundries; 
11.  Lawn sprinkler systems, irrigation systems; 
12.  Fire service systems; 
13.  Slaughter houses and poultry processing plants; 
14.  Farms where the water is used for other than household purposes; 
15.  Commercial greenhouses and nurseries; 
16.  Health clubs with swimming pools, therapeutic baths, hot tubs or saunas; 
17.  Paper and paper-products plants and printing plants; 
18.  Pesticide or exterminating companies and their vehicles with storage or mixing tanks; 
19.  Schools or colleges with laboratory facilities; 
20.  High-rise buildings (four (4) or more stories); 
21.  Multiuse commercial, office, or warehouse facilities; 
22.  Others specified by the director of public works or designee when reasonable cause can be shown for a potential backflow or cross connection hazard. 
F.  Where lawn sprinkler systems, irrigation systems or fire service systems are connected directly to the waterworks with a separate service connection, a backflow prevention device or backflow prevention by separation shall be installed at the service connection or installed under special conditions, section VII.B.1. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 25-134. - Type of protection required. 
    The type of protection required shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists or may exist. 
    The degree of hazard, either high, moderate, or low, is based on the nature of the contaminant; the potential health hazard; the probability of the backflow occurrence; the method of backflow either by backpressure or by backsiphonage; and the potential effect on waterworks structures, equipment, and appurtenances used in the storage, collection, purification, treatment, and distribution of pure water. 
    Table 1 shall be used as a guide to determine the degree of hazard for any situation. 
A.  An air gap or physical disconnection gives the highest degree of protection and shall be used whenever practical to do so in high hazard situations subject to backpressure. 
B.  An air gap, physical disconnection and a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device will protect against backpressure when operating properly. 
C.  Pressure vacuum breakers will not protect against backpressure, but will protect against backsiphonage when operating properly. Pressure vacuum breakers may be used in low, moderate or high hazard situations subject to backsiphonage only. 
D.  A double gate-double check valve assembly shall not be used in high hazard situations. 
E.  Barometric loops are not acceptable. 
F.  Interchangeable connections or changeover devices are not acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 25-135. - Backflow prevention devices and backflow prevention by separation for containment. 
A.  Backflow prevention devices for containment include the reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, the double gate-double check valve assembly, and the pressure vacuum breaker assembly. 
B.  Backflow prevention by separation shall be an air gap or physical disconnection. The minimum air gap shall be twice the effective opening of a potable water outlet unless the outlet is a distance less than three (3) times the effective opening away from a wall or similar vertical surface, in which case the minimum air gap shall be three times the effective opening of the outlet. In no case shall the minimum air gap be less than one (1) inch. 
C.  Backflow prevention devices shall be of the approved type and shall comply with the most recent American Water Works Association Standards and shall be approved for containment by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. 
D.  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner approved by the director of public works or designee and in accordance with the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research recommendations and the manufacturer's installation instructions. Vertical or horizontal positioning shall be as approved by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. 
E.  Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the director of public works or designee prior to the effective date of this article [Nov. 11, 2004] shall, except for inspection, testing, and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements of sections X. C. and D. if the director of public works or designee is assured that the devices will protect the waterworks. 
F.  For the purpose of application to special conditions, section VII.B.2., point-of-use isolation devices or separations shall be as specified by the director of public works or designee where reasonable assurance can be shown that the device or separation will protect the waterworks. As a minimum, point-of-use devices should bear an appropriate American Society of Sanitary Engineering standard number. See the cross connection control program, appendix A, for isolation device application. 
G.  Backflow prevention devices with openings, outlets, or vents that are designed to operate or open during backflow prevention shall not be installed in pits or areas subject to flooding. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 25-136. - Maintenance and inspection requirements. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of the consumer's water supply system owner(s) to maintain all backflow prevention devices or separations installed in accordance with section VII in good working order and to make no piping or other arrangements for the purpose of bypassing or defeating backflow prevention devices or separations. 
B.  Operational testing and inspection schedules shall be established by the director of public works or designee as outlined in the cross connection control program for all backflow prevention devices and separations which are installed at the service connection or installed under special conditions, section VII. The interval between testing and inspection of each device shall be established in accordance with the age and condition of the device and the device manufacturer's recommendations. Backflow prevention device and separation inspection and testing intervals shall not exceed one (1) year. 
C.  Backflow prevention device overhaul procedures and replacement parts shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
D.  Backflow prevention device testing procedures shall be in accordance with the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research backflow prevention assembly field test procedure and the manufacturer's instructions. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 25-137. - Definitions. 
    Air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest point of the potable water outlet and the rim of the receiving vessel. 
    Auxiliary water system means any water system on or available to the premises other than the waterworks. These auxiliary waters may include water from a source such as wells, lakes, or streams; or process fluids; or used water. They may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable, or constitute an unapproved water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control. 
    Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into a waterworks from any source or sources other than its intended source. 
    Backflow prevention by separation (separation) means preventing backflow by either an air gap or by physical disconnection of a waterworks by the removal or absence of pipes, fittings, or fixtures that connect a waterworks directly or indirectly to a nonpotable system or one of questionable quality. 
    Backflow prevention device (device) means any approved device intended to prevent backflow into a waterworks. 
    Backpressure backflow means backflow caused by pressure in the downstream piping which is superior to the supply pressure at the point of consideration. 
    Backsiphonage backflow means backflow caused by a reduction in pressure which causes a partial vacuum creating a siphon effect. 
    Consumer means a person who drinks water from a waterworks. 
    Consumer's water supply system (consumer's system) means the water service pipe, water distributing pipes, and necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves, and all appurtenances in or adjacent to the building or premises. 
    Containment means the prevention of backflow into a waterworks from a consumer's water supply system by a backflow prevention device or by backflow prevention by separation at the service connection. 
    Contaminant means any objectionable or hazardous physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water. 
    Cross connection means any connection or structural arrangement, direct or indirect, to the waterworks whereby backflow can occur. 
    Degree of hazard means either a high, moderate or low hazard based on the nature of the contaminant; the potential health hazard; the probability of the backflow occurrence; the method of backflow either by backpressure or by backsiphonage; and the potential effect on waterworks structures, equipment, and appurtenances used in the storage, collection, purification, treatment, and distribution of pure water. 
    Distribution main means a water main whose primary purpose is to provide treated water to service connections. 
    Division means the Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Health Office of Water Programs' Division of Water Supply Engineering. 
    Domestic use or usage means normal family or household use, including drinking, laundering, bathing, cooking, heating, cleaning and flushing toilets. (See appendix A for title 32.1, article 2, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended). 
    Double gate-double check valve assembly means an approved assembly designed to prevent backsiphonage or backpressure backflow and used for moderate or low hazard situations, composed of two independently operating, spring-loaded check valves, tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test cocks. 
    Entry point means the place where water from the source is delivered to the distribution system. 
    Health hazard means any condition, device, or practice in a waterworks or its operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and well being of the water consumer. 
    Isolation means the prevention of backflow into a waterworks from a consumer's water supply system by a backflow prevention device or by backflow prevention by separation at the sources of potential contamination in the consumer's water supply system. This is also called point-of-use isolation. Isolation of an area or zone within a consumer's water supply system confines the potential source of contamination to a specific area or zone. This is called area or zone isolation. 
    Maximum contaminant level means the maximum permissible level of a contaminant in water which is delivered to the free-flowing outlet of the ultimate user of a waterworks, except in the cases of turbidity and VOCs, where the maximum permissible level is measured at each entry point to the distribution system. Contaminants added to the water under circumstances controlled by the user, except those resulting from corrosion of piping and plumbing caused by water quality, are excluded from this definition. Maximum contaminant levels may be either "primary" (PMCL) meaning based on health considerations or "secondary" (SMCL) meaning based on aesthetic considerations. 
    Plumbing fixture means a receptacle or device which is either permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises, and demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges used water, waste materials, or sewage either directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the premises; or requires both a water supply connection and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water. 
    Pollution hazard means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material may enter the waterworks or a consumer's water system. 
    Premises means a piece of real estate, house or building and its land. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker means an approved assembly designed to prevent backsiphonage backflow and used for high, moderate, or low hazard situations, composed of one or two independently operating, spring-loaded check valves; an independently operating, spring-loaded air-inlet valve; tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly; and fitted with properly located test cocks. 
    Process fluids means any kind of fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted which would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced into the waterworks. This includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Polluted or contaminated water, 
2.  Process waters, 
3.  Used water, originating from the waterworks, which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality, 
4.  Cooling waters, 
5.  Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems, 
6.  Chemicals in solution or suspension, and 
7.  Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluid used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes. 
    Pure water or potable water means water fit for human consumption and domestic use which is sanitary and normally free of minerals, organic substances, and toxic agents in excess of reasonable amounts for domestic usage in the area served and normally adequate in quantity and quality for the minimum health requirements of the persons served. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RPZ device) means an approved assembly designed to prevent backsiphonage or backpressure backflow used for high, moderate, or low hazard situations, composed of a minimum of two (2) independently operating, spring-loaded check valves together with an independent, hydraulically operating pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
    Service connection means the point of delivery of water to a customer's building service line as follows: 
1.  If a meter is installed, the service connection is the downstream side of the meter; 
2.  If a meter is not installed, the service connection is the point of connection to the waterworks. 
3.  When the water purveyor is also the building owner, the service connection is the entry point to the building. 
    System hazard means a condition posing a threat of or actually causing damage to the physical properties of the waterworks or a consumer's water supply system. 
    Used water means water supplied from the waterworks to a consumer's water supply system after it has passed through the service connection. 
    Water supply means the water that shall have been taken into a waterworks from all wells, streams, springs, lakes, and other bodies of surface water (natural or impounded), and the tributaries thereto, and all impounded groundwater, but the term "water supply" shall not include any waters above the point of intake of such waterworks. 
    Waterworks means a system that serves piped water for drinking or domestic use to (1) the public, (2) at least fifteen (15) connections, or (3) an average of twenty-five (25) individuals for at least sixty (60) days out of the year. The term "waterworks" shall include all structures, equipment, and appurtenances used in the storage, collection, purification, treatment, and distribution of pure water except the piping and fixtures inside the building where such water is delivered (see title 32.1, article 2, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended). 
    Waterworks owner means an individual, group of individuals, partnership, firm, association, institution, corporation, government entity, or the federal government which supplies or proposes to supply water to any person within this state from or by means of any waterworks (see title 32.1, article 2, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended). 
TABLE 1-DETERMINATION OF DEGREE OF HAZARD 
Premises with the following conditions shall be rated at the corresponding degree of hazard. 
High Hazard The contaminant is toxic, poisonous, noxious or unhealthy. In the event of backflow of the contaminant, a health hazard would exist. A high probability exists of a backflow occurrence either by backpressure or by backsiphonage. The contaminant would disrupt the service of piped water for drinking or domestic use. Examples-Sewage, used water, nonpotable water, auxiliary water systems and toxic or hazardous chemicals. Moderate Hazard The contaminant would only degrade the quality of the water aesthetically or impair the usefulness of the water. In the event of backflow of the contaminant, a health hazard would not exist. A moderate probability exists of a backflow occurrence either by backpressure or by backsiphonage. The contaminant would not seriously disrupt service of piped water for drinking or domestic use. Examples-Foodstuff, nontoxic chemicals and nonhazardous chemicals. Low Hazard The contaminant would only degrade the quality of the water aesthetically. In the event of backflow of the contaminant, a health hazard would not exist. A low probability exists of the occurrence of backflow. Backflow would only occur by backsiphonage. The contaminant would not disrupt service of piped water. Examples-Foodstuff, nontoxic chemicals and nonhazardous chemicals.  
(Ord. No. 04-1700-769, § 1, 11-11-04) 
Chapter 26 - WEAPONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Possession of hunting weapons on city property, § 17-39.1. 

Sec. 26-1. - Carrying concealed weapons. 
(a)  If any person carries about his person, hid from common observation, any pistol, or any other firearm or weapon designed or intended to propel a missile of any kind, dirk, bowie knife, switchblade knife, razor, slingshot, metal knucks, or any weapon of like kind, or nun chahka or any other similar flailing instrument consisting of two (2) or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to swing freely, which instrument may also be known as a "nunchuck" or "nunchaku," shuriken, fighting chain or any weapon of like kind, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and such weapon shall be forfeited to the city and may be seized by an officer as forfeited, and such as may be needed for police officers and conservators of the peace, shall be devoted to that purpose, and the remainder shall be destroyed by the officer having them in charge. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any person while in his own place of abode or the curtilage thereof or to police officers, sergeants, sheriffs or deputy sheriffs. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any of the following individuals while in the discharge of their official duties: 
(1)  Carriers of the United States mail in rural districts. 
(2)  Officers or guards of the penitentiary or other institutions or camps of the state corrections system. 
(3)  Conservators of the peace other than notaries public. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any person who has been granted permission to carry a concealed weapon in accord with state law. 
(Code 1971, § 30-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, and authority of circuit court to grant permission to carry concealed weapons, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308. 
Sec. 26-2. - Carrying dangerous weapon to place of religious worship. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any gun, pistol, bowie knife, dagger or other dangerous weapon, without good and sufficient cause, to a place of worship while a meeting for religious purposes is being held at such place. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 18.2-283. 
Sec. 26-3. - Discharging of firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any firearm, except in a shooting gallery constructed and operated in accordance with the regulations of the National Rifle Association. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer in the discharge of his duties nor to any other person whose discharge of a firearm is justifiable or excusable at law in the protection of his life or property or in otherwise specifically authorized by law. 
(c)  For purposes of this chapter 26, the term "firearm" means any weapon that will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel single or multiple projectiles by the action of an explosion of a combustible material; or the frame or receiver of any such weapon. 
(Code 1971, § 30-2; Ord. No. 12-1700-914, § 1, 11-1-11) 
Cross reference- License tax for shooting galleries, § 14-90. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate or prohibit discharge of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113; discharging firearms in streets or public places, §§ 18.2-280, 18.2-286. 
Sec. 26-4. - Pointing or brandishing firearm or object similar in appearance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to point or brandish any firearm, as hereinafter described, or any object similar in appearance to a firearm, whether capable of being fired or not, in such manner as to reasonably induce fear in the mind of another. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the word "firearm" shall mean any weapon in which ammunition may be used or discharged, by explosion or pneumatic pressure. The word "ammunition", as used herein, shall mean cartridge, pellet, ball, missile or projectile adopted for use in a firearm. 
(Ord. No. 73-1700-52, 3-20-73) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-282. 
Sec. 26-5. - Discharging of pneumatic guns, slingshots, grit shooters, bows and arrows, etc. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or use in the city any non-explosive weapon (i.e., not a firearm, as defined in section 26-3 above), where such discharge or use is likely to do or cause injury to any person or property. For purposes of this chapter 26, the term "non-explosive weapon" means a pneumatic gun (e.g., paintball gun, BB gun, pellet gun, etc.), slingshot, grit shooter, bow and arrow or other non-explosive device designed or intended to be used to launch or shoot projectiles. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in subsection (a) above, the use of non-explosive weapons shall not be prohibited at facilities approved for shooting ranges, on other property where firearms may be lawfully discharged, or on or within private property with permission of the owner or legal possessor thereof when conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property. 
(Code 1971, § 30-3; Ord. No. 12-1700-914, § 1, 11-1-11) 
Sec. 26-6. - Possession, sale, etc., of firearms of home-made construction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to have in his possession, make or manufacture and sell or trade any pistol, gun or rifle of home-made construction; provided that, this shall in no way apply to pistols, guns and rifles or other like firearms that are manufactured by reputable persons that are engaged in such a manufacturing business. 
(Code 1971, § 30-4) 
Sec. 26-7. - Sale, delivery, etc., of blackjacks, metal knucks, switchblade knives and similar weapons. 
    If any person shall sell or barter, or exhibit for sale or for barter, or give or furnish, or cause to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, or have in his possession, or under his control, with the intent of selling, bartering, giving or furnishing, any blackjack, brass or metal knucks, switchblade knife or like weapon, such person shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. The having in one's possession of any such weapon shall be prima facie evidence, except in the case of a conservator of the peace, of his intent to sell, barter, give or furnish the same. 
(Code 1971, § 30-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-311. 
Sec. 26-8. - Sale, etc., of toy firearms discharging blank or ball charges. 
(a)  No person shall sell, barter, exchange, furnish or dispose of by purchase, gift or in any other manner any toy gun, pistol, rifle or other toy firearm, if the same shall, by means of powder or other explosives, discharge blank or ball charges. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Each sale of any of the articles hereinbefore specified to any person shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the sale of what are commonly known as cap pistols. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-284. 
Sec. 26-9. - Sale or delivery of weapons to minors. 
    If any person sells, barters, gives or furnishes, or causes to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, to any person under eighteen (18) years of age a pistol, dirk, switchblade knife or bowie knife, having good cause to believe him to be under eighteen (18) years of age, such person shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-309. 
Chapter 27 - YARD SALES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 27-1. - Time limitation. 
    No yard sale shall be conducted continuously for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Ord. No. 77-1700-101, § 4, 5-3-77) 
Secs. 27-2-27-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 27-16. - Required. 
    No yard sale shall be conducted in the city until a permit has been obtained from the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 77-1700-101, § 1, 5-3-77) 
Sec. 27-17. - Fee. 
    The fee for a permit for a yard sale shall be one dollar ($1.00). 
(Ord. No. 77-1700-101, § 2, 5-3-77) 
Sec. 27-18. - Limitation on issuance to members of same family. 
    No more than two (2) permits shall be issued under this article to the members of any one family within a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 77-1700-101, § 3, 5-3-77) 
Sec. 27-19. - Display. 
    A permit issued pursuant to this article shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises at all times during the progress of the yard sale. 
(Ord. No. 77-1700-101, § 4, 5-3-77) 
Chapter 31 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 79-1700-130-A is set out herein as adopted by the council on February 13, 1979. It was adopted to replace chapter 31 of the 1971 Manassas Park City Code and the original arrangement and article and section numbers have been retained. The numbering or lettering of subsections and paragraphs within a section have been changed to conform to the format of this Code. Future amendments will be indicated by history notes appearing in parentheses () at the end of the amended section. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived, unamended, from Ordinance No. 79-1700-130-A. 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-41 et seq.; outdoor advertising signs, § 3-16 et seq.; animals and fowl, Ch. 5; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; effect of building code on zoning ordinance, § 7-19 (200.3); erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; license not to issue for conduct of business, trade, etc., at prohibited location, § 14-23; open storage of inoperable motor vehicles in residential districts, § 17-53; repairing or dismantling vehicles in residential districts, § 17-54; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 20; subdivision of land, Ch. 21; traffic code, Ch. 24; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25; yard sales, Ch. 27. 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-486 et seq.; codification of zoning ordinance, § 15.1-37.3. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE, APPLICATION, PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 31-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
Sec. 31-2. - Application. 
    This chapter shall apply to the incorporated territory of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
Sec. 31-3. - Purpose. 
    The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made to promote the safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the citizens of Manassas Park, Virginia, and to provide for efficiency and economy in the process of development, for the appropriate and best use of land, for convenience of traffic and circulation of people and goods, for the appropriate use and occupancy of buildings, to encourage good civic design and arrangement to facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community, and for adequate public utilities, public services and facilities, by regulating and limiting or determining the height and bulk of buildings and structures, the area of yards and other open spaces, and the density of use. The zoning regulations and districts have been made with reasonable consideration for, among other things, the existing use and character of property, the character of the district and its suitability for particular uses, trends of growth or change, and with a view to conserving natural resources and the value of land and buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the incorporated territory of Manassas Park, Virginia. 
Sec. 31-4. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, its provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any other provisions of law or ordinance, or any regulations or permits adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use or construction of buildings or premises, or private restrictions; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed by such other provisions, the provision of this chapter shall govern. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 31-5. - General rules of construction. 
    The following general rules of construction shall apply to the regulations of this chapter: 
(1)  The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the obvious construction of the wording indicates otherwise. 
(2)  Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses, and the future the present. 
(3)  The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
Sec. 31-6. - Definitions. 
    The zoning administrator shall strictly construe the following terms and definitions. In the event a term is not defined in this section, the administrator shall refer to other chapters of the Code and to the building code for guidance. If ambiguity remains, the zoning administrator shall then rely upon the conventional, recognized meaning of the term (e.g., current edition, Merriam-Webster's Dictionary). In determining what activities comprise components of any use defined herein, the zoning administrator may consult the current edition of the North American Industrial Classification Standards. Unless otherwise provided elsewhere in this code, the definitions provided herein are to be used for this chapter only. Such definitions shall not be deemed, nor shall they be construed, to be a listing of the uses permitted in the zoning districts created by this chapter. 
    Abutting/adjoining: Having a common point or border; having property or district lines in common. Compare "adjacent". 
    Accessory building: A subordinate building located on the same lot as the principal building, and the use of which is customarily associated with and incidental to the use of the principal building. An accessory building shall not dominate a principal building in area, extent or purpose. An accessory building that is attached to and is an integrated part of (by location, materials and architectural design) a principal building shall be governed by the regulations of this chapter for principal buildings. 
    Accessory structure: A subordinate structure located on the same lot as the principal use, and the use of which is customarily associated with and incidental to the principal use. See Illustration 1 at end of this section. 
    Accessory use: A subordinate use or structure customarily incidental to and located upon the same lot occupied by the main use or building. 
    Acreage: A parcel of land, regardless of area, described by metes and bounds which is not a numbered lot on any recorded subdivision plat. 
    Adjacent: Nearby, being separated only by a street, railroad right-of-way or other like feature. Compare "abutting/adjoining". 
    Administrator: See "zoning administrator". 
    Adult book store: An establishment which has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, or other periodicals and which excludes juveniles in accordance with §§ 18.2-290 and 18.2-391 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Adult mini motion picture theatre: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for exhibiting motion pictures, shows, or other presentations and which excludes juveniles in accordance with §§ 18.2-390 and 18.2-391 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
    Agriculture: The tilling of soil, the raising of crops, the keeping of animals or fowl, horticulture, forestry; the cultivation of orchards, groves, or nurseries for growing or propagation of plants, trees and shrubs; dairies. 
    Airport: Any airfield, aerodrome, airstrip, landing strip, heliport, or other place, on land or water, for the operation of aircraft. 
    Alley: A travelway located to the sides or rears of lots allowing for vehicular ingress, egress, service access, and the placement and maintenance of utilities. 
    Ambulance service: Transportation service for patients, by licensed personnel; this is not an emergency response service. 
    Antenna: Any device used to collect or radiate electromagnetic waves, including both directional antennas, such as yagi, panel parabolic, and omni-directional antennas, such as wire, whip, and dipole. An "antenna" does not include any structure to which it is affixed. 
    Apartment: A single-family dwelling unit with a room or suite of rooms fitted especially with cooking and housekeeping facilities, which is used, leased and/or owned, and a which is one (1) of a group of not less than three (3) units in a series separated from one another by party walls without doors, windows or other provisions of human passage or visibility through such walls from the ground floor to the roof. An apartment shall not be construed to mean a townhouse dwelling. 
    Applicant: A person seeking any determination, approval, or permit required by this chapter. 
    Art gallery (private): A place for display or retail facility for finished art materials, including paintings, statues, tapestries, ceramics, or other art objects. 
    Assembly: The piecing together of various, separate, manufactured components and mechanical parts to construct a finished product. 
    Automobile graveyard: Any lot, place or parcel, except a lawful motor vehicle repair or service facility, upon which five (5) or more inoperative motor vehicles of any kind are found. 
    Automotive service station: See "motor vehicle fuel station". 
    Bank: See "financial institution". 
    Basement: A story partly underground and having at least one-half (1/2) of average height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Bedroom: A private room planned and intended for sleeping and separated from other rooms by a door, as defined by the building code. 
    Board: The Board of Zoning Appeals of Manassas Park. 
    Broadcast station, radio or television: A business that transmits a radio or television program for general or public use. 
    Buildable area: The area of that part of the lot not included within the yards or open spaces required within. 
    Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels, including tents, cabins, and carports. Where divided by party walls from the ground through the ceiling, each portion of a structure shall be deemed to be a separate building. 
    Building code: The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (Va. Code § 36-97 et seq.). 
    Building, completely enclosed: Any building having no outside openings other than ordinary doors, windows and ventilators. 
    Building height: The vertical distance from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof. See Illustration 3 at end of this section. 
    Building, main: The principal building or the principal buildings on a lot, or the building or one of the principal buildings housing the principal use on the lot. 
    Building official: The person so designated by the city manager. 
    Building restriction line (BRL): The line established by this chapter, beyond which a building shall not extend, except as specifically provided by this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, building restriction lines and setback lines applicable to buildings are not interchangeable. 
    By-right use: A use that is permitted in a zoning district upon approval of a site or subdivision plan (i.e., without further legislative approval). 
    Carpet or flooring retail sales: Retail sales of carpet and other floor covering, in which less than fifty (50) percent of the facility is storage area or installation work area that is not open to the general public. 
    Carport: Any space outside a building and contiguous thereto, wholly or partly covered by a roof, and used for the shelter of motor vehicles. An unenclosed carport is a carport with no side enclosure that is more than eighteen (18) inches in height, exclusive of screens (other than the side of the building to which the carport is contiguous. 
    Car wash, manned: Any motor vehicle cleaning business conducted entirely within the confines of an enclosed structure that houses the business and for which employees of the business perform all aspects of motor vehicle cleaning. 
    Certificate of use and occupancy: The certificate issued by the building official, which permits the use of a building in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and which certifies compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the building code for the use and occupancy of the building in its several parts, together with any special stipulations or conditions of zoning approval and/or the building permit. 
    City: The City of Manassas Park. 
    Civic building: Any permitted civic use building. Examples of civic buildings include, but are not limited to, governmental administrative offices, colleges, universities, cultural arts centers, post offices, public and private schools, and religious institutions. 
    Civic club: A facility used by a group of people organized as a nonprofit entity for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, and a constitution and bylaws. Such organizations may use civic clubs for any activity that is consistent with their nonprofit status. 
    Clearing: Removing or causing to be removed the vegetation growing in the soil. Such removing or causing to be removed shall include any intentional or negligent act to (1) cut down, (2) remove all or a substantial part of, or (3) damage a tree or other vegetation which will cause the tree or other vegetation to decline and/or die. Such acts shall include but not be limited to damage inflicted upon the root system of the vegetation by the application of toxic substances, by the operation of equipment and vehicles, by storage of material, or by the change of natural grade due to unapproved excavation or filling, or damage caused by the unapproved alteration of natural physical conditions. 
    Clinic: An establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination or treatment by physicians or dentists. 
    Club, private: Those associations and organizations of a fraternal or social character not operated or maintained for profit, but the term shall not include night clubs or other institutions operated as a business. 
    Cold storage facility (industrial): A facility primarily engaged in the warehousing and storage of goods under refrigeration, which may include incidental processing, preparing or packaging of items for storage. 
    Commercial artist or photographer's studio: A facility primarily engaged in painting, photographic, graphic art and other art forms or video services. Film development facilities shall occupy twenty-five (25) percent or less of the gross floor area of the principal use. 
    Commercial use: Any wholesale, retail, or service business activity established to carry on trade for a profit or not for profit by the owner, lessee or licensee. 
    Common area: All land within a subdivision or townhouse development, excluding public streets and rights-of-way and private lots, held either by the owner/developer or an individual nonprofit corporate owner whose members are all property owners within the subdivision or townhouse development. 
    Comprehensive plan: The city's comprehensive plan, including those maps, plats, charts, and descriptive matter that have been formally adopted by the governing body, pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Virginia. 
    Conditional use: A use that, owing to some special characteristics attendant to its operation or installation, is permitted in a district after site specific review and subject to special conditions approved by the governing body. See section 31-54.1. 
    Condominium: Real property, or any incidents thereto or interests therein, lawfully submitted for approval as a condominium pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Code of Virginia. 
    Construction equipment: Heavy equipment or vehicles of a type used primarily by the construction industries. Such equipment may include, but is not limited to, bulldozers, backhoes, cement trucks, concrete mixers, construction tractors, cranes, derricks, dredging machinery, dump trucks, excavators, graders, hoists, pavers, power shovels, road construction and maintenance machinery, scaffolds, tank trucks, trenching machines, and water well drilling machinery. 
    Construction operation: The erection, repair, renovation, demolition or removal of any building or structure, and the excavation, filling, grading and alteration of property in connection therewith. 
    Contiguous: Abutting, adjoining, or touching, and having a boundary, or portion thereof, which is coterminous. 
    Contractor or tradesman: One who contracts to perform work or provide supplies for the building or service industry including, but not limited to, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, carpentry, electrical, masonry, and metal working. 
    Contractor or tradesman's shop (limited): A shop that does not involve millwork, operation of heavy equipment, furnaces or heating pots, or the dipping of furniture. Cabinetmaking, floor work, duct work, framing and other similar light work on or off-site is permitted. 
    Contractor or tradesman's shop (unlimited): A shop for contracting or trade operations involving millwork with industrial lathe, heavy equipment, furnaces or heating pots, automated tools, or the dipping or refinishing of furniture, or similar processes. 
    Corner lot: See "lot". 
    Dancing establishment (dance hall): Any place open to the general public where dancing is permitted, to which an admission fee is charged, or for which compensation such as the sale of refreshments, food, or any form of merchandise is received. Private clubs shall be excluded from this definition, provided attendance at dance is limited to bona fide members of such clubs and bona fide guests of such members. 
    Data and computer services: A use involving a building and premises in which the majority of the space is occupied by computers and/or telecommunications and related equipment, and where information is processed, transferred and/or stored. Examples of data and computer services include data centers, data technology centers, internet service providers, network operations centers, web hosting facilities and other similar establishments primarily engaged in providing direct access through telecommunications networks to computer-held information. 
    Defense production business: A company or identifiable subdivision of a company that is engaged in, or performs functions ancillary to or in support of, the design, development, or production of materials, components, or equipment required to meet the needs of national defense. In no case shall a use be permitted by a defense production business that is likely to be dangerous or offensive because of odor, dust, fire, explosion, or other reasons, or that uses equipment and/or processes that are likely to produce objectionable noise, vibration, explosion, fire, smoke, or other effect. 
    Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the placement of streets and other paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, and drilling operations. 
    District: Any section of the city in which certain zoning or development regulations apply. 
    Domestic storage: Storage of or pertaining to the family or household on the premises, such as garden implements, tools, and household items. 
    Drive-in facility: An establishment that, by design, physical facilities, or service or packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in motor vehicles. 
    Dry cleaning/garment processing facility, retail: A commercial facility serving the general public that uses chemical solvents to clean and process garments and household fabrics on the premises, where garments and household fabrics are received and returned directly to the general public only, and not as a wholesale facility used by other dry cleaning shops. The processing area that is used for the actual cleaning/treatment of garments and household fabrics shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the gross floor area, with the remainder to include the public lobby, garment and household fabrics storage area, and accessory uses as a tailor or shoe repair. Such facility may not serve as a wholesale facility for any garments other than those left directly by the general public and may not be over three thousand (3,000) square feet in size unless located within an industrial zone. 
    Dry cleaning/garment processing facility: An industrial processing facility that uses chemical solvents to process and clean garments and household fabrics for distribution to retail outlets, such as dry cleaning pick-up facilities or dry cleaning/garment processing retail establishments. Such facility must be at least three thousand (3,000) square feet in size and must not be principally available to the general public. 
    Dry cleaning pick-up facility: A commercial facility that serves only as a drop-off/pick-up station for the general public for garments and household fabrics to be processed by a dry cleaning/garment processing facility located elsewhere. 
    Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including trailers, mobile homes, hotels, motels, motor lodges, boarding houses, or tourist homes. 
    Dwelling, apartment: See "apartment". 
    Dwelling, single-family: A structure, other than a mobile home, arranged or designed to be occupied by one (1) family, the structure having only one (1) dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, two-family: A structure arranged or designed to be occupied by two (2) families, the structure having only two (2) dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family: A structure arranged or designed to be occupied by three (3) or more families, the structure having three (3) or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, townhouse: See "townhouse". 
    Dwelling unit: One (1) or more rooms in a dwelling that serves as a housekeeping unit for one (1) family, and includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. A dwelling unit shall have no more than one (1) kitchen. 
    Engineer, registered: A person who is registered with the state board of architects, professional engineers, land surveyors and certified landscape architects as a professional engineer. 
    Equipment and material storage: A structure or lot where material, construction equipment and other mobile equipment is stored. 
    Fabrication: See "assembly". 
    Family: One (1) or more persons related by blood, adoption, marriage, or guardianship, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than four (4) persons, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, though not related by blood, adoption, or marriage. 
    Family day home: A regularly operating child care program offered in the residence of the provider or the home of any of the children in care for one (1) through twelve (12) children (exclusive of the provider's own children and any children who reside in the home) where, during the absence of a parent or guardian, a person has agreed to assume responsibility for the supervision, protection, and well-being of a child under the age of thirteen (13) for less than a twenty-four-hour period. Compare "nursery school, child care center, kindergarten". 
    Farmer's market: Retail sale of fresh fruits and vegetables, and other food and related items, at a facility with spaces occupied by several different temporary tenants on a short term or daily basis, either indoor or outdoor, and excluding roadside stands. 
    Fence: A freestanding structure of metal, masonry, composition, vinyl or wood or any combination, resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level, with posts at regular intervals, and used for confinement, screening, or partition purposes. 
    Filling station: See "automotive service station". 
    Financial institution: Any establishment, the primary business of which is concerned with such state regulated activities as banking, savings and loans, and consumer loan companies. 
    Fleet storage facility: An off-street all-weather surfaced parking area, with access to a public street, used for temporary storage of fleet vehicles; provided, however, that only fleet vehicles owned or operated by an agency or business that qualifies as a permitted use in the zoning district for the applicable site shall be parked in a fleet storage facility. 
    Fleet vehicle: A motor vehicle owned or operated by a governmental or public agency or a private business in conducting the primary purpose of the agency or business. Examples of fleet vehicles include city vehicles, public utility vehicles and buses. 
    Flood: A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas. 
    Flood, one-hundred-year: A flood that, on average, is likely to occur once every one hundred (100) years (i.e., that has a one (1) percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year). 
    Floodplain: 
(a)  A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; 
(b)  An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Floodway: The designated area of the floodplain required to carry and discharge flood waters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the one hundred-year magnitude. 
    Floor area, gross: The sum of the total horizontal areas of the several floors of all buildings on a lot, measured from the interior faces of exterior walls, and includes basements; elevator shafts; stairwells at each story; stairs, closets, thickness of interior walls, columns, or similar features, floor space used for mechanical equipment with structural headroom of six feet, six inches or more; penthouses, unless enclosing only mechanical equipment; attic space, whether or not a floor has actually been laid, interior balconies; and mezzanines. Gross floor area shall not include parking structures below or above ground, or open roof top areas, provided these areas are not converted to usable or finished space or any other space demonstrated to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator as incapable of being finished. See Illustration 3 at end of this section. 
    Floor area, net: Seventy-five (75) percent of the gross floor area. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR): The ratio yielded by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the total area of the lot. 
    Foot-candles: A quantitative unit of measure used to measure the brightness of light falling on a surface. One foot-candle is equal to the amount of light falling on a surface of one foot square from a standard candle located one foot away. Foot-candle measurements shall be made with a photometric light meter at grade. One foot-candle is equal to ten lux or one lumen per square foot. 
    Frontage: Any property line that is coterminous with a public or private street or road right-of-way. 
    Front yard: See "yard, front". 
    Garage, private: An accessory building designed or used for storage purposes only by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory and having a capacity of not more than four (4) automobiles. Space therein may be used for not more than one (1) commercial vehicle of not more than two (2) tons capacity. See Illustration 1 at end of this section. 
    Golf course: Any property publicly or privately owned on which the game of golf is played, together with accessory uses and buildings customary thereto. 
    Governing body: The mayor and city council of the city. 
    Grade: A reference plane representing the average elevation of finished ground level adjoining the building or structure at all exterior walls or surfaces. 
    Grading: The reshaping of the ground surface to planned grades as determined by engineering survey evaluation and layout. 
    Greenhouse: A facility employing a glass, plastic or similar enclosure for the cultivation or protection of tender plants, flowers or house plants. 
    Gun shop: A facility for retail sales of firearms. 
    Gunsmith: A facility for sale, service and repair or refurbishing of firearms. 
    Hazardous material or process (HAZMAT): Any substance or activity involving any substance listed in 40 CFR Part 355, Appendix A, as an Extremely Hazardous Substance (EHS) when that substance is stored, generated, used or released in quantities equal to or greater than the lowest quantity listed for either the Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ) or Reporting Quantity (RQ) for the substance. 
    Height (other than "building height"): The vertical distance from the lowest exposed point of the structure being measured to its highest point, but not including accessory fixtures part of the structure being measured. 
    Height, monopole/tower: The total distance measured from the finished grade to the highest point on the monopole or tower, including antennas and all other appurtenances. 
    Historic resources, area of: An area containing buildings or places in which historic events occurred or having special public value because of notable architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community, of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation. 
    Home occupation: A business activity conducted entirely within a dwelling unit by residents of that unit that is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use as a dwelling unit. (See article VI for supplementary regulations). 
    Homeowners association, owners association, condominium owners association: A community association that is organized for a development in which individual owners share common interests in open space or facilities. 
    Hospital: A building or group of buildings, having room facilities for over-night patients, used for providing services for the in-patient related facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices; provided, however, that such related facility must be incidental and subordinate to the main use and must be an integral part of the hospital operation. 
    Hotel or motel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations for more than twenty (20) persons to the general public for compensation, in which room assignments are made through a lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours and which may provide additional services such as restaurants, taverns, meeting rooms, ballrooms, and recreation facilities. 
    Industrial park: See "office or industrial park". 
    Inn; bed and breakfast establishment: A structure, either new or renovated, with fewer than twelve (12) guestrooms or suites, for use by transients as overnight accommodation. 
    Inoperable vehicle: A motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer that: 
(a)  Is not in operating condition; 
(b)  Does not display valid license plates; 
(c)  Does not display a valid safety inspection decal or displays an inspection decal that has been expired for more than sixty (60) days; or 
(d)  Has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle for a period of sixty (60) days or longer. 
    Institutional food service: An establishment engaged in large scale meal preparation and related materials on a contractual basis to industry or institutions. On-site service of food is prohibited. 
    Interior lot: See "lot, interior". 
    Janitorial service: An establishment primarily engaged in furnishing building cleaning and maintenance services, such as restaurant or laboratory hood cleaning, window cleaning, floor waxing, and office cleaning. 
    Junk: Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, and waste; junked, dismantled, inoperable, or dilapidated motor vehicles, including parts; machinery; household furniture and appliances; construction equipment and materials; tanks and drums; tires; pipes; wire; wood; paper; metals; rags; glass; and any other kind of salvage or waste material. 
    Junk yard: Any land or structure used for the storage, keeping, collection, salvage, sale, disassembling, wrecking, baling, maintenance, or abandonment of junk or other discarded material, including an "automobile graveyard". 
    Kennel (animal boarding place): Any building and/or premises used, designed or arranged for the boarding, breeding, or care of four (4) or more dogs, cats, pets, fowl, or domestic animals of at least four (4) months of age. 
    Laboratory: A building, part of a building, or other place equipped to conduct scientific experiments, tests, investigations, etc., or to manufacture chemicals, medicines, or the like. 
    Laboratory, medical or dental: A laboratory that provides professional analytic or diagnostic services to the medical, dental, or other health service professions, or to the patient on a prescription basis; includes denture laboratories and prosthetic facilities. Eyeglass and contact lens and denture manufacturing is permitted; all other manufacturing is prohibited. 
    Laboratory, research, experimental or testing: A laboratory that conducts research and development for a use permitted in a zone. 
    Laboratory, photographic processing: A laboratory that produces photographic images on a variety of papers and other display materials. 
    Land disturbing activity: Any land change that could result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediment into state waters or other property, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including any activity exempted by state law as defined in the Public Facilities Manual. 
    Landscaping: The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with grass, shrubs, trees, other vegetation and/or ornamental objects. Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flowerbeds, ornamental objects such as fountains, statuary and other similar natural and artificial objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect. 
    Landscaping service: An operation where equipment and materials are kept, and which provides yard and garden landscaping and maintenance service, and which may include an office or other buildings and structures to store inventory, equipment, and vehicles, but shall not include a dump heap or landfill. 
    Laundromat (laundry): A building or part thereof where clothes or other household articles are washed in self-service machines with a capacity not exceeding twenty (20) pounds dry weight and where such washed clothes and articles may also be dried or ironed and no delivery service is provided in connection therewith. 
    Lighting fixture, full cut-off: A lighting fixture from which zero percent of its light output is emitted at or above 90 degrees from horizontal (a horizontal plane drawn through the bottom of the light fixture) and no more than ten (10) percent above 80 degrees from the horizontal. 
    Lighting fixture, recessed canopy: An outdoor lighting fixture recessed into a canopy ceiling so that the bottom of the fixture protrudes no more than two (2) inches from the ceiling. 
    Live entertainment: Entertainment provided in person including, but not limited to, musical performances, music played by disc jockeys, karaoke, dancing (including dancing done solely by patrons), modeling and comedy performances. 
    Locksmith shop: A place of business for repairing or making locks. 
    Loading space: An off-street area reserved on a lot and intended for the temporary parking of motor vehicles for the loading or unloading of goods. 
    Lot: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main structure or group of main structures and accessory structures, together with such yards, open space, lot width, and lot areas as are required by this chapter either shown on a plat of record or considered as a unit of property and described by metes and bounds. 
    Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. See Illustrations 1 and 2 at end of this section. 
    Lot coverage: The area of a lot occupied by structures, off-street parking, driveways, outside storage, and any other improvements not considered open space. See Illustration 1 at end of this section. 
    Lot depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage: A lot, other than a corner lot, which has a frontage on two (2) streets. See Illustrations 1 and 2 at end of this section. 
    Lot, interior: Any lot other than a corner lot. See Illustrations 1 and 2 at end of this section. 
    Lot line: A line dividing one lot from another or from a dedicated public street or any public place. See Illustration 4 at end of this section. 
    Lot line, front: The line separating the lot from the street on which it fronts. On a corner lot, the front shall be deemed to be along the shorter dimension of the lot, and where the dimensions are equal, the front shall be on that street on which a predominance of the other lots in the block front. 
    Party lot line: A line separating two (2) attached single-family dwelling units. Side setback regulations for principal buildings shall not apply to party lot lines. 
    Lot line, rear: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side: Any lot other than a front or rear lot line. 
    Lot of record: A lot, a plat or description of which has been recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court. 
    Lot width: The horizontal distance measured from one side lot line to the other along the front setback line, parallel to the right-of-way. 
    Maintained lighting level, average: A level of illumination, measured at grade, which results when the initial output of a lamp is reduced by certain light loss factors, such as lamp depreciation and dirt accumulation. 
    Manufacture, manufacturing: The processing and/or converting of raw, unfinished materials or products into articles or substances of a different character, or for a different purpose. 
    Medical care facility, specialized: A facility primarily engaged in the in-and out-patient treatment of abused, alcoholic, narcotic, psychiatric, and other non-surgical patients. 
    Mobile home: A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and is thirty-two (32) body feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
    Medical or dental office or clinic: A facility engaged in the examination, diagnosis and treatment of medical, chiropractic, ophthalmologic, dental, podiatric or other health care patients, including administrative and clerical operations of the practice, but not including overnight facilities for patients. 
    Monopole: A single, self-supporting pole-type structure, tapering from base to top and supporting a fixture designed to hold one or more antennas. 
    Motor vehicle: A device that is self-propelled or designed for self-propulsion, in or upon which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon any highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. 
    Motor vehicle fuel station (automotive service station): A building, structure or premise or any portion thereof where a flammable fluid is stored, housed and sold for supply to motor vehicles, and may include accessory motor vehicle servicing within the principal building. 
    Motor vehicle repair: Any servicing, modification, reconditioning, restructuring, rebuilding of a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle component. 
    Motor vehicle repair shop: A building, structure, enclosure or premise in or on which the general business of servicing or repairing motor vehicles is conducted, including, but not limited to, body shop, engine rebuilding or reconditioning, upholstering, radiator reconditioning and repair, and similar industrial processes. Incidental servicing of motor vehicles, such as tires and audio installation is permitted. 
    Motor vehicle sales (limited): The retail sale of new or used automobiles and light duty trucks (no more than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds gross vehicle weight); includes repair department, with parts inventory and sales, body and upholstery shop, tires, etc. Secondary sales of larger on-road vehicles are permitted. 
    Motor vehicle sales (recreational): The retail sale of new or used motor homes, travel trailers, recreational trailers, and camper coaches for trucks; includes storage, repair shop, or service department with parts inventory and sales. Pleasure boats and other small craft may also be sold, stored, serviced, or repaired. 
    Motor vehicle sales (unlimited): The sale, repair or servicing of new and used vehicles, of unlimited size or weight; also, off-road or on-road construction equipment, cranes, tractor-trailer rigs, static machinery, as well as any type motor vehicle is permitted. 
    Motor vehicle service: Motor vehicle maintenance services such as tune-ups and maintenance of brakes, air conditioning, transmission, mufflers, glass replacement, and similar services. 
    Motor vehicle service (limited): Minor motor vehicle maintenance services for tires, audio installation and similar services. 
    Motor vehicle storage yard: A facility for wholesale storage of motor vehicles. 
    Motor vehicle towing: A principal use or accessory to another use with more than two (2) salvaging vehicles such as tow trucks, cranes, and flatbed trucks used to tow or haul motor vehicles. 
    Motel: See "hotel or motel". 
    Nonconforming activity or use: The otherwise legal use of a building or structure or of a tract of land that does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming lot: An otherwise legally platted lot that does not conform to the minimum area or width requirements of the chapter for the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming structure: An otherwise legal building or structure that does not conform to the lot area, yard, height, lot coverage, or other area regulations of this chapter, or is designed or intended for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located. 
    Non-HAZMAT: See "hazardous material or process (HAZMAT)". 
    Nonprofit organization: An entity that exists solely for religious, charitable, educational, political or civic purposes and is not in business to make a profit. 
    Nursery: An area where plants (as trees or shrubs) are grown for transplanting, for use as stocks for budding and grafting or for sale. 
    Nursery school, child care center, kindergarten: Any child care program offered to two (2) or more children under the age of thirteen (13) in a facility that is not the residence of the provider, operated for the purpose of providing training, guidance, education, or care of children separated from their parents or guardians during part of the day. Compare "family day home". 
    Nursing home or convalescent care facility: An establishment used as a dwelling place by aged, infirm, chronically ill, or incurably afflicted persons, in which not less than three (3) persons live or are kept or provided for on the premises for compensation, excluding clinics and hospitals and similar institutions devoted to the diagnosis, treatment or care of the sick or injured. 
    Office: Any room, studio, clinic, suite or building wherein the primary use is the conduct of a business such as accounting, correspondence, research, editing, administration or analysis; or the conduct of a business by salespersons, sales representatives, or manufacturer's representatives; or the conduct of a business by professionals such as engineers, architects, land surveyors, artists, musicians, lawyers, accountants, real estate brokers, insurance agents, dentists or physicians, urban planners and landscape architects. In no case shall an office involve manufacturing, fabrication, production, processing assembling, cleaning, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods and products; or the sale and/or delivery of any materials, goods or products that are physically located on the premises. 
    Office or industrial park: A group of five (5) or more office and/or industrial sites with or without accessory uses, developed as an integrated project, and either connected contiguously, or directly across a public or private street; and also having at least one of the following characteristics: some or all of the uses share common parking, travelways, or entrances; or the land, uses, or facilities are organized under one management or ownership form for the purpose of enforcing reciprocal covenants. 
    Off-site: Any area lying outside the boundary of a lot. 
    Off-site parking: A parking area serving a nonresidential principal use which is located on a lot that is adjacent to or abutting the lot containing the principal use; or a parking area serving a nonresidential principal use which is located on the same lot as the principal use, but is located in a different zoning district. Off-site parking is permitted only within nonresidential zoning districts or within nonresidential areas of planned districts or residential districts. Off-site parking is not commercial parking as defined in this chapter. 
    Off street parking area: The area located outside of dedicated rights-of-way providing for on-site vehicular parking, including designated parking spaces and travelways providing access to parking, but excluding loading areas. 
    One-family dwelling, detached: See "single-family detached dwelling". 
    On-site: The area which is within the boundary of a lot. 
    Open space: The area within the boundaries of a development that is intended to provide light, air, view and/or a quality or general appearance of openness, and is designed for scenic, recreational, privacy, or environmental purposes. In general, open space shall be available for entry on and use by the residents of the development within which the open space is located, but may include areas designed to enhance aesthetic amenities, maintain property values and buffer incompatible uses by preserving natural features and providing landscaping or screening for the benefit of such residents or residents of neighboring areas. Open space may include, but shall not be limited to, lawns; decorative plantings; walkways and trails; active and passive recreation areas, such as tot lots; undisturbed natural areas; wooded areas; natural creeks, streams, lakes and similar water features; manmade lakes designed to be an attractive development amenity but which may be used for storm water management; storm water management dry ponds which are landscaped or contain existing trees; and areas where buffering, landscaping or screening is required by this chapter. 
    Natural open space: Open space with natural resource benefits within the boundaries of a development, such as native forests; topographic features; critical habitats for threatened and endangered species and species of special concern; natural creeks, streams and lakes; and natural wetlands that are set aside as an area to remain undisturbed during development and in perpetuity for the preservation of the natural resources contained therein and for the passive use and enjoyment of the residents of the development and/or the public at large. This definition is not to be construed to prohibit non-destructive activities, such as reforestation and stream restoration, specifically designed to improve the quality of the existing resource contained therein. This definition is intended to exclude areas where activities have destroyed any natural habitat in an attempt to create a man-made habitat (e.g., removal of tree cover to create a wetland). To be considered as natural open space the open space so considered must be conveyed, with appropriate restrictions as to use, to a bona fide homeowners association or other entity that would maintain the natural open space in perpetuity. 
    Outside storage: The keeping of goods or materials, excluding junk, outside of a fully enclosed building, and which shall be considered as an accessory use, unless specifically enumerated as a principal use (such as a contractor's storage yard or building material sales yard). 
    Owner: The owner of record of fee simple interest. 
    Package, telecommunications, and courier service: A retail service facility for the dispatching, coordination, preparation and routing of package pick-up and delivery (items weighing under one hundred (100) pounds), or telephone message system. 
    Parcel: See "lot". 
    Parking deck or garage: An off-grade, structured parking facility with at least two (2) levels of parking, in which the repair of motor vehicles is prohibited. 
    Parking facility: An off-street parking area, other than a private garage or carport, usually surfaced and improved, with direct access to a public street, open to the public and designed to accommodate at least twenty-five (25) motor vehicles for temporary parking. 
    Parking lot (i.e., surface parking): A ground level parking facility. 
    Parking lot, satellite: A parking lot used by a principal use that is not located on the same lot or parcel, or on a parcel adjoining or abutting to the subject lot or parcel, not including commercial parking facilities operating independently of other uses. 
    Parking space, off-street: An designated, all-weather surfaced area not in a street or alley and having an area of not less than one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet and dimensions of at least nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet, exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one (1) vehicle and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway which affords ingress and egress for an automobile without requiring another automobile to be moved. 
    Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town, or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
    Pet grooming service: A facility engaged in the manicuring, bathing, clipping and styling of pets. 
    Petroleum product: Liquid petroleum gas, fuel oil, and light fractions of crude oil, including kerosene, naphtha, gasoline, and diesel fuel. See also "hazardous material or process HAZMAT". 
    Petroleum product storage facility: A facility principally engaged in the storage of petroleum products except facilities used in conjunction with a gasoline service station, for storage as part of an agricultural use, or private vehicle fuel station. 
    Pharmaceutical product manufacturing: An establishment primarily engaged in manufacturing, packaging or finishing pharmaceutical products intended for internal and external consumption in dose forms, such as ampoules, tablets, capsules, vials, ointments, powders, solutions and suspensions. 
    Planned development: A contiguous land area of a minimum size, as specified by district regulation, to be planned and developed using a common master zoning plan, and containing one or more uses and appurtenant common areas. 
    Plat: A document, prepared by a registered surveyor, which delineates property lines, and shows monuments and other landmarks for the purpose of identifying property. 
    Portable storage unit: A portable box-like container, a maximum of eight feet six inches in height, ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length, that is designed for the temporary storage of personal property and for ease of loading to and from a motor vehicle. This definition does not include sea-containers, truck compartments or trailers. 
    Premises: A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon. 
    Principal building: A structure in which the principal use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted. 
    Principal use: The primary activity or structure for which a lot is used, as permitted by this chapter. 
    Private yard: A single area adjacent to a dwelling unit maintained directly by the owner of the unit. 
    Professional office: The office, studio, or room of a doctor, architect, artist, musician, lawyer, or similar professional person, excluding any funeral home or any establishment where goods are offered for sale. 
    Public access easement: Any area through which ingress and egress is not restricted or limited to any individual occupant of the development or guest. 
    Public building: A building, or part thereof, owned or leased and occupied and used by an agency or political subdivision of the United States of America, the commonwealth, the city or a county or town. 
    Public water and sewer system: A water or sewer system owned and operated by a municipality or owned and operated by a corporation approved by the governing body and properly chartered and certified by the state corporation commission, and subject to special regulations herein set forth. 
    Railroad passenger station: A facility, either light or heavy rail, for the boarding of passengers, and related ticketing sales and offices. 
    Range, shooting: A place where shooting is practiced, and including the following: rifle, pistol, skeet, trap, archery (including crossbows) and any other projectile weaponry ranges. 
    Recreation facility, commercial: A sports or activity facility either open to the general public for a fee or for members and their guests, including, but not limited to, a roller or ice skating rink, bowling alley, billiard hall, dart pavilion, amusement arcade (video, pinball or other), bingo parlor, swimming pool, slot cars, hard and soft court, miniature golf, squash, racquetball or tennis court, health spa or club, weightlifting, and exercise facility. 
    Refuse: As defined in section 13-11. 
    Religious institution: A place of worship or religious assembly with related facilities including, but not limited to, the following in any combination: rectory or convent; private school; meeting hall; offices for administration of the institution; licensed child or adult day care; playground; cemetery, or any other facility as may be identified with a conditional use permit. 
    Research and development: The administration and conduct of investigation, examination, prototype production, experimentation, testing, and/or training aimed at the discovery and interpretation of facts, theories, and/or the practical application of the above to products or processes. Prototype manufacturing shall be permitted as an accessory use. 
    Restaurant: A retail food service establishment with table service (order placement and delivery) provided to patrons, including traditional sit-down dinner establishments with waiter/waitress service and cafeterias with table attendants. Carry-out trade, if any, shall be a limited portion of the facility. 
    Restaurant, drive-in/drive-locksup, or drive-through: A restaurant or carry-out restaurant dispensing prepared food or drinks ready for consumption at the time of sale-where the customers are either served in, or have product delivered to, their vehicles, or at a drive-through window. 
    Required open space: Any space required in any front, side or rear yard. 
    Screening: A completely opaque visual barrier for loading areas, trash receptacles, maintenance and storage areas, mechanical equipment, and other similar features. 
    Self-storage center: A building or group of buildings divided into separate compartments used to meet the temporary storage needs of small businesses, apartment dwellers and other residential uses. 
    Semi-trailer: Any vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests on or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Satellite wagering facility: A building and all areas of the property on which the building is constructed at which simulcast horse racing is received for the purposes of pari-mutuel wagering, and any additional areas designated by the Virginia Racing Commission. 
    School, business: A non-college degree-granting school offering courses in office machine operation, computers, data processing, software, secretarial, and related skills, schools, including educational correspondence courses, tutoring, and continuing education; offices and classroom facilities are permitted by right, however, laboratory or other specialized training facilities are to be evaluated based upon the zoning district in which the school is located. 
    School, private: A bona fide educational institution other than a public school that provides instruction which is equivalent to public school education to public school-age children, and which may involve the boarding of pupils who, in the ordinary course of events, return annually to the homes of their parents or guardian for not less than two (2) months of summer vacation. 
    School, public: A bona fide educational institution operated by a duly constituted governmental entity. 
    School, special instruction: A facility for the private instruction of skills or activities not directly related to employment. These may include the following: dance studio, music studio (not a conservatory), martial arts, gymnastics instruction, exercise studio (not having a locker room and shower facilities and not required to comply with the Virginia Health Spa Act). 
    School, trade, technical, and vocational: A school providing specialized vocational education courses; offices and classroom facilities are by right; however, laboratory or other specialized training facilities are required to be located, and permitted in accordance with restrictions, in zoning districts in which the underlying activities may be conducted. 
    Setback: The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from a lot line or other feature. See Illustration 4 at end of this section. 
    Shopping center: Any group of two (2) or more commercial uses, located in a zoning district where commercial uses are permitted as principal uses, and having any or all of the following characteristics: 
(a)  Are designed as a single commercial group, whether or not located on the same lot; 
(b)  Are under common ownership or management; 
(c)  Are connected by party walls, partitions, canopies, or other structural members to form one (1) continuous structure, or if located in separate buildings, are interconnected by walkways and accessways designed to facilitate customer interchange between uses; 
(d)  Share a common parking area; and 
(e)  Otherwise present the appearance of a single, continuous commercial area. 
    Sign: Any display, visible beyond the boundaries of the parcel of land on which the display is made, comprised of letters, words, numerals, figures, logos, devices, emblems, and/or pictures, in any combination and by any means, for the purpose of attracting attention or making anything known. Every such display shall be deemed a sign whether made on, attached to, or as a part of a structure, surface, or any other thing, including, but not limited to, the window (inside or outside), wall, ground, any rock, tree or other natural object. See section 31-29. 
    Sign face: The area or display surface used for the message. 
    Sign, monument: A freestanding sign that is either a solid structure made of brick, stone, concrete or similar type of material; or constructed on or connected directly to a solid supporting foundation, with no separations between the sign and the base, made of brick, stone, concrete or similar type of material. 
    Sign structure: The supports, uprights, bracings and framework of any structure, be it single-faced, double-faced, V-type or otherwise, that exhibits a sign. 
    Single-family attached dwelling: A group of two (2) or more interrelated single-family dwelling units which are generally joined to one another by a common party wall, a common floor-ceiling or garage and/or with connecting permanent and architecturally unified structures such as breezeways, carports, or walls, which structures continue the design, pattern and/or materials of the facade from one dwelling unit to another, whether or not such a group is located on a single parcel or on adjoining individual lots. Connecting structures and outdoor living space may be so designed as to provide access between front and rear yards. Each unit shall have its own outside entrance and not be occupied by more than one family. 
    Single-family detached dwelling: A single-family dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open space or yards on the same lot. 
    Site plan: A drawing illustrating a proposed development and prepared in accordance with the specifications of article VII. 
    Story: The vertical distance from top to top of two (2) successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces; and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such and the ceiling joists, or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters next above it. 
    Street, center line: The center line of a street shall mean the center line thereof as shown in any of the official records of the city, the county, or as established by the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT). If no such line has been established, the center line of a street shall be a line lying midway between the side lines of the right-of-way thereof. See Illustration 4 at end of this section. 
    Street, private: A street, as defined in section 1-2, that is privately-maintained and designed to provide access to private property, and which may be constructed in accordance with the Public Facilities Manual or other standards, as permitted. 
    Street, public: A street, as defined in section 1-2, that has been or is intended to be dedicated for public use, and is constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Public Facilities Manual. This definition includes any private street over which a public ingress/egress or access easement has been granted to the city. 
    Street width: The total width of the strip of land (right-of-way) dedicated or reserved for public travel, including roadway, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and planting strips. See Illustration 4 at end of this section. 
    Streetscape: An area that may either abut or be contained within a public or private street or accessway that may contain sidewalks, street furniture, street lighting trees or other landscaping, and similar features. 
    Structural alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, including bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders, or similar parts of a building or structure, and any substantial change in the roof of a building. 
    Structure: Any assembly of materials forming a construction or fixture for occupancy or use on, under, or over (or any combination thereof) land or water, including, but not limited to, stadiums, tents, reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers, telecommunications towers, solar energy devices, water tanks, trestles, piers, wharfs, swimming pools, storage bins, fences, private or public utility lines and other facilities, signs, buildings, parking lots, driveways, patios, gasoline pumps and pump islands, underground storage tanks, storm water management and retention facilities. The word "structure" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or parts thereof" unless the context clearly requires a different meaning. 
    Surveyor: A person who is registered with the state board of architects, professional engineers, land surveyors and certified Landscape architects as a land surveyor. 
    Taxi or limousine operations and service: The provision of passenger vehicle transportation for hire, including business offices and dispatching, and the service of fleet vehicles if permitted in the zoning district. 
    Telecommunications: A process that permits the passage of information from a sender to one or more receivers in a usable form, such as printed copy, fixed or moving pictures, and/or visible or audible signals, by means of any electromagnetic system, such as electrical transmission by wire or radio, including such uses as telegraph and telephone. 
    Telecommunications facilities: Any land area, structure, and equipment affixed to land or structures (singly or in any combination) used in telephone, broadcast, cable television, microwave relay, two-way radio, and private amateur radio, or other operations involving the transmitting, receiving or exchanging of information over wires, cables, fibers, light beams or by electromagnetic energy through the atmosphere. 
    Telecommunications facilities, temporary: A temporary telecommunications facility erected for a limited period of time by a licensed telecommunications enterprise for the purpose of testing the location of a possible permanent telecommunications facility. 
    Telecommunications tower: A structure used to support one or more antennas. Such a structure is typically of skeletal lattice-type framework or solid construction. Guy wires, framework, or other stabilizing devices are considered part of the structure of the tower. 
    Technology business: A company or identifiable subdivision of a company that has fifty (50) percent or more of its gross receipts derived from research, development, manufacturing or rendering of advanced technological products or services and that expands or locates in a technology zone. In no case shall the use of computers or telecommunication services by a company or identifiable subdivision of a company in its administrative operations qualify such company or subdivision as a technology business. 
    Townhouse: A single-family attached dwelling unit being one (1) of a group of not less than three (3) nor more than ten (10) units in a series separated from one another by party walls without doors, windows, or other provisions for human passage or visibility through such walls from basement to roof. 
    Tradesman's shop: A facility for building or service industry contractors. See "contractor or tradesman's shop". 
    Trailer: Any vehicle without mobile power designed for carrying property or passengers on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Trash: As defined in section 13-11. 
    Trash and refuse removal service: Establishment engaged in the collection of trash or refuse for disposal at an approved processing, recycling, or destruction plant, such as incinerators, waste treatment plant, landfills, or other locations approved by the city; on-site storage of refuse is prohibited. 
    Travel trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and designed to be used for temporary occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation use, and when factory equipped for the road, being of any length, provided its gross weight does not exceed four thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds, or being of any weight, provided its overall length is less than thirty-two (32) feet. For the purpose of this chapter, a travel trailer shall not be deemed a mobile home. 
    Truck terminal: Any structure or land devoted principally to the servicing, fueling, repair, storage, sales and leasing of trucks, or any of the above; or any structure or land devoted principally to any activity involving a substantial and routine traffic consisting of trucks or passenger buses, such as a gasoline or fuel oil distributor, a freight or shipping business, a bus depot, a moving business, or similar activities, but not including other principal uses specified in the zoning district(s) where a truck terminal is allowed. 
    Use: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
    Utilities: Distribution or service connection facilities and appurtenances thereto, for gas, electricity, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, communications, heating or air conditioning, fuel, and other similar consumable public commodities or services. 
    Variance: A reasonable deviation from provisions regulating the size or area of a lot or parcel of land, or the size, area, bulk or location of a building or structure when the strict application of this chapter would result in unnecessary or unreasonable hardship to the property owner, and such need for a variance would not be shared generally by other properties, and provided such variance is not contrary to the intended spirit and purpose of this chapter, and would result in substantial justice being done. A variance cannot authorize a change in a permitted use, which can only be accomplished by the governing body's approval of a rezoning application or a conditional use permit application. Variances may only be granted by the board of zoning appeals. 
    Veterinary hospital: A facility for the prevention, cure or alleviation of disease and injury in animals, including surgery. 
    Warehousing: An operation from a structure, or part of a structure, for storing goods, wares, commodities and merchandise, whether for the owner thereof or for others, and whether it is a public or private warehousing operation, but excluding self-storage centers. 
    Weed: Weeds are vegetative growth generally deemed to exhale unpleasant and noxious odors; to be foreign growth, undesirable, rank or detrimental to the public health or safety; or to have minimal use or value. 
    Wholesaling: The business of selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers. 
    Yard: An open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    Yard, front: A yard lying between the front lot or street line and the nearest part of the building (excluding steps) and extending across the full width of the lot. The front yard depth shall mean the distance, measured horizontally, between any part of the building or use not specifically excepted and the front lot line. 
    Yard, rear: A yard lying between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the building (excluding steps) and extending across the full width of the lot. The rear yard depth shall mean the distance, measured horizontally, between any part of the building not specifically excepted and the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side: A yard lying between a side lot line and the nearest part of the building or use (excluding steps) and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Side yard width shall mean the shortest distance, measured horizontally, between any part of the building or use not excluding steps, and the nearest side lot line. 
    Zoning administrator or administrator: The official charged with the interpretation, administration and enforcement of this chapter, and any assistant zoning administrator appointed to assist in administration and enforcement of this chapter. The zoning administrator shall be so designated by the governing body. 
Illustration 1 

Illustration 2 

Illustration 3 

Illustration 4 

(Ord. No. 85-1700-269, 2-6-85; Ord. No. 86-1700-342, 9-2-86; Ord. No. 89-1700-393, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 93-1700-497, § 1, 12-2-93; Ord. No. 95-1700-522, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 04-1700-754, § 1, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 04-1700-767, § 1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 06-1700-812, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 06-1700-818A, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 09-1700-864, § 1, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 2, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 12-1700-916, § 1, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 12-1700-921, § 1, 4-3-12) 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT MAPS 

Sec. 31-7. - Establishment of districts. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, in regulating the use of land, water, and buildings, and height, bulk, density, and open space, the City of Manassas Park is hereby divided into the following districts: 
A-1 Agricultural District R-1 Single-Family Residential District R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District PUD Planned Unit Development district B-1 Neighborhood Business District B-2 General Business District I-1 Industrial District FP Floodplain District MU Mixed Use District PF Public Facilities District  
(Ord. No. 03-1700-724, § 1, 9-2-03) 
Sec. 31-8. - Reference to district names. 
    For the purpose of reference hereafter in this chapter, unless specifically provided to the contrary, the term "residential district" shall include all agricultural, single-family and multiple-family districts. 
Sec. 31-9. - Establishment of district map. 
    Such land and the district classification thereof shall be as shown on the map or maps designated as the "Zoning District Map of the City of Manassas Park, Virginia," dated and signed by the mayor of the city and attested by the city clerk upon adoption. This zoning district map or maps, and all notations, dimensions, references, and symbols shown thereon, pertaining to such districts shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described herein and shall be filed as part of this chapter by the city clerk. 
Sec. 31-10. - Information copies of district map. 
    The zoning district map shall be made available to the public. Any person desiring a copy of any sheet of the zoning district map shall pay the amount established by the fee schedule. Information copies of the zoning map shall be made available for inspection at the office of the zoning administrator and other locations as may be necessary or convenient. These maps shall be revised to show changes in zoning district boundaries as officially approved. New streets, highways, subdivisions, major governmental installations, public lands, and other major features shall be shown. 
(Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 3, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 31-11. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any zoning district boundary as shown thereon, the zoning administrator shall make an interpretation of said map upon request of any person. any person aggrieved by any such interpretation may appeal such interpretation to the board of zoning appeals as provided in article IX. The zoning administrator and the board of zoning appeals, in interpreting the zoning map or deciding any appeal, shall apply the following standards: 
(1)  Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, or along the center lines of alleys, rights-of-way or water courses, unless such boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the zoning map. 
(2)  Where zoning district boundary lines are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines or city limit lines, such lot lines or city limit lines shall be construed to be the district boundary lines. 
(3)  In cases where district boundaries do not coincide or approximately coincide with street lines, alley lines or lot lines, and no dimensions are shown, the location of such district boundary lines shall be determined by the use of the map scale shown thereon. 
Sec. 31-12. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Any area annexed to the City of Manassas Park shall, immediately upon such annexation, be automatically classified as an A-1 Agricultural District, until a zoning map for said area has been adopted by the city council. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 31-13. - General provisions. 
(a)  Conformance with regulations required: No building or land shall hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof shall be erected, reconstructed, converted, enlarged, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Location on a lot required: Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved, or structurally altered shall be located on a lot of record and in no case shall there be more than one (1) main building on one (1) lot unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Street frontage required: No lot shall be used in whole or in part for dwelling purposes unless such lot abuts upon a street in accordance with the minimum street frontage requirements of this chapter. No lot or parcel of land abutting the terminus of a public street shall be deemed to comply with street frontage requirements unless such lot abuts on an approved permanent cul-de-sac. 
(d)  Encroachment: The minimum yards, height limits, parking space, open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this chapter for each building existing at the time of the passage of these regulations or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as required yard or open space for any other building, except as hereinafter provided. 
(e)  Reduction of lot area: No lot or parcel of land, with or without buildings at the time this chapter became effective, shall be subdivided, resubdivided, or reduced in any manner below the minimum lot width and lot area required by this chapter. 
(f)  Accessory buildings: No accessory building shall be used for dwelling, except in accordance with the specific provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  Uses not permitted are prohibited: For the purpose of this chapter, permitted uses are listed for the various districts. Unless the contrary is clear from the context of the lists or other regulations of this chapter, uses not specifically listed are prohibited. 
(h)  Similar uses permitted: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (g) above, uses that are similar to and no more objectionable than listed permitted uses in a zoning district may be permitted by the zoning administrator upon a finding that such uses would not be injurious to or have an adverse effect on adjacent properties or areas. In approving any such use, the zoning administrator may place such conditions, restrictions and safeguards on the use as deemed necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-930[B], § 1, 5-15-12) 
Sec. 31-14. - A-1 Agricultural District. 
(a)  Purpose of the district: This district is intended to preserve the character of that portion of the city where agricultural and other low intensity uses predominate while preventing the untimely scattering of more intense urban uses which should be confined to areas planned for efficient extension of public services. To achieve this end, it is necessary to maintain a low density development pattern while excluding most commercial and industrial type uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses: A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Agriculture, including horticultural, chemical, or general farming, cultivation of field crops, orchards, groves or nurseries, dairy farming, and the raising and keeping of livestock, provided that the commercial slaughtering and processing of animals shall not be conducted on the premises. 
(2)  Churches and other places of worship, but not including temporary revival tents. 
(3)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(4)  Facilities and structures necessary for rendering utility service, including poles, wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for normal electrical power distribution or communication service, and pipelines or conduits for electrical, gas, sewer, or water service. 
(5)  Greenhouses or nurseries, commercial, retail, or wholesale. 
(6)  Public and private forests, wildlife reservations, and similar conservation projects. 
(7)  Residential human care facilities, as defined and regulated by section 15.1-486.2 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(8)  Stable, public, commercial or private, provided that any buildings for keeping of animals shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any side or rear lot lines, and that there shall be housed on the premises no more than one (1) horse or pony for each acre of land. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal or conditional use on the same lot therewith, including: 
(1)  Accessory farm buildings, including barns, stables, sheds, tool rooms, shops, bins, tanks, and silos. 
(2)  Dog kennels, noncommercial, provided any open pens, runs, cages, or kennels or any place for keeping more than five (5) adult dogs shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any side or rear lot lines. 
(3)  Domestic storage in a main building or in an accessory building. 
(4)  Garage, private. 
(5)  Guest house for nonpaying guests. 
(6)  Home occupation in a main building. (See article VI for supplementary regulations.) 
(7)  Roadside stands for the sale only of products produced on the same lot. 
(8)  Storage of a boat trailer, or unoccupied travel trailer (not mobile home), or a boat less than thirty-two (32) feet in length, but not in the front yard. (See article VI for supplementary regulations.) 
(9)  Swimming pool and game courts for use of occupants or their guests, however, if lighted, illumination must be properly shielded from adjoining properties. 
(10)  Signs, as regulated by article VI. 
(11)  Temporary buildings, the uses of which are incidental to construction operations during development being conducted on the same or adjoining tract or subdivision, or for use as a sales or rental office for a real estate development or subdivision, provided that such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of such construction. 
(12)  Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces. 
(d)  Conditional uses: The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses if approved by the governing body in accordance with the procedures, guides, and standards of section 31-54.1: 
(1)  Airports and landing fields, provided they shall comply with the regulations of the Federal Aviation Agency. 
(2)  Camps, day or boarding, private or commercial. 
(3)  Cemetery, including crematorium. 
(4)  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, homes for the aged, hospitals, and sanitariums, but not animal hospitals. 
(5)  Kennels, or animal boarding place, commercially operated. 
(6)  Mobile homes, mobile home parks and subdivisions. 
(7)  Nonaccessory tents for special purposes. 
(8)  Private clubs, including commercially operated swimming or tennis clubs. 
(9)  Public or governmental buildings and uses, including schools, fire and police stations, parks, playgrounds, and administrative buildings. 
(10)  Public utilities or public service uses, buildings, generating or treatment plants, pumping or regulator stations, and substations. 
(11)  Recreational facility, commercially operated, such as fishing or boating lake, golf course, or race track. 
(12)  Sanitary landfill, or trash collection site. 
(e)  Area regulations: Every building or group of buildings shall be located on a lot having at least the area, width, and depth as prescribed below: 

Other area regulations
(2) Church, temple, synagogue 3 200 200 
(3) Greenhouses, nurseries 5 300 300 
(4) Stable 4 200 200  


(f)  Yard requirements: 
Minimum in Feet Front 
Yard Side 
Yard 
Minimum Side 
Yard 
Total Rear 
Yard (1) Single-family dwelling a. Street width 50 feet or greater 40 25 60 40 b. Street width less than 50 feet 60 25 60 40  
See article VI, section 31-30, "Special height and yard regulations." 
(2)  Other structures: Same or as required in A-1 district regulations. 
(g)  Height requirements: 

Maximum 
Height (1) Single-family dwellings and all other structures not specifically exempted in article VI 35 feet  
(h)  Other applicable requirements: 
(1)  Article VI: Supplementary Regulations. 
(2)  Article VII: Site Plan Review Requirements. 

Single-family dwelling
Minimum lot area 1 acre
Minimum Lot Width - 150 feet
Minimum Lot Depth - 200 feet

(Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 3, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 31-15. - R-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Purpose of the district: The intent of this district is to provide for medium density single-family development. The regulations for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the district, and to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life. To these ends, development is limited to a medium concentration and permitted uses are restricted basically to providing homes for the residents. Certain additional uses, such as schools, parks, churches, and certain public facilities that serve the residents of the district are made conditional on review of the governing body to ensure compatibility. 
(b)  Permitted uses: A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Residential human care facilities, as defined and regulated by of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(3)  Facilities and structures necessary for rendering utility service, including poles, wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for normal electrical power distribution or communication service, and pipelines or conduits for electrical, gas, sewer, or water service. 
(4)  Public or private forests, wildlife reservations, and similar conservation projects. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal or conditional use on the same lot therewith, including: 
(1)  Domestic storage in main building or in an accessory building. 
(2)  Garage, private. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Home occupations in a main building. (See article VI for supplementary regulations.) 
(5)  Storage of a boat trailer, an unoccupied travel trailer (not mobile home) or a boat less than thirty-two (32) feet in length, but not in a front yard. (See article VI for supplementary regulations.) 
(6)  Swimming pool and game courts for use of occupants or their guests, however, if lighted, illumination must be properly shielded from adjoining properties. 
(7)  Signs, as regulated by article VI. 
(8)  Temporary buildings, the uses of which are incidental to construction operations during development being conducted on the same or adjoining tract or subdivision or for use as a sales or rental office for a real estate development or subdivision, provided that such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of such construction. 
(9)  Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces. Open or enclosed space for parking one (1) commercial vehicle (truck or bus) of not more than one (1) ton capacity and used by the occupant of the dwelling shall be permitted as accessory. 
(d)  Conditional uses: The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses if approved by the governing body in accordance with the procedures, guides, and standards of section 31-54.1: 
(1)  Cemetery. 
(2)  Churches and other places of worship, but not including temporary revival tents. 
(3)  Clinic or medical office building. 
(4)  Institutions, educational or philanthropic, including museums, art galleries, and libraries. 
(5)  Kennels (private), for the keeping of animals by the occupant of the property, of a noncommercial nature. 
(6)  Nursery schools, child care centers, kindergartens and family day homes serving six (6) to twelve (12) children. 
(7)  Public or governmental buildings and uses, including schools, fire and police stations, parks, playgrounds, and administrative buildings. 
(8)  Public utilities or public service uses, buildings, generating or treatment plants, pumping or regulator stations, and substations. 
(9)  Swimming or tennis club, private, noncommercially operated. 
(e)  Area regulations: Every building or group of buildings shall be located on a lot having at least the area and width as prescribed below: 
Single-family dwelling (1) With public water and sewerage
Minimum  Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width 
8,400 square feet  70 feet 
Single-family dwelling (2) With individual water and sewerage 
Minimum Lot Area 43,560 square feet
Minimum Lot Width 150 feet
(f)  Yard requirements: 
Minimum Feet Front 
Yard Side 
Yard 
Minimum Side 
Yard 
Total Rear 
Yard Single-family dwelling  (1) Street width 50 feet or greater 30 5 10 25  (2) Street width less than [50 feet] 55 5 10 25  
See Article VI, section 31-30, "Special height and yard regulations." 
(g)  Height requirements: 
Maximum 
Height (1) Single-family dwellings and all other structures not specifically exempted in article VI 35 feet (2) Accessory building within 10 feet of any lot line 15 feet  
(h)  Other applicable requirements: 
(1)  Article VI: Supplementary Regulations. 
(2)  Article VII: Site Plan Review Requirements. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-216, Exh. A, § 1, 4-5-83; Ord. No. 83-1700-226, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 88-1700-376, 5-17-88; Ord. No. 06-1700-818A, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 4, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 31-16. - R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Purpose of the District: The intent of this district is to encourage variety in housing types and provide for residential densities appropriate for apartment or townhouse developments in areas suitably located for such use due to the availability of public water and sewerage facilities and the area's locational aspects with respect to major roads, shopping facilities, and places of employment. Uses such as schools, parks, churches, and certain public facilities that serve the residents of the district are made conditional on review of the governing body to ensure compatibility. 
(b)  Permitted uses: A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 district, excluding detached single-family dwellings and residential human care facilities. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Townhouses. 
(4)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal or conditional use on the same lot therewith, including: 
(1)  Domestic storage in main building or in an attached accessory building. 
(2)  Attached private garage or carport. 
(3)  Home occupations in a main building of a townhouse only. (See article VI for supplementary regulations.) 
(4)  Storage of a boat trailer, boat, or an unoccupied travel trailer in a special section of the required parking lot only. 
(5)  Swimming pools, recreational and athletic facilities, community buildings and other similar and related improvements for the common use of occupants of the development and their guests. 
(6)  Signs, as regulated by article VI. 
(7)  Temporary buildings, the use of which are incidental to construction operations during development being conducted on the same or adjoining tract, provided that such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of such construction. 
(8)  Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces. 
(9)  An office located in a main building for administration of a multiple-family development containing ten (10) or more dwelling units. 
(10)  A laundry room for use of occupants of a multiple-family dwelling development. 
(d)  Conditional uses: The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses if approved by the governing body in accordance with the procedures, guides, and standards of section 31-54.1: 
(1)  Business or professional office buildings. 
(2)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(3)  Clinic or medical office buildings. 
(4)  Hospitals and sanitariums, but not animal hospitals. 
(5)  Institutions, educational or philanthropic, including museums, art galleries, and libraries. 
(6)  Nursery schools, child care centers, kindergartens and family day homes serving six (6) to twelve (12) children. 
(7)  Public or governmental buildings and uses, including schools, fire and police stations, parks, playgrounds, and administrative buildings. 
(8)  Public utilities or public service uses, buildings, generating or treatment plants, pumping or regulator stations, and substations. 
(e)  Area regulations: Every building or group of buildings shall be located on a lot having at least the area, density, and width as prescribed below: 
(1) Two-family dwelling
Total minimum lot area - 10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Area per family - 5,000 square feet
Minimum Feet Lot Width 70

(2) Multiple-family dwelling 
Total minimum lot area - 12,000 square feet
Minimum lot area per family - 2,000 square feet
Minimum Feet Lot Width 90

(3) Townhouse 
Minimum lot area per family- 1,800 square feet
Maximum Density Per Gross Acre - 10 units
Minimum Feet Lot Width 20 
See subsection (i) below for special regulations on townhouses. 
(f)  Yard requirements: 
Minimum in Feet Front Yard Side Yard Minimum Side Yard Aggregate Rear 
Yard (1) Two-family dwelling 30 10 25 30 (2) Multiple-family dwelling a. 1, 2, 21/2 stories 30 15 30 35 b. 3 stories 30 20 40 40 (3) Townhouses 20 10 20 25  
See article VI, section 31-30, "Special height and yard regulations." 
(g)  Height requirements: 
Maximum Height (1) Permitted uses and all other structures not specifically exempted in article VI 3 stories but not to exceed 45 feet.  
(h)  Common areas: All lands in common open space, not a part of individual lots, and all private streets, driveways, uses, facilities, and buildings or portions thereof as may be provided for the common use, benefit, and/or enjoyment of the occupants of the development shall be maintained by and be the sole responsibility of the developer-owner of the development until such time as the developer-owner provides for and establishes a nonprofit organization or other legal entity under the laws of Virginia composed of all persons having ownership within the development, such organization being responsible for the perpetuation, maintenance, and function of all common lands, uses and facilities. 
(i)  Special regulations for townhouses: 
(1)  The dwelling units and individual lots of a townhouse development may be sold separately if separate utility systems are provided and if separate lots for all dwelling units in a building are created at the same time and in conformance with the subdivision ordinance. [2] 
(2)  For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a townhouse building shall be considered as one building on one lot with side yards required for end units only. Lot width for end units shall be adequate to provide required front and side yards. 
(3)  No detached garage or carport or other detached unscreened accessory building shall be permitted on a lot occupied by a townhouse. 
(4)  There shall be no more than ten (10) townhouse dwelling units continuously connected. 
(5)  The facades of dwelling units in a townhouse development shall be varied by changed front yards of not less than three (3) feet and variation in materials or design so that no more than three (3) abutting units will have the same front yard depth and the same or essentially the same architectural treatment of facades and roof lines. 
(6)  A site plan complying with the requirements of this chapter shall accompany an application for approval of a townhouse development. 
(j)  Other applicable requirements: 
(1)  Article VI: Supplementary Regulations. 
(2)  Article VII: Site Plan Review Requirements. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-216, Ex. A, § 3, 4-5-83; Ord. No. 83-1700-225, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 01-1700-652, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 5, 5-24-11) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivision ordinance, Ch. 21. 

Sec. 31-17. - PUD Planned Unit Development. 
(a)  Purpose of the district: The intent of this district is to permit greater flexibility and, thus, more creative and imaginative design for the development of residential and/or commercial areas than generally is possible under the rigid area and bulk restrictions characteristic of conventional zoning regulations. It is further intended to promote more economical and efficient use of the land while encouraging variety in housing choices and accessory commercial uses, a higher level of urban amenities, and the preservation of natural scenic qualities of open spaces. 
(b)  Permitted uses: A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
(2)  Any use permitted in the R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District. 
(3)  Any use permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District. 
(4)  Any use permitted in the B-2 General Business District. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses: Any accessory use permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, the R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District, the B-1 Neighborhood Business District, or the B-2 General Business District. 
(d)  Conditional uses: Any conditional use, except for a satellite wagering facility, listed as permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, the R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District, the B-1 Neighborhood Business District, or the B-2 General Business District, if approved by the governing body in accordance with the procedures, guides, and standards of section 31-54.1. 
(e)  Area regulations: The minimum area for a Planned Unit Development District shall be five (5) acres. 
(f)  Density of development: No minimum lot size or maximum density restrictions are placed on developments within the Planned Unit Development District. This flexibility is offered to encourage innovative site designs that are in accord with the district's intent of promoting efficient use of land, variety in housing choices, higher level of amenities, and preservation of open space and natural features. However, the planning commission and the city council reserve the right to reduce the proposed density on a particular parcel when it has been determined that such reduction is warranted by conditions specifically applicable to the parcel or the plan of development, such as topography, the character of the surrounding property, potential health or safety hazards, inconvenient or unsafe access to the parcel, traffic generation characteristics excessive for adjoining streets, the development's inconsistency with existing and proposed public facilities, or any other adverse impact that can be alleviated through a reduction in density. 
(g)  Coverage: Maximum coverage permitted of all impervious surfaces, including buildings, structures, roads, streets, and parking areas, in any Planned Unit Development District shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of the total gross area of the development. Areas used for swimming pools, bathhouses, tennis courts, and other outside recreational space that is improved with a hard surface shall not be counted as covered area. 
(h)  Common areas: Common areas, including only common open space, parking area, and screening, shall be maintained by, and be the sole responsibility of the developer/owner of the planned unit development until such time as the developer/owner conveys such common area to a nonprofit corporation, organized and operated under the laws of Virginia. The developer/owner shall present, along with the site plan, copies of the articles of incorporation of such corporation, its by-laws and an adequately financed plan with effectuating agreements and covenants acceptable to the city assuring the development and continued maintenance of the nonpublic areas. 
(i)  Utilities: All utilities shall be installed underground, except control instrumentation and substations which must be effectively screened. 
(j)  Height: The maximum height of any building or structure in a Planned Unit Development District shall be fifty-eight (58) feet, except for those uses and structures specifically exempted in article VI. 
(k)  Procedures for application: 
(1)  The establishment of a Planned Unit Development District requires a change in the zoning district classification of the property and an amendment to the official zoning map in order to register the change. An application for rezoning property and amending the official zoning map shall be made in accordance with the provisions of article X. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  To permit coordination of Planned Unit Development District Regulations with the regulations of the city subdivision ordinance, plats complying with such ordinance, shall be submitted with the application for rezoning. Review of the subdivision plat and the site plan shall be conducted simultaneously in one review process. 
(4)  The planning commission and city council shall consider the application for rezoning, the site plan, and applicable subdivision plats and hold necessary public hearings thereon in accordance with the standards set forth in article X. Following the recommendations of the planning commission, the city council shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the site plan, applicable subdivision plats, and application for rezoning. In approving the site plan and subdivision plats, the council may establish such conditions and may require such modifications as shall assure compliance with the standards and regulations of this chapter and the subdivision ordinance. [3] 
(5)  In the event that a site plan shall be disapproved by the city council, the application for rezoning shall be deemed to be denied. In the event that a site plan shall be approved with modifications by the city council, the council may continue the public hearing on the rezoning application to a date certain in order to permit the applicant to modify the site plan in accordance with such modifications. 
(6)  Approval of the application for rezoning, the site plan, and applicable subdivision plats shall constitute authority for the applicant to prepare final subdivision plats, if applicable, in accordance with the subdivision ordinance. [4] No building permit shall be issued nor subdivision plat recorded until a final subdivision plat shall have been approved by city council. 
(7)  The site plan shall be for the entire project, unless the project is staged, in which case the site plan for the first state shall be submitted. A site plan for a particular development stage other than the first shall not be approved until the site plan has been approved for the immediately preceding stage. Minor deviations from the site plan shall be permitted in the site plan in accordance with the regulations set forth in article VII. 
(l)  Other applicable requirements: 
(1)  Article VI: Supplementary Regulations. 
(2)  Article VII: Site Plan Review Requirements. 
(3)  The subdivision ordinance.* 
(m)  Final development plan approval: 
(1)  The granting of a rezoning application to a PUD district, and the approval of its accompanying schematic plan to the city council, shall constitute authority for the applicant to prepare a final development plan; however, a final development plan may be filed with and included in the processing of the rezoning application and land use plan. All final development plans shall be prepared in accordance with the approved schematic land use plan, any conditions as may have been adopted by the city council and the provisions of subsection 31-17(n) below. If a site plan for the entire property is approved at the time of rezoning no final development plan shall be required for any site plan phase submitted with the initial rezoning application. 
(2)  A final development plan may be prepared and submitted for the entire planned development at one time or for sections of the planned development, and each such plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. 
(3)  Upon determination by the zoning administrator that the content of the final development plan is complete in accordance with the requirements of subsection 31-17 (n) below, the plan shall be submitted for comment and review to appropriate city departments and agencies. Upon completion of such administrative review, the plan shall be submitted to the planning commission. 
(4)  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the final development plan no later than three (3) months from the date the zoning administrator determined that such plan was complete in accordance with the requirements of subsection 31-17 (n) below. The commission shall consider the final development plan in accordance with the approved conceptual development plan, and shall determine if said plan does comply with the applicable zoning district regulations. Upon the determination that the final development plan is in accordance and does comply, the planning commission shall approve or approve with modifications, the final development plans. 
(5)  In reviewing a final development plan, the planning commission and city council may establish such conditions and may require such modifications as will assure compliance with the standards and regulations of the subject district, and with the approved conceptual development plan. Further, the planning commission may recommend to the city council the waiver of any zoning and subdivision requirements otherwise applicable to the development where it is found that such waiver would be in conformance with said standards and regulations. 
(6)  In the event that the planning commission finds that the final development plan is not in accordance with the approved schematic land use plan, or does not comply with the applicable zoning district regulations, it shall recommend the disapproval of the final development plan and forward such recommendation to the city council. 
(7)  The city council shall hold a public hearing on the final development plan and shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the final development plan. In approving the final development plan, the city council may establish such conditions and may require such modifications as will assure compliance with the standards and regulations of the subject district, and with the approved schematic land use plan. Zoning and subdivision requirements otherwise applicable to the development may be waived by the city council where it finds that such waiver would be in conformance with said standards and regulations. 
(8)  In the event that the city council shall uphold a recommendation of the planning commission to disapprove the final development plan, such action shall be cause for the applicant to prepare a revised development plan. 
(9)  Once a final development plan has been approved, and there is cause for amendment of the same, such amendment shall be processed as follows: 
a.  Upon a determination by the zoning administrator that the amendment will result in a final development plan which is still in accordance with the approved plan, then such amendment shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
b.  Upon a determination by the zoning administrator that the amendment will cause the final development plan to be not in accordance with the approved schematic land use plan, then an amendment to the plan shall be required and a new application shall be filed in accordance with section 31-52 of the zoning ordinance. The amendment to the final development plan shall also be the subject of review by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
c.  The zoning administrator may waive any submission requirement if such requirement is not necessary for an adequate review of the final development plan amendment application. 
d.  An amendment may be filed by an owner of individual property. 
(n)  Final development plan: A final development plan prepared in accordance with the approved schematic land use plan shall be filed with the zoning administrator, including any resubmission of the plan and supporting graphics. All maps, plans, sketches and illustrations submitted as part of a final development plan shall be presented on a sheet having a maximum size of twenty-four (24) feet by thirty-six (36) feet. If presented on more than one (1) sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. One (1) eight and one-half (81/2) inch by eleven (11) inch reduction of the final development plan and supporting graphics shall also be submitted. All submission requirements shall become the property of the city. Such plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A final plan, at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (one (1) inch = one hundred (100) feet), showing: 
a.  A vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals two thousand feet (one (1) inch = two thousand (2,000) feet). 
b.  Bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines. 
c.  Total areas of property presented in square feet or acres. 
d.  Scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of all drawings. 
e.  Names and route numbers of boundary streets and the width of existing right(s)-of-way. Any proposed improvements to the public right(s)-of-way and delineation of the existing centerline of all streets abutting the property, including dimensions from the existing centerline to the edge of the pavement and to the edge of the right-of-way. 
f.  Existing topography and a statement indicating whether it is air survey or field run, with a maximum contour interval of two (2) feet. 
g.  The location and arrangement of all proposed uses, including a preliminary subdivision plan, if subdivision is proposed. 
h.  For other than single-family dwellings, the maximum height in feet, to include penthouses, of all buildings, and the number of floors both above and below or partially below finished grade. 
i.  The distances of all structures from the development boundaries and streets. 
j.  The traffic circulation systems and the pedestrian circulation system, including the location and width of all streets, driveways, entrances to parking areas and parking structures, walkways, bicycle paths and/or bridle paths, and all trails required by the adopted comprehensive plan. 
k.  The off-street parking and loading areas and structures. 
l.  The open space areas, specifying the proposed treatment or improvement of all such areas and delineating those areas proposed for specific types of developed recreational facilities. 
m.  A landscape plan showing the limits of clearing, location and design of all screening measures, indicating the type and height of such screening, and a delineation of existing vegetation, to include existing vegetation to be preserved. 
n.  Approximate delineation of any grave, object or structure marking a burial site if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will impact the burial site. 
o.  A plan or statement showing how public utilities are, or will be, provided. 
p.  Approximate location and estimated size of all proposed stormwater management facilities, a preliminary storm drainage plan, including information with respect to the type of facilities proposed and the adequacy of downstream drainage improvements. 
q.  The location of all existing utility easements having a width of twenty-five (25) feet or more. 
r.  Approximate delineation of any floodplain designated by the Federal Insurance Administration, United States Geological Survey, or the city, and the approximate delineation of any environmental quality corridor as defined in the adopted comprehensive plan, and, if applicable, the distance of any existing and proposed structures from the floodplain or environmental quality corridor. 
s.  When the development is to be constructed in sections, a final sequence of development schedule showing the order of construction of such sections, and an approximate completion date for the construction of each section. 
(2)  A final statement in tabular form which sets forth the following data, when such data is applicable to a given development plan: 
a.  Total number of dwelling units by type. 
b.  Residential density in units per acre. 
c.  Total floor area and floor area ratio for each type of use, except residential uses. 
d.  Total area in open space. 
e.  Total area in developed recreational open space. 
f.  Total number of off-street parking and loading spaces provided and the number required by the provisions of the Code. 
g.  Amount of density or floor area applied for under the onus provisions, and the calculations supporting the specific development provisions giving rise to such bonus application. 
(3)  For the residential component of an application, five (5) copies of a map identifying classification of soil types at a scale of not less than one inch equals five hundred feet (one (1) inch = five hundred (500) feet). 
(4)  Architectural sketches, if available, of typical proposed structures, including lighting fixtures and signs. 
(5)  A listing, if known, of all hazardous or toxic substances as set forth in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations Parts 116.2, 302.4 and 355; all hazardous waste as set forth in Commonwealth of Virginia/Department of Waste Management VR672-10-1-Virginia Hazardous Waste Management Regulations; and/or petroleum products as defined in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations Part 280; to be generated, utilized, stored, treated, and/or disposed of on site and the size and contents of any existing or proposed storage tanks or containers. 
(6)  A statement that the proposed development conforms to the provisions of all applicable ordinances, regulations and adopted standards, or, if any waiver, exception or variance is sought by the applicant, such shall be specifically noted with the justification for such modification. 
(7)  When a final development plan is not submitted in conjunction with a schematic land use plan, a notarized affidavit as to conflict of interest, which affidavit shall be sworn to under oath before a notary public, stating whether or not any member of the Manassas Park City Council, the planning commission, or any elected or appointed official has an interest in such property either individually, by ownership of stock in a corporation owning such land, or partnership, or as a holder of ten (10) percent or more of the outstanding shares of stock in, or as a director or officer of any corporation owning such land, directly or indirectly, or by any such member or members of his or her immediate household. 
    The sheet size and scale of a final development plan may be modified by the zoning administrator, based on the nature and/or size of the application. 
(Ord. No. 91-1700-443A, 6-4-91; Ord. No. 01-1700-651, § 1, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 03-1700-733, § 1, 12-23-03; Ord. No. 04-1700-767, § 3, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 6, 5-24-11) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivision ordinance, Ch. 21. 2056 

--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivision ordinance, Ch. 21. 

Sec. 31-17.A. - MU-D Downtown mixed-use district. 
(a)  Purpose of the district: The purpose of this district is to encourage the creation of a vibrant and economically dynamic downtown, with compatible development of office, commercial and multi-family residential land uses in a diverse manner that emphasize pedestrian circulation and a higher quality of life. Development within this district shall be based on well-designed master plans that integrate creativity, innovation, functionality, and flexibility. It is further the intent of this district to accommodate development that will benefit the city both with positive net revenues and through the creation of unique and attractive areas that serve to project a positive image of the city. 
(b)  Permitted uses: Development within this district may contain a mix of multi-family residential, office and commercial land uses, provided, however, that the residential component of any development cannot comprise more than forty (40) percent of the development's total floor area. A building or land shall be used only for the following uses: 
(1)  Apartments and townhouses. 
(2)  All permitted uses in the B-2 General business district, except automobile and truck tire sales and service, boat and boat trailer sales and storage, greenhouses and funeral homes, plus inns and bed and breakfast establishments. 
(3)  All permitted uses in the PF Public facilities district, except fleet storage facilities. 
(4)  Technology businesses. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use on the same lot. 
(d)  Conditional uses: The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses if approved by the governing body in accordance with the procedures, guides, and standards of section 31-54.1: 
(1)  Manufacturing or fabrication of goods to be sold through a storefront within the same building. 
(2)  Nightclubs and restaurants providing live entertainment, including dance halls. 
(3)  Boat and boat trailer sales. 
(4)  Motorcycle sales. 
(5)  Nursery schools. 
(e)  Area regulations: The minimum site area required for all downtown mixed-use rezoning applications is four (4) contiguous acres, unless a parcel proposed for the downtown mixed-use district is adjacent to a parcel already zoned to the downtown mixed-use district, in which case no minimum acreage requirement would apply. For the purposes of meeting the minimum acreage requirement in this subsection, a parcel will be considered to be adjacent to an existing downtown mixed-use parcel if the two (2) parcels are separated only by publicly-owned right-of-way. 
(f)  Density of development: No minimum lot size or maximum density restrictions are placed on developments within the downtown mixed-use district. This flexibility is offered to encourage innovative site designs that are in accord with the district's intent of promoting efficient use of the land, pedestrian accessibility, variety in housing choices, higher level of amenities, and preservation of open space and natural features. However, the planning commission and the governing body reserve the right to reduce the proposed density on a particular parcel when it has been determined that such reduction is warranted by conditions specifically applicable to the parcel or the plan of development, such as topography, the character of the surrounding property, potential health or safety hazards, inconvenient or unsafe access to the parcel, traffic generation characteristics excessive for adjoining streets, the development's inconsistency with existing and proposed public facilities, or any other adverse impact that can be alleviated through a reduction in density. 
(g)  Coverage: Maximum coverage permitted of all impervious surfaces, including buildings, structures, roads, streets, and parking areas, in any downtown mixed-use district shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the total gross area of the development. Areas used for swimming pools, bathhouses, tennis courts, and other hard surface recreational uses shall not be counted as covered area. 
(h)  Utilities: All utilities shall be installed underground, except control instrumentation and substations, which must be effectively screened. 
(i)  Yard requirements: 
Land Use (on ground floor) Minimum Front Yard (feet) Minimum Side Yard Each Side (feet) Minimum Rear Yard (feet) Multi-family Residential 0 10 25 Commercial & Office 0 0 0  
(j)  Common areas: If common areas are provided, including common open space, parking area, and screening, then they shall be maintained by and be the sole responsibility of the developer/owner of the development until such time as the developer/owner conveys such common area to a nonprofit corporation, organized and operated under the laws of Virginia. The developer/owner shall present, along with the site plan, copies of the articles of incorporation of such corporation, its bylaws and an adequately financed plan with effectuating agreements and covenants acceptable to the city assuring the development and continued maintenance of the nonpublic areas. The city may choose to accept ownership of any common area, if such area is offered by the owner, and thereby become responsible for maintenance of the area. 
(k)  Height requirements: With the exception of uses permitted in the PF Public facilities district, all construction must have a minimum height of forty (40) feet. 
(l)  Screening: All private trash receptacles must be located and/or screened so they are not visible from a public street. Loading docks and garage doors for commercial businesses must be located so they are not visible from a public street. 
(m)  Signage: The signage regulations contained in section 31-29 apply to the uses in the downtown mixed-use district based on the type of use with the following exceptions: 
(1)  No pole type signs are permitted. All freestanding signs must be monument signs and incorporate a solid base. 
(2)  The maximum height of a freestanding sign is twelve (12) feet. 
(3)  The maximum size of a sign face is fifty (50) square feet. 
(4)  Only one (1) freestanding sign is permitted for each parcel or lot. 
(5)  Wall signs shall be limited in size to one and one-half (11/2) square feet of sign area per lineal front foot of building. 
(n)  Master planning: Every development proposed within the downtown mixed-use district shall meet the requirements of the master planning section of this title. 
(1)  The applicant shall be required to submit a master development plan which must be reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the governing body as part of the rezoning request. The master development plan shall consist of both a concept plan which shows the location and distribution of land uses and related facilities and a development plan which deals with site specific issues. 
(2)  The purpose of the master development plan is to: 
a.  Assure that the proposed development is considered as a whole and conforms to the comprehensive plan and the requirements of this title. The master plan may serve to allow flexibility of uses and development standards. Any other reviews needed for the development review process, such as conditional uses, plan amendments or zone changes may be considered at the same time as the master plan; and, 
b.  Assure that phased development is properly coordinated. 
(o)  Components of a master development plan: The applicant must submit a master plan with the following components. The review body may modify the proposal, especially those portions dealing with development standards and review procedures. The greater the level of detail in the plan, the less need for extensive reviews of subsequent phases. Conversely, the more general the details, the greater the level of review that will be required for subsequent phases. 
(1)  Boundaries of the site. The master plan must show the current and potential future boundaries of the site for the duration of the master plan. 
(2)  General statement. The master plan must include a narrative that addresses a description in general terms of the use and site as well as expansion plans for the duration of the master plan. 
(3)  Uses and functions. The master plan must include a description of present uses, affiliated uses, proposed uses and potential future uses. The description must include information about the general amount and type of functions of the use, the hours of operation and the approximate number of members, employees, visitors and special events. For projects which include residential units, proposed minimum and maximum floor areas and densities, number of units and building heights must be indicated. For office/commercial projects or mixed-use, minimum and maximum floor area ratios must be indicated. 
(4)  Site plan. The master plan must include a site plan, showing, at the appropriate level of detail, buildings and other structures, existing mature trees and landscaping, the pedestrian and vehicle circulation system, parking areas, open areas, and other required items. This information must cover the following: 
a.  All existing improvements that will remain after development of the proposed use(s); 
b.  All improvements planned in conjunction with the proposed use(s); 
c.  Conceptual plans for potential future uses; and, 
d.  General locations of usable open space, any land proposed to be dedicated for open space, pedestrian and transit connection between the site and public or private streets serving the development and connecting to off-site open space, internal circulation (both auto and pedestrian), and location of proposed gates and fencing. 
e.  A summary table that lists all uses and their actual area coverage and their percentage of the site. 
The site plan may either be submitted at the same time as the master plan or following approval of the rezoning to the downtown mixed-use district. No permits connected to the development of the subject land, including grading and building permits, will be issued until the site plan has been approved. 
(5)  Covenants. The applicant may propose development standards in the form of covenants that will control development of the future uses that are in addition to the requirements of this title. These may be such things as height limits, setbacks, frontage, FAR limits, landscaping requirements, parking requirements, signage, view corridors or facade treatment. The city may require the recording of covenants for any project and must be a partner to all such covenants. The covenants, and any changes thereto, will require approval of the city. In addition, the covenants must include provisions for enforcement by the city. The covenants must be recorded by the developer. 
(6)  Phasing of development. The master plan must include the proposed development phases, probable sequence of future phases, estimated dates and interim uses of the property awaiting development. In addition, the plan should address any proposed temporary uses or locations of uses during construction periods. 
(7)  Transportation and parking. The master plan shall include information on the following items for each phase. 
a.  Projected transportation impacts. This includes the expected number of trips (peak and daily), an analysis of the impact of those trips on the adjacent street system, and the proposed mitigation measures to limit any projected negative impacts. 
b.  Proposed parking impacts. This information includes the projected peak-hour parking demand and an analysis of this demand compared to proposed on-site and off-site parking supply. If off-site parking is proposed, evidence of a shared-parking agreement or easement must be presented. For new on-site parking, justification must be provided if a parking lot is proposed instead of a parking garage. 
(8)  Procedures. 
a.  Master plan pre-application meetings are required with the planning director prior to commencing a conceptual master plan. 
b.  Site plan review pre-application conferences are required prior to submission of a site plan review request, in addition to the master plan pre-application meeting. Site plan review conferences are required for each phase of development, based on specific development/building plans. 
c.  Minor modifications, additions, or changes to an approved master plan shall be reviewed and a determination made by the planning director or his designee to permit the changes with no formal review. 
d.  Major modifications, additions, or changes to an approved master plan shall be subject to the original review procedures, including the fees in effect at the time of the change request application. 
e.  Projects approved as part of a master plan do not require an additional public hearing on a project-specific basis so long as the original master plan is followed. 
(Ord. No. 01-1700-662, § 1, 4-17-01; Ord. No. 04-1700-770, § 1, 11-11-04; Ord. No. 05-1700-789, § 1, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 06-1700-818B, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 06-1700-818C, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 06-1700-818D, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 7, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 12-1700-916, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 31-17.B. - PF Public facilities district. 
(a)  Purpose of the district. The intent of this district is to provide for the appropriate location and development of public uses that serve the cultural, governmental, educational, recreational and public service needs of the community. These uses are recognized as being both necessary and convenient. It is further intended that, to the extent possible, the location of these uses be accomplished so as to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. For the purposes of this section, the terms "government", "governmental" and "public" refer to federal, state, county and city governments, their departments and subdivisions, as well as public utilities, and to lands, facilities and structures owned, operated and/or maintained by any such entity. 
(b)  Permitted uses. A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Governmental structures, including but not limited to government offices, maintenance facilities and public safety facilities; 
(2)  Public educational structures and facilities; 
(3)  Libraries, auditoriums and museums operated by a governmental agency or a nonprofit organization; 
(4)  Athletic facilities, concert venues and other forms of public entertainment operated by a governmental agency or a nonprofit organization; 
(5)  Public parks and recreational facilities; 
(6)  Protected historical areas and structures; 
(7)  Transportation facilities, including but not limited to parking garages, parking lots and fleet storage facilities, owned by either a governmental agency or a public agency; 
(8)  Structures and facilities owned, operated and maintained by a public utility company that has a franchise agreement with the city; 
(9)  Stormwater control and management facilities that are owned, operated and/or maintained by a governmental agency; 
(10)  Water and sanitary sewer facilities that are owned, operated and/or maintained by a governmental agency or a public agency, including wells, water towers and sanitary sewer and water pumping stations; 
(11)  Undeveloped land owned by a governmental agency, public school district, transportation agency or public utility. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses if approved by the governing body in accordance with the procedures, guides, and standards of section 31-54.1: 
(1)  Publicly-owned or subsidized recycling and solid waste collection facilities; 
(2)  Freestanding antennae for wireless communication services. 
(d)  Permitted accessory uses. 
(1)  Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use; 
(2)  Antennae for wireless communication services located on one (1) or more permitted structures and/or facilities. Provided, however, that any antenna located on a protected historical structure must be adequately concealed so as not to diminish from the structure's historic character. 
(e)  Landscaping. If the screening described in paragraph 31-33(j)(3) is required, the area around the screening will be appropriately landscaped so as to mitigate the visual impact of the screening fence. The planning director shall determine the level of landscaping required for such mitigation. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-724, § 2, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 09-1700-864, § 2, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 8, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 31-18. - B-1 Neighborhood business district. 
(a)  Purpose of the district: This district provides primarily for retail shopping and personal services uses to be developed either as a unit or in individual parcels to serve the needs of nearby residential neighborhoods. The range, size, hours of operation, lighting, signs, and other developmental aspects of permitted uses will be limited in order to enhance the general character of the district and its compatibility with its residential surroundings. 
(b)  Permitted uses: A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, except dwellings and residential human care facilities. 
(2)  Banks, drive-in or otherwise, so long as driveway space shall be provided off the street for all vehicles waiting for drive-in service. 
(3)  Bakeries occupying not more than three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area and provided all products produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises. 
(4)  Barbershops or beauty parlors. 
(5)  Bicycle shops, sales and repair; but limited to labor intensive vehicles. 
(6)  Catering or delicatessen business. 
(7)  Dry-cleaning or pressing pickup stations or shops occupying not more than three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area. 
(8)  Florist shops. 
(9)  Laundromats or self-service dry cleaning establishments. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Offices, general business or professional. 
(12)  Pet shop or dog beauty parlor, provided that any work rooms, cages, pens or kennels shall be maintained within a completely enclosed, soundproof building. 
(13)  Private club, lodge, or meeting hall. 
(14)  Restaurants, including outdoor cafes associated with such uses (excluding restaurants with drive-through windows and dancing or entertainment, except as provided for in subsection 31-18(d). 
(15)  Shoe repair shops occupying not more than three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area. 
(16)  Shops for the sale, service, or repair of home appliances, office machines, electrical, television and radio equipment occupying not more than three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area. 
(17)  Stores or shops for the conduct of retail business, including the sale of accessories, antiques, appliances, beverages, carpets, clothing, drugs, fabrics, food, furniture, garden supplies, groceries, hardware, hobby supplies, office supplies, paint, sporting goods, stationery, and similar stores, but not including adult book stores or adult mini motion picture theatres, or massage parlors. No shop may occupy more than eight thousand (8,000) square feet of floor area. 
(18)  Studios for artists, photographers, teachers, sculptors, or musicians. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use on the same lot. 
(d)  Conditional uses: The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses if approved by the governing body in accordance with the procedures, guides, and standards of section 31-54.1: 
(1)  Nightclubs and restaurants providing live entertainment, including dance halls. 
(2)  Nursery schools, child care centers, and kindergartens. 
(e)  Area regulations: There are no minimum lot size requirements except as may be required to meet sanitary standards. 
(f)  Yard requirements: 
Minimum in Feet Front 
Yard Side Yard* 
Minimum Rear* 
Yard Permitted uses (1) Street width 50 feet or greater 35 10 25 (2) Street width less than 50 feet 60 10 25  
*Side and rear yards required only if adjacent to a residential district. See article VI, section 31-30, "Special height and yard regulation." 
(g)  Height requirements: 
Maximum 
Height (1) Permitted uses and all other structures not specifically exempted in article VI 35 feet  
(h)  Other applicable requirements: 
(1)  Article VI: Supplementary Regulations. 
(2)  Article VII: Site Plan Review Requirements. 
(3)  Hours of operation: Permitted uses may remain open for business twenty-four (24) hours per day subject to the following conditions: 
(i)  Building storefronts shall be aligned to face away from adjacent residential properties to minimize adverse effects of noise, storefront lighting, displays, etc., and other activities related to commercial business operations. 
(ii)  Structures within this district existing at the adoption of this condition may be eligible for consideration for twenty-four-hour operation by providing adequate screening and buffering to satisfy the intent to minimize the adverse effects, for example, noise, artificial light intrusion, etc., of commercial business operation upon adjacent residential property. 
(Ord. No. 81-1000-183, 11-4-81; Ord. No. 86-1700-343, 9-16-86; Ord. No. 93-1700-497, §§ 2, 3, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 06-1700-818E, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 9, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 31-19. - B-2 general business district. 
(a)  Purpose of the district: The intent of this district is to provide sufficient space in suitable locations for a wide variety of commercial, automotive, and miscellaneous service uses, generally serving a wide area and located particularly along primary highway arteries where a general mixture of commercial and service activity now exists, but which uses are not characterized by extensive warehousing, frequent heavy truck activity, open storage of materials, or the nuisance factors of dust, odor, and noise associated with manufacturing. 
(b)  Permitted uses: A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District. 
(2)  Amusement places or theaters, except open-air drive-in theaters. Amusement places include bowling alleys, skating rinks, swimming pools, miniature golf, indoor model racing tracks, movie theaters, and similar activities. 
(3)  Automobile and truck tire sales and service, provided no tire recapping is done on the premises. 
(4)  Bakeries. 
(5)  Boat and boat trailer sales and storage. 
(6)  Funeral home. 
(7)  Green houses, commercial, wholesale or retail. 
(8)  Hospitals for human care. 
(9)  Hotels, motels, or motor lodges. 
(10)  Loan or credit offices. 
(11)  Restaurant, including outdoor cafes associated with such uses (excluding restaurants with drive-through windows and dancing or entertainment, except as provided for in subsection 31-19(d)). 
(12)  Service establishments, such as linen or laundry service, dry cleaning, furniture refinishing and repair, including upholstering, (but not furniture manufacture) plumbing, heating, and electrical shops, painting, interior decorating shops, printing and photostatting offices, appliance repair, and other general service and repair establishments provided that no outside storage of material is permitted except as provided in this section. 
(13)  Stores or shops for the conduct of retail business, including sale of accessories, antiques, appliances, beverages, carpets, clothing, drugs, fabrics, farm supplies, food, furniture, garden supplies, groceries, glass, hardware, hobby supplies, office supplies, paint, sporting goods, stationary, and similar stores. 
(14)  Wholesale establishments with not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of accessory storage per establishment. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses: Storage of office supplies or merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a permitted office, business, or commercial use subject to applicable district regulations. 
(d)  Conditional uses: The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses if approved by the governing body in accordance with the procedures, guides, and standards of section 31-54.1: 
(1)  A business or commercial building greater in height than forty-five (45) feet. 
(2)  Adult bookstores and adult mini motion picture theatres; however, no two (2) such uses shall be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of each other and no such use shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any residential district, school, church or library. 
(3)  Animal hospital or kennel. 
(4)  Billiard parlor or pool hall. 
(5)  Dancing establishments and dance halls. 
(6)  Drive-in theaters. 
(7)  Warehouses with up to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of floor area. 
(8)  Nightclubs and restaurants providing live entertainment, including dance halls. 
(9)  Restaurants with drive-through windows. 
(10)  Automotive and truck, new and secondhand previously owned sales, rental, lease, service and repair. 
(11)  Automobile service stations, garages, and filling stations, so long as bulk storage of inflammable liquids is underground. 
(12)  A satellite wagering facility as defined in section 31-6 of this chapter. 
(13)  Car wash, manned. 
(14)  Nursery schools, childcare centers, and kindergartens. 
(e)  Area regulations: There are no minimum lot size requirements except as may be required to meet sanitary standards. 
(f)  Yard requirements: 
Minimum in Feet Front 
Yard Side 
Yard* 
Minimum Rear* 
Yard Permitted uses (1) Street width 50 feet or greater 35 10 25 (2) Street width less than 50 feet 60 10 25  
*Side and rear yards required only if adjacent to a residential district. See article VI, section 31-30, "Special height and yard regulations." 
(g)  Height requirements: 
Maximum 
Height (1) Permitted uses and all other structures not specifically exempted in article VI. 45 feet  
(h)  Other applicable requirements: 
(1)  Article VI: Supplementary Regulations. 
(2)  Article VII: Site Plan Review Requirements. 
(Ord. No. 93-1700-497, §§ 4, 5, 12-2-93; Ord. No. 04-1700-742, § 1, 3-16-04; Ord. No. 04-1700-767, § 2, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 06-1700-812, §§ a, b, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 06-1700-815, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 06-1700-816, § 2, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 10, 5-24-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-1700-818F, adopted Dec. 12, 2006, added subsection 31-19(d)(13) to the Code. Inasmuch as said subsection already existed, the new material has been redesignated as (d)(14) at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 31-19.A. - B-3 Gateway business district. 
(a)  Purpose of the district: The purpose of this district is to create a visually appealing, diversified gateway business area along the Route 28 corridor in the city, with compatible development of office and commercial land uses that emphasize pedestrian and vehicle friendly businesses that draw both local customers and those from the larger metropolitan area. Development within this district shall be geared toward diversifying the city's tax base and creating a positive, welcoming image for the city. 
(b)  Permitted uses: Development within this district may contain a mix of office and commercial land uses. A building or land shall be used only for the following uses: 
(1)  All permitted uses in the B-2 General business district, except automobile and truck tire sales and service, boat and boat trailer sales and storage, green houses and funeral homes. 
(2)  All permitted uses in the PF Public facilities district, except fleet storage facilities. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use on the same lot. 
(d)  Conditional uses: The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses if approved by the governing body in accordance with the procedures, guides, and standards of section 31-54.1: 
(1)  A business or commercial building greater in height than forty-five (45) feet. 
(2)  New automobile sales. 
(3)  New boat and boat trailer sales. 
(4)  New motorcycle sales. 
(5)  Drive-in restaurant. 
(e)  Utilities: All utilities shall be installed underground, except control instrumentation and substations, which must be effectively screened. 
(f)  Area regulations: The minimum lot size for the B-3 Gateway business district shall be five (5) acres. 
(g)  Yard requirements: 
Minimum Front Yard 
(feet) Minimum Side Yard 
Each Side 
(feet)* Minimum Rear Yard 
(feet)* Street width 50 feet or greater 35 10 25 Street width less than 50 feet 60 10 25  
* Side and rear yards required only if adjacent to a residential district. 
(h)  Height requirements: The maximum height without a conditional use permit shall be forty-five (45) feet. 
(i)  Screening: All private trash receptacles must be located and/or screened so they are not visible from a public street. Loading docks and garage doors for commercial businesses must be located so they are not visible from a public street. 
(j)  Signage: The signage regulations contained in section 31-29 apply to the uses in the gateway business district based on the type of use with the following exceptions: 
(1)  No pole type signs are permitted. All freestanding signs must be monument signs and incorporate a solid base. 
(2)  The maximum height of a freestanding sign is twelve (12) feet, except as otherwise provided in subsection 31-29(f)(4)c. 
(3)  The maximum size of a sign face is fifty (50) square feet. 
(4)  Only one (1) freestanding sign is permitted for each parcel or lot, except as otherwise provided in subsection 31-29(f)(4)c. 
(5)  Wall signs shall be limited in size to one (1) square foot of sign area per lineal front foot of building. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-916, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 31-20. - I-1 Industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose of the district: The intent of this district is to promote employment opportunities and enhance the city's tax base through the development of research and development centers, light industrial manufacturing, warehousing, and related office and institutional uses, with retail and service uses limited to support for primary permitted uses. Uses shall not be dangerous or offensive due to odor, dust, fire, explosion, or other reasons, or use equipment and/or processes that are not likely to produce objectionable noise, vibration, explosion, fire, smoke, or other effect. In addition, no use shall be permitted that involves the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form to be used in an industrial operation at another location. 
(b)  Permitted uses: A building or land shall be used only for the following uses: 
(1)  Ambulance services, commercial 
(2)  Artist's or photographer's studio, commercial. 
(3)  Assembly (non-HAZMAT). 
(4)  Bakery, industrial. 
(5)  Building materials sales yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel, and similar materials, as incidental to the principal business, but not including junk storage for extractive activities. 
(6)  Carpet, rug and garment cleaning and dyeing. 
(7)  Computer and data processing center. 
(8)  Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant, including rental of equipment commonly used for contractors, but not including equipment used for trash or refuse removal services. 
(9)  Dry-cleaning garment processing plant. 
(10)  Gunsmith shop. 
(11)  Janitorial service. 
(12)  Laboratory, research, experimental or testing. 
(13)  Laboratory, medical or dental. 
(14)  Laboratory, photographic processing 
(15)  Locksmith shop. 
(16)  Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles of merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious stones, metals, shell, straw, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood, yarns, and paint. 
(17)  Manufacturing and maintenance of electric and neon signs; sheet metal products, including HVAC equipment; cornices; eaves; and similar products. 
(18)  Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as baked goods, candy, food products, dairy products, and meat and poultry products; toiletries, cosmetics, drugs, perfumes, and pharmaceuticals (non-HAZMAT); and beverage blending or bottling; but not including the distilling of beverages, the slaughter of poultry or animals, and the refining of fats and oils. 
(19)  Office. 
(20)  Packaging, telecommunications or courier service. 
(21)  Publishing and printing. 
(22)  Public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses. 
(23)  Radio or television broadcasting station. 
(24)  Recording studio. 
(25)  Research and development (non-HAZMAT). 
(26)  School, business. 
(27)  School, trade, technical or vocational. 
(28)  Self-storage centers, subject to provisions of section 31-33.3. 
(29)  Warehouse and wholesale establishment (non-HAZMAT). 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use on the same lot, including: 
(1)  Specialized equipment repair related to or compatible with the uses permitted by right in this district. 
(2)  Storage or sale of goods or materials used in or produced by uses permitted by right in this district, subject to applicable ordinance regulations. 
(3)  Retail activities and services that support the uses permitted by right in this district, provided that any such activities are by their nature accessory to the permitted uses in this district. 
(d)  Conditional uses: The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses if approved by the governing body in accordance with the procedures, guides, and standards of section 31-54.1: 
(1)  Assembly, repairing, rebuilding, reconditioning, performing body and fender work, and painting automobiles, tractors, trucks, buses, and motorcycles, and repairing and retreading tires for the same. 
(2)  Range, shooting, indoor. 
(3)  Stadium or arena, indoor or outdoor. 
(4)  Taxi or limousine operations and service. 
(e)  Prohibited use: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, salvage, scrap or vehicle storage yards (auto graveyards) are not permitted within the City of Manassas Park. 
(f)  Utilities: All utilities shall be installed underground, except control instrumentation and substations, which must be effectively screened. 
(g)  Area regulations: There are no minimum lot size requirements except as may be required to meet sanitary standards. However, buildings or groups of buildings with the accessory buildings may cover up to, but shall not exceed, seventy (70) percent of the area of the lot, provided that adequate provisions are made for all common property resources, including storm drainage. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the lot area must be landscaped. 
(h)  Yard requirements: 
Minimum 
Front Yard 
(feet) Minimum 
Side Yard 
Each Side 
(feet)* Minimum 
Rear Yard 
(feet) 15 10 20**  
* Side yards required only if adjacent to a residential use. 
** The rear setback shall be increased to fifty feet (50') for any industrial land use adjacent to a residential land use. 
(i)  Height requirements: The maximum height shall be sixty feet (60'). 
(j)  Screening: All private trash receptacles must be located and/or screened so they are not visible from a public street. Loading docks and garage doors for commercial businesses must be located so they are not visible from a public street. 
(k)  Use limitations: Manufacturing and repair business shall be conducted within enclosed building; ancillary activities may be conducted but must be screened from public view. 
(l)  Other applicable requirements. 
(1)  Article VI. Supplementary regulations. 
(2)  [Article VII]. Site plan review requirements. 
(Ord. No. 85-1700-269, 2-6-85; Ord. No. 93-1700-497, §§ 4, 5, 12-2-93; Ord. No. 03-1700-699, 1-3-03; Ord. No. 07-1700-841, §§ 1, 2, 11-2-07; Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 11, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 12-1700-922, § 1, 4-3-12) 
Sec. 31-20.A. - I-2 Light industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose of the district: The intent of this district is encourage the development of compatible industrial, commercial and office uses. Development within this district shall be geared toward diversifying the city's tax base and creating a positive image for the city. 
(b)  Permitted uses: Development within this district may contain a mix of office, commercial and light industrial land uses. A building or land shall be used only for the following uses: 
(1)  All permitted uses in the PF Public facilities district, except fleet storage facilities. 
(2)  All permitted uses in the B-2 General business district, except amusement places or theaters, automobile and truck tire sales and service, boat and boat trailer sales and storage, and funeral homes. 
(3)  Defense production businesses. 
(4)  Technology businesses. 
(5)  Research and development, excluding laboratories where animals or livestock are used for research. 
(6)  The manufacturing, assembling, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment, storage or distribution of products from materials, where such use is not likely to be dangerous or offensive because of odor, dust, fire, explosion, or other reasons, or uses equipment and/or processes that are not likely to produce objectionable noise, vibration, explosion, fire, smoke, or other effect. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use on the same lot, for which the combined area may constitute up to twenty-five (25) percent of the total gross floor area of the principal use, including: 
(1)  Specialized retail supply and equipment repair related to or compatible with the uses permitted by right in this district. 
(2)  Retail activities and refreshment areas as a part of any of the uses permitted by right in this district, provided that any such activities are by their nature accessory to the permitted uses in this district. 
(d)  Conditional uses: The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses if approved by the governing body in accordance with the procedures, guides, and standards of section 31-54.1: 
(1)  A business or commercial building greater in height than sixty (60) feet. 
(2)  New automobile sales. 
(3)  New boat and boat trailer sales. 
(4)  New motorcycle sales. 
(5)  Commercial recreational and related ancillary uses including, but not limited to, ice skating and roller skating rinks, gymnastic centers, swim facilities, tennis barns and bowling alleys. 
(e)  Utilities: All utilities shall be installed underground, except control instrumentation and substations, which must be effectively screened. 
(f)  Area regulations: The minimum lot size for the district shall be two (2) acres. 
(g)  Yard requirements: 
Minimum 
Front Yard 
(feet) Minimum 
Side Yard 
Each Side 
(feet)* Minimum 
Rear Yard 
(feet)* 15 10 20  
* Side and rear yards required only if adjacent to a residential use. 
(h)  Height requirements: The maximum height without a conditional use permit shall be sixty (60) feet. 
(i)  Screening: All private trash receptacles must be located and/or screened so they are not visible from a public street. Loading docks and garage doors for commercial businesses must be located so they are not visible from a public street. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-916, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 31-21. - FP floodplain districts. 
(a)  Statement of intent: The purpose of these districts is to prevent the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
(1)  Regulating uses, activities, and development which, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities and frequencies. 
(2)  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within areas subject to flooding. 
(3)  Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage. 
(4)  Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
(b)  Basis of districts: 
(1)  The various floodplain districts shall include areas subject to inundation by waters of the one hundred-year flood. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the flood insurance study for Prince William County, Virginia and incorporated areas, including the City of Manassas Park, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency Federal Insurance Administration, dated March 11, 1978. 
(2)  The floodway District is delineated for purposes of this chapter using the criteria that a certain area within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the one hundred-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. These areas included in this district are specifically defined in Table No. 9 of the above referenced flood insurance study and shown on the accompanying flood boundary and floodway map or flood insurance rate map. 
(3)  The floodway-fringe district shall be that area of the one hundred-year floodplain not included in the floodway district. The basis for the outermost boundary of this district shall be the one hundred-year flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the above referenced flood insurance study and as shown on the accompanying flood boundary and floodway map or flood insurance rate map. 
(4)  The approximated floodplain district shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a one hundred-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown as Zone A on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. For these areas, the one hundred-year flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used, when available. Where the specific one hundred-year flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data such as the U.S. Corps of Engineers floodplain information reports, the U.S. Geological Survey floodprone quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the city. 
(5)  The floodplain districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as shown on the official zoning map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions. 
(6)  Where there happens to be any conflict between the provisions or requirements of any of the floodplain districts and those of any underlying district the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply. 
(7)  In the event any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislation or administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic underlying provisions shall remain applicable. 
(c)  Official zoning map: 
(1)  The boundaries of the floodplain districts are established as shown on the flood boundary and floodway map and the flood insurance rate map which are declared to be a part of this chapter and which shall be kept on file at the office of the zoning administrator. 
(2)  The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the city council where natural or manmade changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency or individual documents the need or possibility for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(d)  Interpretation of district boundaries: Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the zoning administrator. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the board of zoning appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board and to submit his own technical evidence, if he so desires. 
(e)  Floodplain districts generally: 
(1)  Permit requirement. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only upon approval of the required site plan and/or building permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this article and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, such as the Uniform Statewide Building Code and the City of Manassas Park subdivision ordinance. [5] Prior to the approval of a required site plan, and/or building permit, the zoning administrator shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. 
(2)  Interference with floodways. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
(3)  Alteration or relocation of watercourse. Prior to any proposed alteration of any channels, or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction; a permit shall be obtained from the U.S. Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission (a joint permit application is available for any of these organizations). Furthermore, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Soil and Water Conservation) and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(4)  Filling or grading in floodplains prohibited. No filling or grading, either temporary or permanent, shall be allowed within any areas (floodplains) inundated by the one hundred-year frequency flood, unless it can be demonstrated, through detailed engineering analysis that such filling or grading will have no effect on the one hundred-year frequency flood level or that satisfactory channel improvements will be made to compensate for the filling or grading such that the one hundred-year frequency flood level is not changed. 
(5)  Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties. 
(6)  Site plans and permit applications. All applications for development in the floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information: 
a.  For structures to be elevated, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement). 
b.  For structures to be floodproofed (nonresidential only), the elevation to which the structure will be floodproofed. 
c.  The elevation of the one hundred-year flood. 
d.  Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations. 
(7)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, be fully licensed and ready for highway use; [6] or 
b.  Meet the permit requirements for placement and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes as contained in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(8)  Definitions. 
a.  Base flood/one-hundred year flood. A flood, that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one hundred (100) years (i.e., that has a one (1) percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year). 
b.  Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The Federal Emergency Management Agency designated one hundred-year water surface elevation, plus one (1) foot. 
c.  Basement. Any area of the building having its flood subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
d.  Board of zoning appeals. The board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the Zoning Administrator in the interpretation of his section. 
e.  Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
f.  Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
g.  Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
h.  Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. 
i.  Lowest flood. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). 
j.  Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
k.  Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
l.  Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term included structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
(f)  FW Floodway district: The Floodway District (FW) is delineated for the purpose of this article in subsection (b) of this section, "Basis of districts." 
(g)  Same-Use regulations: In floodway districts: 
(1)  No development shall be permitted except where the effect of such development on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements which have been approved by all appropriate local and/or state authorities as required above. 
(2)  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the one hundred-year flood elevation. 
(h)  Same-Permitted uses: In the floodway district, the following uses and activities are permitted, provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided that they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials and equipment: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching, and swimming areas, hiking, and horseback riding trails, wildlife and nature preserves. 
(3)  Accessory residential uses, such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and pervious parking areas. 
(4)  Accessory industrial and commercial uses, such as yard areas, pervious parking and loading areas, airport land strips, etc. 
(i)  Same-Uses permitted by special exception: The following uses and activities may be permitted by special exception granted by the board of zoning appeals, provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by this chapter or any other ordinance: 
(1)  Structures, except for mobile homes, accessory to the uses and activities in (h) above. 
(2)  Utilities and public facilities and improvements, such as railroads, streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipe lines, water and sewage treatment plants, and other similar or related uses. 
(3)  Water-related uses and activities, such as marinas, docks, wharves, piers, etc. 
(4)  Temporary uses, such as circuses, carnivals, and similar activities. 
(5)  Storage of materials and equipment, provided that they are not buoyant, flammable or explosive, and are not subject to major damage by flooding, or provided that such material and equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement, and/or can be readily removed from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
(6)  Other similar uses and activities provided they cause no increase in flood height and/or velocities. All uses, activities, and structural developments shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing provisions contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
(j)  Same-Prohibited uses: In the floodway district, the following uses and activities are prohibited: 
(1)  The placement of any manufactured home, within the floodway district is specifically prohibited. 
(k)  FF Flood fringe and AF approximated floodplain districts: The Flood Fringe District (FF) and Approximated Floodplain District (AF), are delineated for the purposes of this article in subsection (b) of this section, "Basis of districts." 
(l)  Same-Use regulations: Flood Fringe District and Approximated Floodplain Districts: 
(1)  The development and/or use of land shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district provided that all such uses, activities, and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
(2)  Within the Approximated Floodplain District, proposals for all new subdivisions, manufactured home parks/subdivisions (greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser), shall include base flood elevation data. The applicant shall also delineate a floodway area based on the requirement that all existing and future development not increase the one hundred-year flood elevation more than one (1) foot at any one (1) point. The engineering principal, equal reduction of conveyance, shall be used to make the determination of increased flood heights. 
(3)  Within the floodway area delineated by the applicant, the provisions of subsection (g) of this section "Use regulations" shall apply. 
(m)  Same-Additional factors for special exceptions and variances: In the passing upon applications for special exceptions and variances, the board of zoning appeals shall consider all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of this chapter and the following factors: 
(1)  Applications for a special exception or variance from the provisions of this article shall be made to the board of zoning appeals, under the provisions of article VII. 
(2)  The board of zoning appeals, in passing upon applications for special exceptions and variances, shall consider, in addition to those factors specified in article VII, the following: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No special exception or variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within the floodway district that will cause any increase in flood levels during the one hundred-year flood. 
b.  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
c.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contaminations, and unsanitary conditions. 
d.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
e.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
f.  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
g.  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
h.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
i.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
j.  The safety of access to the property, in time of flood, of ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
k.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. 
l.  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this chapter. 
(3)  The board of zoning appeals may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a special exception or variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for protection and other related matters. 
(4)  Special exceptions and/or variances shall only be issued after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the granting of such will not result in: 
a.  Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; 
b.  Additional threats to public safety; 
c.  Extraordinary public expense; 
d.  Create nuisances; 
e.  Cause fraud or victimization of the public; or 
f.  Conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
(5)  Special exceptions and/or variances shall only be issued after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the special exceptions and/or variance will be the minimum reliefs to any hardship. 
(6)  The board of zoning appeals shall notify the applicant for a special exception and/or variance, in writing, that the issuance of a special exception and/or variance to construct a structure below the one hundred-year flood elevation increases the risks to life and property, and will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
(7)  A record of the above notification as well as all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, shall be maintained and any variances which are issued shall be noted in the annual report submitted to the federal insurance administrator. 
(n)  Existing structures in floodplain districts: A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Existing structures and/or uses located in any floodway district shall not be expanded or enlarged, unless the effect of the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements. 
(2)  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain district to an extent or amount of less than fifty (50) percent of its market value, shall be elevated and/or flood proofed to the greatest extent possible. 
(3)  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use regardless of its location in a floodplain district to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide building Code. [7] 
(4)  Uses or adjuncts thereof which are, or become, nuisances shall not be permitted to continue. 
(o)  Municipal liability: 
(1)  The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts, or that land uses permitted within such districts, will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(2)  This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Manassas Park or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 82-1700-192, 4-20-82) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Building Code, § 7-16 et seq.; subdivision ordinance, Ch. 21. 

--- (6) --- 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 

--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Building Code, § 7-16 et seq. 

ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 31-22. - Continuation of existing uses and permits. 
    Any lawful use, building, or structure existing at the time of adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereto may be continued even though such use, building, or structure may not conform with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located. Such use, building, or structure shall be deemed a "nonconforming use." A nonconforming use or structure may be continued provided: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use or structure shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, unless said enlargement does not result in an increase in nonconformity or results in a change to a use permitted in the district. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use or structure at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, unless said move results in decreasing the degree of nonconformity or results in conformity with the requirements for the district. 
(3)  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. No additional uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved shall be permitted. 
(4)  Any nonconforming use may be expended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(5)  When any nonconforming use is superceded by a permitted use, the use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and no nonconforming use shall thereafter be resumed. 
(6)  If any such nonconforming use or structure ceases for any reason for a period of more than two (2) years (except when government action impedes access to the premises), any subsequent use of such land or structure shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land or structure is located. 
    The rights pertaining to a nonconforming use or building shall be deemed to pertain to the use or building itself, regardless of the ownership of the land or the building on or in which such nonconforming use is conducted or of such nonconforming building or the nature of the tenure of the occupancy thereof. 
Sec. 31-23. - Restoration of a nonconforming use. 
    No building or structure which has been damaged by any cause whatsoever to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the building, immediately prior to the damage, shall be restored except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter and all rights as a nonconforming use are terminated. If a building or structure is damaged by less than fifty (50) percent of the fair market value, it may be repaired or reconstructed and used as before the time of damage, provided that such repairs or reconstruction be substantially completed within twelve (12) months of the date of such damage. 
Sec. 31-24. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
    Any lot of record at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, which is less in area or width than the minimum required by this chapter, may be used provided that a variance of area, lot width, setback, or yard requirements is obtained through action of the board of zoning appeals. 
Sec. 31-25. - Changes in district boundaries. 
    Whenever the boundaries of a district are changed, any uses of land or structures which become nonconforming as a result of such change shall become subject to the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 31-26. - Existence of a nonconforming use. 
    When evidence available to the zoning administrator is deemed by him to be inconclusive as to whether a nonconforming use exists, the board of zoning appeals shall decide the question after public hearing and notice in accordance with the rules of procedure in article X. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 31-27. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    These off-street parking requirements are intended to ensure an efficient transportation and parking system by establishing standards for off-street parking. In any zoning district, all structures built and all uses established hereafter shall provide off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following regulations. Except for existing residential structures, when an existing structure or use is expanded, off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations. 
(a)  General provisions for off-street parking. 
(1)  Location: The off-street parking facilities required by this article shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land that they are intended to serve; provided, however, that when the site or shape of land, or a nonconforming building or structure presently existing on the parcel of land, prevents the establishment of such facilities on the same lot or parcel, they may be permitted on a properly zoned lot or parcel within four hundred (400) feet of the premises they are to serve. Before such parking facilities are approved, a written agreement thereto assuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney, and shall be filed with the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Shared: Required off-street parking spaces may be provided cooperatively for two (2) or more nonresidential uses, subject to arrangements that will assure the permanent availability of such spaces to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator. A reduction in the off-street parking required for each separate use may be allowed when the separate uses involve differing hours of operation, days of operation, or other circumstances that clearly demonstrate that the separate uses will not experience simultaneous peak-hours of usage. 
(3)  Principal use: All off-street parking facilities shall be used solely for the parking of vehicles in operating condition by patrons, occupants or employees of the use to which such parking is accessory. No motor vehicle repair work, except emergency service, no storage of merchandise, and no motor vehicles for sale, shall be permitted in association with any required off-street parking facilities. 
(4)  Change in use: Whenever a building or use is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need under the requirements of this article for an increase in parking spaces of ten (10) percent or more, such additional spaces shall be provided on the basis of the change or enlargement. 
(5)  Residential garage: For residential uses in which one or more private garage spaces are provided, each space located inside a private garage based on the designed intent of the structure shall be considered as one-half (1/2) of an off-street parking space for purposes of determining if the minimum off-street parking requirement has been met. 
(6)  Trailers, commercial or residential: Trailers shall not be occupied for residential or business purposes in any district of the city, except that contractors may park or temporarily store equipment trailers and office trailers when necessary to the construction or improvement of a structure; provided that the trailers are located on the same site as the construction or improvement, and that the trailers are removed promptly at the completion of the construction or improvement and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or phasing. 
(7)  Front yards: Parking of vehicles is not allowed on front yards of any property. Parking is permitted only in approved driveways, parking stalls or parking spaces. 
(b)  Design standards for off-street parking. 
(1)  Minimum area: For the purpose of these regulations, an off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet and dimensions of at least nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet, exclusive of access drives and aisles, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one (1) vehicle and connected with a street or alley by a paved driveway which affords ingress and egress for an automobile without requiring another automobile to be moved. Compact spaces are not permitted. 
(2)  Surfacing: Off-street parking areas, service areas, interior travel lanes, or driveways shall be surfaced with a stable material, such as asphalt or concrete, in accordance with specifications approved by the public works department. The use of grass pavers may be permitted in low-traffic areas (i.e., overflow parking for places of assembly, temporary events, etc.) upon approval from the city, where it can be demonstrated that the vegetation will survive the amount of expected traffic. 
(3)  Drainage and maintenance: Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking areas in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property, public streets, or toward buildings. Required parking areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly, dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee. 
(4)  Delineating parking spaces: Whenever five (5) or more parking spaces are provided, such spaces shall be laid out on the parking surface with paint, plastic stripping, curbs, or other means to indicate individual spaces. 
(5)  Separation from walkways and streets: Off-street parking spaces shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, or streets by a wall, fence, curbing, bumper guard, or other protective device, or by distance so that vehicles cannot protrude over publicly owned areas or roll onto adjacent property. 
(6)  Access to street: Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. A landscaped strip five (5) feet in width, curbing, or approved barriers, continuous except for entrances and exits, shall be provided along the boundaries of any off-street parking area that abuts or adjoins a public street, alley, or public right-of-way in order to control entrance and exit of vehicles or pedestrians. 
(7)  Maneuvering lanes: All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes of sufficient width to serve interior traffic movement. Backing directly onto a public street shall be prohibited. 
(8)  Lighting: Adequate lighting shall be provided if off-street parking spaces are to be used at night. Any lights used to illuminate said parking areas shall be so arranged and hooded as to confine all direct light rays entirely within the boundary lines of the parking area. 
(9)  Charging stations: Parking spaces that meet the minimum requirements may also include charging stations for electric vehicles as indicated on the submitted site plan. 
(10)  Landscaping and screening: All off-street parking areas shall comply with the "landscaping and screening requirements" of section 31-33. Parking areas shall be arranged for functional efficiency and safety for both vehicles and pedestrians and shall be designed to be amenable to surrounding property. Parking areas, accessory or otherwise, shall comply with the following: 
The parking lot shall be constructed so that spaces are grouped into bays. At the end of each bay, a landscape island of at least nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length shall be built to separate the bays from each other and from traffic lanes. When the parking bays contain double rows of parking spaces, the landscape island shall be increased to nine (9) feet in width and thirty-six (36) feet in length. A parking bay shall not be constructed to a length of more than ninety (90) feet without constructing a landscape island. The city may approve islands, which vary from 9-foot by 18-foot or 9-foot by 36-foot rectangles in order to provide desirable geometric design features such as rounded corners and angles to facilitate maneuvering of automobile traffic. In no case shall the total island area be decreased as a result of a design change. 

(11)  Handicap accessible parking: Every use shall include the number of handicap accessible off-street parking spaces set forth in the Public Facilities Manual (PFM) and in conformance with the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VUSBC), as amended from time to time, including its reference to the American National Standards Institute specifications. The number of parking spaces for handicapped persons shall be included in the total required spaces. Each such parking space shall be identified by an above-grade sign, which meets the requirements of the director of public works. 
(12)  Parallel parking: Parallel parking spaces shall have a minimum length of twenty-two (22) feet and a minimum width of nine (9) feet. 
(13)  Bumper guards: Off-street parking areas shall have appropriate bumper guards where needed, as determined by the director of public works. Header curbs may be substituted for bumper guards, provided they are located at least ten (10) feet from any property line. This will avoid vehicle overhang into adjacent properties. 
MINIMUM OFF-STREET 
PARKING AREA DIMENSIONS Parking angle 45° 60° 90° Width of stall (feet) 9.0 9.0 9.0 Depth of stall (feet) 19.0 20.0 18.0  

(c)  Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
Use Type Required Off-Street Spaces Residential and lodging uses Single-family dwelling (detached) 2 space;i§\i; for each dwelling unit Multiple-family dwelling 1.75 spaces for each dwelling unit, plus 1 space for each 10 dwelling units Townhouses (single-family attached) 2 spaces for each dwelling, plus 1 space for each 3 dwelling units Residential human care facility 1 space per living unit Nursing or convalescent facility 0.67 space per living unit Hotel, motel 1.3 spaces per room Educational uses Nursery school, kindergarten 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per 20 students Child care center 1 space per 250 square feet Elementary, intermediate, junior high school; public or private 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per 20 students High school or college; private or public 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per 10 students Medical uses Doctor's or dentist's office; clinic 1 space per 250 square feet Hospital 1 space per 300 square feet Animal hospital 2 spaces per examination room, plus 1 space per day shift employee Institutional and cultural uses Religious institution 1 space per 4 seats in the main place of assembly or 60 square feet of floor area Art gallery, library, museum 1 space per 500 square feet Private club, lodge, meeting hall 1 space per 65 square feet Entertainment and recreational uses Community center, dance hall, motion picture theater:  With fixed seats 1 space per 4 seats  Without fixed seats 1 space per 100 square feet Amphitheater, sports arena, stadium 1 space per 5 seats or per 10 feet of bench space Bowling alley 4 spaces per lane, plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift Golf course 5 spaces per hole Indoor swimming pool, skating rink, recreation center, and similar establishment 1 space per 125 square feet of usable recreational or social floor area Outdoor swimming pool, skating rink, miniature golf, and similar establishment 1 space per 200 square feet of usable and improved recreational area Business uses Retail sales establishments (unless otherwise specified) 1 space per 250 square feet Furniture, hardware, appliance, home furnishings establishments 1 space per 400 square feet Motor vehicle repair shop 3 spaces per bay Restaurant 1 space per 100 square feet of seating area, plus 1 space per 400 square feet of non-seating area Restaurant, drive-in 1 space per 100 square feet of seating area, plus 1 space per 400 square feet of non-seating area Shopping center 1 space per 250 square feet Wholesale trade 1 space per 1,250 square feet Financial institution 1 space per 250 square feet Funeral home 1 space per 150 square feet of assembly area Car wash: Manned 10 stacking spaces per bay Vehicle sale, rental and service establishment 1 customer vehicle space per 500 square feet Service uses Barber, beauty salon 1 space per 500 square feet Laundry, self-service 1 space per 500 square feet Dry cleaning establishment 1 space per 500 square feet Repair service establishment 1 space per 800 square feet Other personal or business service establishment 1 space per 500 square feet Office uses Business, governmental, professional office building, excluding doctor's or dentist's office 1 space per 300 square feet Industrial uses Manufacturing and industrial plants 1 space per 800 square feet Warehousing and storage 1 space per 1,250 square feet  
(d)  Interpretation of specific requirements: 
(1)  The above off-street parking requirements are in addition to space for storage of trucks or other vehicles used in connection with any use. Any spaces in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the minimum number required are to be located in a multi-level parking structure that will serve the proposed uses. 
(2)  Where fractional space results, the parking spaces required shall be rounded to the next highest whole number. 
(3)  Seasonal variations in employment may be recognized in determining the average day. 
(4)  Floor area shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use, excluding areas designated for stairwells, elevators, hallways, restrooms, storage space, and escalators. 
(5)  In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces shall be provided proportional to the required spaces for each use. 
(6)  The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed in this article shall be the same as for a listed use of similar characteristics of parking demand generation. Where there is no similar general type of use listed, the zoning administrator shall determine the basis for the number of spaces to be provided based on the similarity to the use type presented herein. 
(e)  Bicycle parking: These standards are intended to promote the use of alternative transportation throughout the city and to create a healthier, multimodal community. The availability of bicycle parking improves access to commercial areas in simple and efficient ways, reducing the need for automobiles and vehicular parking spaces over time. 
(1)  Maneuvering areas . All required bicycle parking must meet all of the following minimum criteria: 
a.  The parking area must accommodate the maneuvering standards or, for bicycle parking provided with vertical space-saving racks, as set forth in the figure below. 
b.  When in use, each parking space must be accessible without moving another parked bicycle. 

c.  The maneuvering area provided alongside or behind the bicycle parking spaces may extend into portions of a public right-of-way but not those portions established as a motor vehicle lane, motor vehicle drive aisle, off-street parking space, or any landscaped area. 
(2)  Surfacing . The surface of the bicycle parking area shall be improved with a dustless, hard surface and shall not include any gravel, dirt, sand or turf. 
(3)  Visibility . Whenever the bicycle parking area is not visible from either the street or the entrance of the principal building, a sign shall be posted at the entrance of the principal building indicating the location of the bicycle parking. 
(4)  Parking spaces . Except where indicated otherwise in this section, every use shall include the number of bicycle vehicle parking spaces indicated under the classifications and formulae set forth in the bicycle parking requirements table below. If a particular use is not specified in the table, then the number of spaces required shall be established by the zoning administrator based on the indicated use type category (i.e., commercial, public facilities, etc.). 
(5)  Exemptions . 
a.  No bicycle parking spaces are required for any single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, group home, or industrial use. 
b.  No bicycle spaces are required for any residential use located on property in the business zoning districts. 
Bicycle Parking Requirements Use Type City Center 
Redevelopment District All Other Areas Multiple-Family Dwelling 1 per 4 dwelling units 1 per 6 dwelling units Commercial Use (except as listed below) 1 per 1,200 gross square feet 1 per 2,000 gross square feet  Auto-dependent uses: Auto rental/repair/sales/car wash 6 per 20,000 gross square feet 4 per 20,000 gross square feet (short-term)  Hotel 1 per 20 lodging units 1 per 40 lodging units  Office uses (medical/general) 1 per 1,200 gross square feet 1 per 2,000 gross square feet  Place of assembly 1 per 1,200 gross square feet of assembly area 1 per 1,500 gross square feet of assembly area Public Facilities 1 per 1,200 gross square feet 1 per 1,500 gross square feet  
(Ord. No. 86-1700-342, 9-2-86; Ord. No. 89-1700-393, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 06-1700-812, §§ a, b, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 16-1700-981, § 1, 1-5-16) 
Sec. 31-28. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    These off-street loading requirements are intended to ensure an efficient transportation and loading system by establishing standards for commercial loading areas. In any zoning district, all structures built and all uses established hereafter shall provide off-street loading spaces in accordance with the following regulations. When any existing structure or use is expanded to the extent of increasing the floor area by twenty-five (25) percent or more, accessory off-street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations. 
(a)  General provisions for off-street loading: 
(1)  All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same or a contiguous lot as the use served. 
(2)  Required off-street loading spaces may be provided cooperatively for two (2) or more uses, subject to arrangements acceptable to the city that will assure the permanent availability of such spaces. 
(3)  No loading space shall be located in a required front yard, except in the I-1 Industrial district. 
(4)  No required off-street loading area shall be used to satisfy the space requirement for any off-street parking facilities and no loading area shall be located so as to interfere with the free circulation of vehicles in any off-street parking area. 
(5)  No motor vehicle repair work, except emergency service, shall be permitted in association with any required off-street loading facility. 
(b)  Design standards for off-street loading: 
(1)  Access to street: All spaces shall be provided with safe and convenient access to a street. Ingress and egress shall be provided only through clearly limited and defined driveway openings. 
(2)  Surfacing: Off-street loading areas, including aisles and driveways, shall be constructed and maintained with a stable surface, such as asphalt or concrete, in accordance with specifications approved by the director of public works. 
(3)  Dimensions: For the purpose of these regulations, a loading space is a space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and other vehicles, having a minimum width of twelve (12) feet, a minimum depth of thirty-five (35) feet, and a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet. Such loading space shall be located so that no part of the vehicle is on any public right-of-way. Vertical clearance for a loading space for a funeral home may be reduced to eight (8) feet. 
(4)  Drainage: Off-street loading facilities shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the loading area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property, public streets, or toward buildings. 
(5)  Lighting: Any lights used to illuminate off-street loading areas shall be so arranged and hooded as to confine all direct light rays entirely within the boundary lines of the loading area. 
(6)  Landscaping and screening: All off-street loading areas shall comply with the provisions of section 31-33. 
(c)  Off-street loading requirements by use type: 
Use or 
Use Category Floor Area 
(Square Feet) Loading 
Spaces 
Required Commercial Up to 10,000 1 Each additional 10,000 1 Office Up to 5,000 None Greater than 5,000 1 Industrial 10,000 to 40,000 1 40,001 to 100,000 2 Each additional 100,000 1 Public Facilities and Religious Institutions 10,000 to 40,000 1 40,001 to 100,000 2 Each additional 100,000 1  
(Ord. No. 07-1700-837, §§ 1, 2 7-17-07; Ord. No. 16-1700-981, § 1, 1-5-16) 
Sec. 31-29. - General sign regulations.[8] 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Signs obstruct views, distract motorists, displace alternative uses for land, and pose other problems that legitimately call for regulation. The purpose of this section is to regulate the size, color, illumination, movement, materials, location, height and condition of all signs placed on private property for exterior observation, thus ensuring the protection of property values, the character of the various neighborhoods, the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community, protection against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas and the safety and welfare of pedestrians and wheeled traffic, while providing adequate communication through signage while encouraging aesthetic quality in the design, location, size and purpose of all signs. This section shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. If any provision of this section is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding shall not affect the validity of other provisions of this article, which can be given effect without the invalid provision. 
(2)  Signs not expressly permitted as being allowed by right or by specific requirements in another portion of this chapter are forbidden. 
(3)  A sign placed on land or on a building for the purpose of identification, protection or directing persons to a use conducted therein shall be deemed to be an integral but accessory and subordinate part of the principal use of land or building. 
(4)  This section establishes limitations on signs in order to ensure they are appropriate to the land, building or use to which they are appurtenant and adequate for their intended purpose, while balancing the individual and community interests identified in paragraph (1). These regulations herein are intended to promote signs that are compatible with the use of both the property to which they are appurtenant and the landscape and architecture of surrounding buildings, are legible and appropriate to the activity to which they pertain, are not distracting to motorists, and are constructed and maintained in a structurally sound and attractive condition. 
(5)  These regulations distinguish between portions of the city designed for primarily vehicular access and portions of the city designed for primarily pedestrian access. 
(6)  These regulations do not regulate every form and instance of visual speech that may be displayed anywhere within the jurisdictional limits of the city. Rather, they are intended to regulate those forms and instances that most likely meaningfully affect one or more of the purposes set forth above. 
(7)  These regulations do not entirely eliminate all of the harms that may be created by the installation and display of signs. Rather, they strike an appropriate balance that preserves ample channels of communication by means of visual display while still reducing and mitigating the extent of the harms caused by signs. 
(8)  These regulations are not intended to and do not apply to signs erected, maintained or otherwise posted, owned or leased by the federal government or the government of the Commonwealth of Virginia or of the city. The inclusion of "government" in describing some signs is not intended to subject the government to regulation, but to instead help illuminate the types of signs that fall within the immunities of the government from regulation. 
(b)  Substitution clause. Signs containing non-commercial speech are permitted anywhere that signs containing commercial speech are permitted and shall comply with all requirements of this section. 
(c)  Definitions. The words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Affix: To stick, attach or fasten an object to something else. 
(2)  A-frame sign: A portable two-faced sign with supports that are connected at the top and separated at the base, forming an "A" shape. These are also referred to as "sandwich board signs" is ordinarily in the shape of an "A" or some variation thereof, 
(3)  Address sign: A sign that designates the street number and/or street name for identification purposes, as designated by the United States Postal Service. 
(4)  Alter: To change in the size or shape of an existing sign or to replace a sign face. 
(5)  Air-activated sign: A sign, all or any part of, which is designed to be moved by action of forced air so as to make the sign appear to be animated or otherwise have motion. See also balloon sign. 
(6)  Awning sign: A sign painted on, printed on or attached flat against the surface of an awning that is a shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of non-rigid material on a supporting framework. 
(7)  Balloon sign: A sign that is an air-inflated object, which may be of various shapes, made of flexible fabric, resting on the ground or a structure, and equipped with a portable blower motor that provides a constant flow of air into the device. Balloon signs are restrained, attached or held in place by a cord, rope, cable or similar method. See also air-activated sign. 
(8)  Banner sign: Canvas, plastic fabric or similar lightweight, non-rigid material that can be mounted to a structure with cord, rope, cable or a similar method. If such sign is supported by stakes in the ground, it shall be considered a yard sign. 
(9)  Billboard: A sign that describes or calls attention to products, activities or services that are not customarily engaged in, produced or sold on the premises upon which the sign is located, which is either freestanding or displayed on a motor vehicle or trailer, as defined in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia. 
(10)  Building frontage: The linear footage of a building façade that faces a street. 
(11)  Building sign: A sign mounted directly on a building, or attached to the façade, parapet or other element of a building. Such signs shall include awning signs, canopy signs, wall signs and projecting signs. 
(12)  Canopy sign: A sign attached to the soffit or fascia of a canopy of a covered entrance or walkway, which is a permanent structure made of cloth, metal or other material attached or unattached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a building wall. A canopy is not a completely enclosed structure but typically is supported by features other than the building façade, such as structural legs or building extensions. 
(13)  Directional sign: A small permanent sign located near driveway access points and/or at the intersection of internal access drives. 
(14)  Display: Make a prominent exhibition of some object in a place where it can easily be seen. 
(15)  Drive-up sign: Any signage located along a drive-up lane that is oriented toward the customer or user in the drive-up lane. 
(16)  Durable: Able to withstand wear, pressure or damage; hard-wearing and not easily worn over a long duration. 
(17)  Electronic message center: A variable message sign that utilizes computer-generated messages or some other electronic means of changing copy more than once in a twelve (12) hour period and requires approval of a waiver. These signs include displays using incandescent lamps, light emitting diodes (LEDs), liquid-crystal display (LCDs) or a flipper matrix. 
(18)  Erect: To construct or install a building, wall or other structure. 
(19)  Flag: A sign made of non-rigid material such as canvas or vinyl and having no enclosing or supporting framework. A flag is usually rectangular or triangular and is attached at one end to a pole. Often intended for temporary use, a flag can be woven, screen-printed or painted. 
(20)  Freestanding sign: Any sign supported upon the ground by a monument, pedestal, pole bracing or other permanent measure and not attached to any building. 
(21)  Master sign plan: A comprehensive plan of signage for a multi-tenant shopping centers, office complex, industrial park or the nonresidential portions of a property zoned MUD or PUD that is subject to approval of a waiver and allows for the modifications to the sign regulations resulting in a superior design that compliments the layout, architecture and distinctive elements of a development. 
(22)  Mixed use: Refers to a parcel or lot of record, or a structure constructed thereon, zoned to the MU-D, downtown mixed-use zoning district. 
(23)  Monument sign: A ground mounted sign where the sign face is set on a base or platform and has no visible support structure. 
(24)  Double-faced sign: A sign having two (2) display faces, where the sign faces are not mounted back to back and where the faces are such that the interior angle of the faces is greater than ninety (90) degrees and not being a three-way dimensional sign. 
(25)  Multifamily: Refers to a parcel or lot of record, or a structure constructed thereon that accommodates more than one dwelling unit. 
(26)  Nonconforming sign: Any sign lawfully installed that due to the adoption or amendment of this Code does not meet the current regulations. 
(27)  Nonresidential: Refers to a parcel or lot of record, or a structure constructed thereon primarily for agricultural, commercial, industrial, public or institutional purposes. 
(28)  Off-premises sign: A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
(29)  On-premises sign: A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered on the same lot, parcel, site or property where the sign is located. 
(30)  Pennant: A triangular or irregular piece of fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, commonly attached by strings, strands or supported on small poles, intended to flap in the wind. 
(31)  Permanent sign: A sign permitted by this ordinance to be located on the premises for an unlimited period of time and designed to be permanently attached to a structure or the ground. 
(32)  Portable sign: A sign that is capable of being transported because it is lighter and smaller in size. See A-frame and T-frame signs. 
(33)  Projecting sign: A sign that is affixed to a building or wall and extends more than eighteen (18) inches beyond the face of such building or wall. A projecting sign shall also include a sign hung under an arcade. 
(34)  Reader board: A sign or portion of a sign where it is possible to change the copy on a frequent basis but where such sign change must be manually made and is not made electronically. 
(35)  Roof sign: A sign located in whole or in part upon or above the highest point of a building with a flat roof or the lowest portion of a roof for a building with a pitched roof. 
(36)  Sign: Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof situated outdoors or adjacent to the interior of a window or doorway which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means including words, letters, pictures, logos, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. A sign not visible from any adjacent right-of-way is not considered a sign for purposes of this ordinance. 
(37)  Single family: A parcel or lot of record, or a structure constructed thereon that accommodates a single dwelling unit, whether it is a single family attached or detached dwelling unit. 
(38)  Subdivision sign: A sign placed at the entrance of a subdivision from the public right-of-way. 
(39)  Temporary sign: Any sign which is movable, not permanently attached to the ground, a structure or other sign, designed or constructed in such a manner that it can be moved or relocated without involving any structural or support changes, intended for a limited period of display or constructed out of cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard or other like materials. 
(40)  T-frame sign: A portable sign that is ordinarily in the shape of an upside down "T" or some variation thereof, which is readily moveable and is not permanently attached to the ground or any structure. 
(41)  Wall sign: A sign attached directly to an exterior wall of a building and which does not extend above the roof line more than eighteen (18) inches from or beyond the limits of the outside wall, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall. Murals and other painted signs are considered wall signs pursuant to this section. 
(42)  Window sign: Any sign viewable through and/or affixed in any manner to a window or exterior glass door such that it is intended to be viewable from the exterior including, but not limited to, window paintings and signs located inside a building but visible primarily from the outside of the building. This does not include merchandise and other displays located in a window or print intend to be viewable from the interior of a building. 
(43)  Wind sail sign: A temporary sign that is constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic fabric or similar lightweight, non-rigid material that is supported by a single vertical pole mounted into the ground or on a portable structure. 
(44)  Yard sign: Any temporary sign placed on the ground or attached to a supporting structure, posts or poles, that is not attached to any building. 
(d)  Administration. 
(1)  Except for those signs listed in subsection (h) below, no sign shall be erected, posted, painted, altered, or relocated until a permit for such sign has been issued by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Each sign permit shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of the following information for each sign: rendering of sign design and support structure, dimensions of sign area and any support structure; a site plan showing proposed location(s); method of illumination, if any; method of fastening such sign; contact information of property owner, sign owner and sign company; and, if applicable, approval of the waiver for a master sign plan or electronic message center. 
(3)  An application for a sign permit shall include payment of the review fee in the amount established by the fee schedule. 
(4)  A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six (6) months after the date of the issuance of the permit. 
(5)  Any sign for which a sign permit has been granted shall be subject to inspection by the zoning administrator. If the sign fails to pass inspection, the sign shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(6)  All signs shall meet the structural requirements set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(e)  Revocation of sign permit. The zoning administrator may revoke a sign permit under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Information provided in the application was materially false or misleading; 
(2)  The sign as installed does not conform to the approved sign permit application; 
(3)  The sign violates the zoning ordinance, building code or other law, regulation or ordinance. 
(f)  Sign measurement and calculations. 
(1)  Sign height shall be measured from the average grade at the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign structure. Property grade may not be modified immediately adjacent to a sign unless the modified grade is shown on an approved site plan. 
(2)  If the proposed sign location is below the grade of the adjacent roadway, the sign height shall be measured from the adjacent road elevation closest to the base of the sign. 
(3)  Sign area is the area within a circle, triangle, parallelogram, or trapezoid enclosing the extreme limits of any message including writing, representation, pictorial elements, emblems or figures of similar character, together with all material, color or lighting that either forms an integral part of a display or differentiates the message from the background against which it is placed. 
(4)  For double-faced signs, only one (1) display face shall be measured in computing total sign area provided the faces are either parallel or have an internal angle between its two (2) faces of no more than forty-five (45) degrees. If one side is larger than the other the larger of the two shall be used to calculate sign area. 
(g)  Sign illumination. Lighting shall be the minimum necessary to be visible at nighttime and shall not create a distraction or other hazard, such as pinpoint glare, to vehicular traffic. 
(1)  In the case of indirect lighting, the source shall be so shielded that it illuminates only the face of the sign. Indirect lighting shall consist of full cut-off or directionally shielded lighting fixtures that are aimed and controlled so that the directed light shall be substantially confined to the sign to minimize glare, sky glow and light trespass. The beam width shall not be wider than that needed to light the sign. The light source shall have a neutral hue and be consistent for all fixtures illuminating a single sign. 
(2)  Internal illumination and halo illumination shall not be permitted to have an illumination spread of more than .05 foot candle at the lot line, shine into on-coming traffic, affect highway safety, or shine directly into or upon a residential dwelling unit. The background of internally illuminated signs shall be designed so that the illumination only penetrates the letters, logos, symbols, or other message copy. 
(3)  Internally illuminated wall signs shall not be placed on any building elevation that faces an adjacent residential property. 
(h)  Signs not requiring a permit. The following signs are exempt from the permit process but shall still comply with all applicable safety, lighting, height and area location standards established in this section. 
(1)  Address signs. 
(2)  Flags. 
(3)  Holiday decorations. 
(4)  Home occupation signs. 
(5)  Light pole banners, provided they are located on-site in commercial and mixed use developments, there are no more than two (2), double-faced banners per light standard, are limited to six (6) square feet in size per banner, have a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet above grade, and are placed no higher than the maximum height of the light pole. 
(6)  Signs associated with approved temporary uses. 
(7)  Signs installed by city governmental agencies on city-owned property. 
(8)  Signs or notices issued by any court, officer or other person or organization in performance of a public duty or required by law to be posted. 
(9)  Signs not visible from the public right-of-way that do not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. 
(10)  Signs posted on accessory structures that are customarily found and incidental to any permitted nonresidential use, provided such sign is no greater than two (2) square feet in size. 
(11)  Temporary signs, as regulated by subsection (k) below. 
(12)  Traffic control devices (TCDs) as identified in the latest version of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and other State and City design standards related to traffic control or management that are installed by Manassas Park Department of Public Works or the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(13)  Window signs, provided coverage does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the window area. 
(i)  Prohibited signs. 
(1)  Any sign that violates any provision of any law of the state or federal government relative to outdoor advertising. 
(2)  Any sign that violates any provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(3)  Any sign that obscures a sign or signal displayed by a governmental authority. 
(4)  Any sign, except an off-premises sign that complies with subsection (l) below, that advertises an activity, business, product, or service no longer conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
(5)  Any sign that is a copy or imitation of or which for any reason is likely to be confused with any traffic-control sign or signal used or displayed by a public authority. 
(6)  Any sign within the triangular area at the street corner of a corner lot described in section 31-31 of this chapter. 
(7)  Any sign that obstructs any window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder, or opening intended to produce light, air, ingress, or egress for any building, as required by law. 
(8)  Balloon signs. 
(9)  Air-activated signs. 
(10)  Pennants and spinners. 
(11)  Any sign, except an official notice from the city or a public utility company, that is nailed, tacked, posted, or in any other manner attached to any utility pole or structure for supporting wire, cable, or pipe, or to any tree on any street or sidewalk or to public property of any description. 
(12)  Any sign or illumination that causes any direct glare into or upon any building or property other than the building or property to which the sign may be related, or which the direct or reflected light from primary light sources creates a traffic hazard to operators of motor vehicles on public roads. 
(13)  Any sign displaying flashing or intermittent lights, or other lights of changing degrees of intensity, brightness or color, unless approved as a waiver for an electronic message center. 
(14)  Roof signs. 
(15)  Billboards. 
(j)  Signs allowed by zoning district. Signs shall be permitted by district in accordance with the following table. 
A-1, R-1, R-2 B-1, B-2, B-3 I-1, I-2 PUD, MU-D PF Residential Nonresidential Residential Nonresidential or Mixed Use SF MF SF MF Permanent Freestanding Signs Directional X P P P P X P P P Drive-Up X X X P X X X P X Residential Development/Subdivision P P X X X P P X X Other monument signs X P P P P X X P P Permanent Building Signs Awing or Canopy X P P P P X P P P Projecting X P P P P X P P P Wall X P P P P X P P P Reader Boards and Electronic Message Centers Reader Boards P P P P P P P P P Electronic Message Centers W W W W W W W W W Portable Signs A-frame or T-frame X X X X X X X P P Temporary Signs Yard P P P P P P P P P Banner P P P P P P P P P Wall P P P P P P P P P Wind Sail X P X P P X P P P Off-Premises Signs Freestanding X X X P P X X P 1 X  
[Key:] SF = Single Family; MF = Multifamily; P = Permitted; 
 X = Not Permitted; W= Requires a waiver; 
P 1 = Permitted only in commercial areas of PUD; not permitted in MU-D. 
(k)  Temporary signs. 
(1)  General provisions. 
a.  Temporary signs do not require approval of a sign permit. 
b.  Temporary signs shall be on-premises signs. 
c.  Temporary signs shall be constructed and maintained according to the standards, specifications and regulations of this section. 
d.  Temporary signs shall not be mounted, attached, affixed, installed or otherwise secured in a manner that will make the sign a permanent sign. 
e.  No on-premises temporary signs shall be mounted, attached, affixed, installed or otherwise secured to or above the roof or roofline of any structure. 
f.  No on-premises temporary signs shall be internally or externally illuminated. 
g.  Temporary signs shall be properly secured to their framing and the ground or structure to which they are attached. 
h.  Temporary signs shall not be attached to any permitted sign or its associated support structure. 
i.  With the exception of A-frame and T-frame signs, no temporary sign shall be placed in the right-of-way. 
j.  The posting of temporary signs requires permission of the property owner. 
(2)  Temporary signs on properties for sale or lease. 
a.  One temporary sign may be placed on a lot for sale or lease. 
b.  Signs shall be removed no later than fourteen (14) days following the date on which a sale or lease contract was executed. 
c.  Signs shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet from any property line. 
d.  Sign type is limited to yard or banner sign. 
e.  Sign size and height limitations are as follows: 
Temporary Signs on Lots for Sale or Lease Lot Size Maximum Sign Area Maximum Yard Sign Height Maximum Banner Sign Height Less than one (1) acre Six (6) square feet Six (6) Feet No higher than roof line One (1) acre to five (5) acres Fifteen (15) square feet Eight (8) feet No higher than roof line Over five (5) acres Thirty-two (32) square feet Twelve (12) feet No higher than roof line  
(3)  Temporary signs during elections. 
a.  One temporary sign per candidate and per issue on a ballot may be placed on a lot for a period of seventy-five (75) days prior to any federal, state or local election. 
b.  Each sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size. 
c.  Signs shall be removed no later than three (3) days after the date of the election. 
d.  Notwithstanding paragraph (a) above, any sign no greater than six (6) square feet may be placed at a polling station, provided it is located no closer than forty (40) feet from any polling station entrance and is erected no earlier than 12:00 p.m. the day before the election and removed no later than 9:00 a.m. the day after the election. 
(4)  Temporary signs on single family property. 
a.  A maximum of twenty (20) square feet of temporary signage is permitted. 
b.  Banner signs may be attached to a building, fence or other similar structure. No banner shall be mounted higher than the roofline. 
c.  A banner sign attached to posts and mounted in a yard or landscape area shall be regulated as a temporary yard sign. 
d.  Temporary yard signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
e.  Signs having an area of sixteen (16) square feet or greater shall only be permitted for a maximum of ninety (90) days in a consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365) day period. 
(5)  Temporary signs on nonresidential property and multifamily property. 
a.  Any nonresidential use located in the City Center Redevelopment District may have one (1) T-frame or A-frame sign. Such sign may be displayed on the sidewalk, provided it is removed daily and does not interfere with pedestrian traffic. 
b.  Up to two (2) of the following signs, or any combination thereof, may be displayed on nonresidential property, multifamily property or mixed use property for a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) days within a consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365) day period: 
1.  Banner or building signs. 
i.  Banner signs may be attached to a building, fence or other similar structure. A banner sign attached to posts and mounted in a yard or landscape shall be regulated as a temporary yard sign. 
ii.  The maximum sign area of any single banner or building sign shall be twenty (20) square feet. 
iii.  A banner or building sign shall not be mounted higher than the roofline. 
2.  Wind sail signs. 
i.  The maximum dimensions of a wind sail sign shall be fifteen (15) feet in height and three (3) feet in width. 
ii.  Every wind sail sign shall be set back from any property line a distance equal to its height. 
3.  Yard signs. 
i.  Each sign face that can be seen from the public right-of-way shall count as a sign. 
ii.  The temporary yard sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height or thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
(l)  Off-premises signs. 
a.  Off-premises signs shall require permission from the property owner or his designated agent as part of the sign permit application. 
b.  Off-premises signs shall only be located on property that is zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1, I-2, and commercial areas of a PUD. 
c.  An off-premises sign shall be a freestanding sign. 
d.  Off-premises signs shall be constructed of materials that are durable enough to safely, securely and effectively meet the proposed duration of such sign. 
e.  Off-premises signs shall have a maximum height of eight (8) feet and a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet. 
f.  There shall be a maximum of two (2) off-premises signs per property. 
g.  An off-premises sign permit is only valid for six (6) months, but may be renewed for another six (6) months up to two (2) times. 
(m)  Permanent freestanding signs. 
(1)  Directional signs. 
a.  Where permitted, there shall be no more than one sign per driveway intersection with any street; 
b.  The maximum sign area shall be five (5) square feet; and 
c.  The maximum sign height shall be three (3) feet. 
(2)  Drive-up signs. 
a.  Drive-up signs shall be located on nonresidential property having a drive-up lane. 
b.  One (1) drive-up sign is permitted for each drive-up lane with a maximum sign area of thirty-six (36) square feet each. 
c.  The provisions of subparagraph b above shall not apply to any drive-up sign located in the rear of the building not visible from a public right-of-way or screened with a wall or landscaping or other screening method that fully blocks the view of the drive-up sign as seen from the right-of-way. 
(3)  Monument signs. 
a.  Monument signs for single family residential developments. 
i.  A maximum of two (2) monument signs are permitted at the entrance of any single family residential development. 
ii.  Such signs shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from any property line. 
iii.  The sign area shall be a maximum of thirty-six (36) square feet per sign. 
iv.  The maximum height of such signs shall be twelve (12) feet. 
b.  Monument signs for public facilities and commercial, industrial, multifamily and mixed use properties. Except as qualified below, any lot containing a public facility, mixed use development, commercial, industrial or multifamily use is permitted one (1) monument sign per street frontage with each sign having a maximum height of twelve (12) feet and a maximum sign area of [fifty] (50) square feet. 
i.  When located in the Four Corners Redevelopment District, monuments signs are limited to one (1) per lot with a maximum height of ten (10) feet and fifty (50) square feet of sign area, which may be increased to eighty (80) square feet when located in a shopping center. Any monument sign in the Four Corners Redevelopment District shall have perimeter landscaping at the base consisting of flowers or shrubs that are regularly maintained. 
ii.  When located in a shopping center outside the Four Corners Redevelopment District, monument signs are permitted a maximum sign area of sixty (60) square feet and a maximum height of twelve (12) feet. 
iii.  When located in an industrial park, monument signs are permitted a maximum sign area of one hundred (100) square feet and a maximum height of twelve (12) feet. 
(n)  Permanent building signs. 
(1)  Building signs include canopy, awning, wall and projecting signs and are limited based on a total maximum sign area. Roof sign are prohibited. 
(2)  Building signs for multifamily uses and nonresidential uses in agricultural or residential districts shall be limited to a maximum sign area of twenty-four (24) square feet per building frontage. 
(3)  Building signs for commercial and industrial uses, mixed use developments and public facilities shall not exceed two (2) square feet per linear foot of building or tenant frontage. The maximum sign area per tenant shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. 
(4)  Where building frontage is on more than one (1) street, the sign area computed for each frontage shall only be used along the street that the building fronts. 
(5)  No building sign shall project more than five (5) feet from the building front, nor closer than two (2) feet from any curb line. 
(6)  All building signs shall have a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet above a walkway and fifteen (15) feet above a driveway, alley or parking space. 
(7)  Awning signs may be located on or above the vertical fascia or drop leaf. 
(8)  Projecting signs shall be no closer than five (5) feet to a property line. 
(o)  Reader boards. Reader boards are permitted as part of any canopy or monument sign provided the reader board does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the sign area. 
(p)  Signs requiring a waiver. 
(1)  To promote flexibility in design and enhance the compatibility of signage with the architectural and site design features within a development, electronic message centers and master sign plans may be may be submitted for review and approval as a waiver, as provided in section 31-33.2. 
(2)  In addition to the submission requirements in section 31-33.2, a waiver application for signage shall include four (4) sets of the following: 
a.  A map showing the location of each sign; 
b.  A site plan that shows property lines, location of buildings, length of building frontage and street frontage, location of tenant spaces, frontage improvements, parking and landscaped areas; 
c.  Building elevations showing location for all proposed sign options, showing maximum letter and logo height and width and the dimensions between signs and the edges of the façade and roofline; 
d.  Renderings of proposed signage and any support structure that identifying the length, width, height of each sign and its associated support structure; 
e.  Area of each sign; 
f.  Identification of sign materials and type of support structures to include color and texture; 
g.  Proposed illumination; and 
h.  Message change time, transition method, all text and image movements including but not limited to scrolling, flashing, or spinning and all other animated effects, if requesting a reader board or electronic message center. 
(3)  Limitations for electronic message centers. 
a.  Electronic message centers shall be limited to seventy-five (75) percent of the sign area. 
b.  Where permitted, there shall be only one (1) electronic message center per lot with no more than two (2) sign faces. 
c.  Electronic message centers must be designed and equipped to freeze a display in one (1) position if a malfunction occurs. 
d.  Electronic message centers shall be equipped with an automatic dimming photocell that automatically adjusts the display's brightness based on ambient light conditions. 
e.  The brightness level shall not exceed 0.3 foot candles over ambient levels as measured at a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(4)  Limitations for master sign plans. 
a.  A master sign plan is only permitted for multi-tenant shopping centers, office complexes, industrial parks or the nonresidential portions of a property zoned MUD or PUD. 
b.  A master sign plan may include signage that exceeds the requirements of this section in terms of number, type, size and height. 
(5)  In addition to the standards provided in section 31-33.2(d), the planning commission and governing body will evaluate the following factors when considering a signage waiver: 
a.  The proposed signage is appropriate for the architectural and urban design elements of the site; and 
b.  The proposed signage is complementary to the scale and harmony of the development; and 
c.  The proposed signage is compatible with adjacent properties; and 
d.  The proposed signage is architecturally and aesthetically durable. 
(q)  Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Signs which do not conform to the regulations prescribed herein that were erected in accordance with all applicable regulations in effect at the time of their erection may remain except as qualified below. 
(2)  No nonconforming sign shall be enlarged nor shall any feature of a nonconforming sign, such as illumination be increased or added. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent keeping in good repair a nonconforming sign. Nonconforming signs shall not be extended or structurally reconstructed or altered in any manner, unless the nonconforming sign is reduced in area or height. Sign face replacement is permitted provided the new sign face is equal to or smaller than the existing nonconforming sign face. 
(4)  If damaged to an extent greater than fifty (50) percent of its replacement value, it shall not be rebuilt. 
(5)  No nonconforming sign shall be moved for any distance on the same lot or to any other lot unless such change in location will make the sign conform in all respects to the provisions of this section. 
(6)  A nonconforming sign that is destroyed or damaged by any casualty to an extent not exceeding fifty (50) percent of its area may be restored within two (2) years after such destruction or damage but shall not be enlarged in any manner. If such sign is so destroyed or damaged to an extent exceeding fifty (50) percent, it shall not be reconstructed but may be replaced with a sign that is in full accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(7)  A nonconforming sign that has become or is replaced with a conforming sign shall no longer be deemed nonconforming, and thereafter such sign shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(8)  A nonconforming sign shall be removed if 1) it does not meet the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code or 2) the use to which it is accessory has not been in operation for a period of two (2) years or more. Such sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the property. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the zoning administrator or designee shall give the owner thirty (30) days' notice to remove it. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the zoning administrator or designee may enter the property upon which the sign is located and remove any such sign or may initiate such action as may be necessary to gain compliance with this provision. The cost of such removal shall be chargeable to the owner of the property. 
(r)  Sign maintenance and removal. 
(1)  All signs shall be maintained in good working condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The zoning administrator may cause to be removed any sign which shows gross neglect, is dilapidated, has ground area around it that is not well maintained, or is in danger of falling or is otherwise unsafe. 
(2)  A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the business that it advertises or identifies is no longer on the premises. Failure to remove the sign shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(3)  The zoning administrator may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this chapter. The zoning administrator shall give thirty (30) days' notice in writing to the owner of such sign or of the building, structure, or premises on which such sign is located to remove the sign or to bring into compliance. Failure to comply shall constitute grounds for the zoning administrator to have the sign removed at cost to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 85-1700-269, 2-6-85; Ord. No. 01-1700-660, § 1, 4-17-01; Ord. No. 01-1700-661, § 1, 4-17-01; Ord. No. 03-1700-702, § 1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 06-1700-810, § 1, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 07-1700-840, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 08-1700-849, § 1, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 12-1700-930[A], § 1, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 4, 6-19-18; Ord. No. 18-1700-1022, § 1, 7-17-18) 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Outdoor advertising signs generally, § 3-16 et seq. 

Sec. 31-30. - Special height and yard regulations. 
(a)  Structures excluded from maximum height regulations: The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Air conditioning units; 
(2)  Belfries; 
(3)  Chimneys; 
(4)  Church spires; 
(5)  Conveyors; 
(6)  Cooling towers; 
(7)  Elevator bulkheads; 
(8)  Fire towers; 
(9)  Flag poles; 
(10)  Flues; 
(11)  Ornamental towers and spires; 
(12)  Public monuments; 
(13)  Radio and television towers; 
(14)  Scenery lofts; 
(15)  Silos and grain driers; 
(16)  Smokestacks; 
(17)  Transmission towers and cables; 
(18)  Water tanks and towers; 
or other similar roof structures and mechanical appurtenances; provided, however, that no such structure, when located on a building roof, shall occupy an area greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the total roof area; no such structure shall be used for any purpose other than a use incidental to the main use of the building; freestanding structures shall not be located nearer to a lot line than a distance equal to its height; and the height of all buildings and structures located within the approaches to airport landing strips shall be in accordance with the official recommendations of the Federal Aviation Agency as to heights that would not constitute a hazard to the safe air approach to or departure from an airfield. 
(b)  Yards and open space in general: 
(1)  No yard or other open space on any lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other lot. 
(2)  No yard or open space provided on any lot for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be reduced so as to be less in width or area than is required by this chapter. 
(3)  More than one (1) main building may be located upon a lot or tract in the following instances: institutional buildings, public or semi-public buildings, multiple-family dwellings, commercial or industrial buildings, homes for the aged. The provisions of this exception shall not be construed to allow the location or erection of any building outside of the buildable area of the lot. 
(4)  Where these regulations refer to side streets, the zoning administrator shall be guided by the pattern of development in the vicinity of the lot in question in determining which of the two (2) streets is the side street. 
(c)  Yard encroachment: Every part of every required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  Unenclosed porches, platforms, or terraces, with or without roofs, which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend into the front yard setback to within ten (10) feet of the front property line, five (5) feet into a required side yard, and twelve (12) feet into a required rear yard. 
(2)  The depth of any porch attached to the front of a house can be no greater than eight (8) feet. 
(3)  Cornices, eaves, sills, belt courses and similar ornamental features may extend three (3) feet into any required yard. 
(4)  Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes shall not project over five (5) feet into a required yard. 
(5)  Steps or landings not higher than the entrance floor of the building may extend five (5) feet into any required yard. 
(6)  Bay windows and balconies occupying not more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the wall length may extend three (3) feet into any required front or side yard and ten (10) feet into any required rear yard. 
(7)  An unenclosed carport, attached to a dwelling, may extend into any required side yard a distance of not more than five (5) feet, but not nearer to any side lot line than a distance of five (5) feet. 
(d)  Front yards: 
(1)  Where the street width is fifty (50) feet or greater, the front yard shall be measured from the street line. Where the street width is less than fifty (50) feet, the front yard shall be measured from the center line of the Street. However, in all cases, where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a street upon which a lot abuts, then the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
(2)  Buildings on lots that extend through from street to street shall provide the required front yards on both streets, but need not provide the required rear yards in case an equivalent open space is provided in lieu thereof. 
(3)  There shall be a front yard of at least fifteen (15) feet on the side street of a corner lot in any district; provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot shall not be reduced to less than thirty (30) feet. 
(4)  Where the street frontage in a block is partially built up, the minimum front yard for a new building shall be the average of the nearest front yard on either side thereof in the same block, with a variation of five (5) feet permitted, except that no front yard in a residential district shall be less than twenty (20) feet or need be more than seventy-five (75) feet. 
(5)  Excluding off-street parking space and related driveway, no motorized vehicle shall be parked in the front yard. 
(6)  Any lot containing a single-family detached dwelling located in either the R-1 or PUD (residential) zoning district, may have a combined paved area for driveway and parking purposes that does not exceed either twenty (20) feet in width or twenty (20) percent of the width of the front yard, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 85-1700-269, 2-6-85; Ord. No. 04-1700-755, §§ 1, 2, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 04-1700, § 2, 7-20-04) 
Sec. 31-31. - Fences and visual obstructions. 
    Except when used in connection with a public use, fences and other visual obstructions shall be governed by the following standards: 
(a)  Fences: The setback and yard requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit any fence, wall or hedge which is less than four (4) feet high; however, a fence or wall along the rear lot line or along a side lot line to the rear of the required front setback line may be erected to a height not exceeding six (6) feet. 
(1)  Electrified fences (other than invisible fences that are buried underground and that have insulated wiring) and fences using barbed wire are prohibited in all residential districts and residential portion of the PUD Planned Unit Development district and the MU-D Downtown Mixed-Use district. 
(2)  No fencing shall be erected so as to restrict access by emergency equipment to any building. 
(b)  Visual obstructions: 
(1)  On a corner lot, no sign, fence, wall, hedge, planting, or other obstruction to vision exceeding a height of three (3) feet above center-line grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected, planted, or maintained within a distance of twenty (20) feet in either direction from the corner. 
(2)  On all lots, fences, landscaping and other improvements shall be located and maintained in a manner that does not obscure sight distances. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-931, § 1, 7-31-12) 
Sec. 31-32. - Accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  In general: In all districts, accessory uses or structures shall not be located in a front or side yard area, unless specifically provided for elsewhere by the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  In residential districts, all accessory structures located in a rear yard shall be located at least two (2) feet from any side or rear lot line. 
(2)  In residential districts, accessory buildings permitted in rear yards shall not occupy a combined total of more than thirty (30) percent of said yard. 
(3)  In nonresidential districts, no setback from side or rear lot lines shall be required, except the minimum side and rear yard adjoining or adjacent to a residential district shall be ten (10) feet. 
(4)  If a garage is entered from an alley, it shall not be closer than five (5) feet to the alley line in any district. 
(5)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of a main building has actually been commenced; and no accessory building shall be used unless the main building on a lot is completed and used. 
(b)  Major recreational equipment: The use and storage of major recreational equipment, including but not limited to, boats, boat trailers, camping trailers, travel trailers, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, houseboats, horse vans, and utility trailers, shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Such equipment shall not be used for living, sleeping, or other occupancy when parked, or stored on a residential lot, or in any other location not approved for such use. 
(2)  Such equipment not parked or stored in a garage, carport, or other structure may be parked as follows: 
a.  Outside parking in the side yard or the rear yard; or 
b.  Outside parking in the front yard, provided: 
1.  Space is not available or there is no reasonable access to either the side yard or rear yard; a fence is not necessarily deemed to prevent reasonable access; 
2.  The unit is parked perpendicular to the front curb; 
3.  The recreational vehicle is at least ten (10) feet from the face of the curb; 
4.  No part of the recreational vehicle extends over a public sidewalk, easement, or street right-of-way; 
5.  Shall be located at least three (3) feet from all building doors; 
6.  Shall not restrict emergency access operations; and 
7.  Shall be operable and movable at all times. 
c.  Outside parking on the street provided: 
1.  Space is not available or there is no reasonable access to either the side or front yard; a fence is not necessarily deemed to prevent reasonable access; 
2.  The unit is parked parallel to the front curb; 
3.  The recreational vehicle extends no more than seven (7) feet from the face of the curb; 
4.  No part of the unit extends over the side lot line, and into the adjacent property owner's yard; 
5.  The unit complies with the requirements of the city traffic code; and 
6.  The unit is operable and movable at all times. 
(3)  Parking is permitted only if the unit, while parked in accordance with the requirements of subsection (2), is: 
a.  Not used for dwelling purposes. Cooking is not permitted in the recreational vehicle at any time. Butane or propane fuel shall not be used; 
b.  Not connected to sewer, water, or electrical lines; 
c.  Not used for storage of goods, materials, or equipment other than those items considered to be a part of the recreational vehicle or essential for its immediate use; 
d.  Displays current Virginia license plates and city sticker. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) above, a unit may be parked on the premises during active loading or unloading for a maximum of forty-eight (48) hours and use of electricity, propane fuel and water is permitted when necessary to prepare a recreational vehicle for use. 
(5)  Any recreational vehicle owner who cannot comply with the above requirements may make an appeal to the board of zoning appeals. 
a.  Any recreational vehicle owner who is aggrieved by the decision of the zoning administrator or his designee may make a subsequent appeal to the board of zoning appeals for a variance. 
(c)  Home occupations: In any residential district, a home occupation is permitted, provided that the occupation complies with all of the following conditions: 
(1)  No more than one (1) person other than members of the family shall be engaged in such occupations, except that any number of nonfamily/nonresident employees may be permitted if they work off-premises and do not park at the premises. 
(2)  The home occupation shall be in its entirety within the single unit dwelling or in an accessory building which is normally associated with a residential use. 
(3)  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one (1) sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet, nonilluminated. 
(4)  There shall be no outdoor display of goods or outside storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation. 
(5)  Only those articles produced on the premises may be sold from the home occupation. 
(6)  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. 
(7)  Any need for parking generated by the conduct of such occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard. 
(8)  There shall be no more than one (1) commercial vehicle associated with the home occupation parked at the premises at any time, unless authorized as a special exception by the board of zoning appeals. Parking for the home occupation vehicles shall be off-street. 
(9)  A home occupation permit must be obtained from the zoning administrator in accordance with the procedural requirements as established by the governing body. The charge for a home occupation permit shall be in the amount established by the fee schedule. An approved permit shall be made available on request by the zoning administrator. The building inspector shall review all home occupation applications to ensure compliance with all applicable building codes. 
(10)  Internet sale of merchandise. 
(d)  Temporary mobile homes: 
(1)  In any district, construction trailers used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted during the period construction work is in progress, but such temporary facilities shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction work. 
(2)  In the B-2 and I-1 districts, the temporary use of a mobile home for business purposes during construction of permanent facilities is permitted as a special exception from the board of zoning appeals, subject to the following standards: 
a.  Location of the mobile home on the building site shall not interfere with construction of permanent buildings. 
b.  All applicable building code requirements shall be met. 
c.  The mobile home site must be attractively landscaped and parking as required by the board shall be provided. 
d.  The special exception is valid for one (1) year. A one-year extension may be granted by the board provided diligent effort has been made to complete the permanent facilities. 
e.  The temporary mobile home must obtain site plan approval. The location of the mobile home must be shown on the site plan, as well as all permanent facilities. Necessary public improvement and erosion and sedimentation bonds and agreements must be filed proceeding location of the mobile home on the site. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-216, Ex. A, § 2, 4-5-83; Ord. No. 83-1700-225, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 85-1700-269, 2-6-85; Ord. No. 91-1700, 450D, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 95-1700-523, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 04-1700-766, § 1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 5, 6-19-18) 
Cross reference- Parking, § 24-47 et seq. 
Sec. 31-33. - Landscaping and buffering. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to harmonize uses and structures in close proximity to each other which otherwise would be regarded as incompatible and to generally establish a pleasing and attractive environment in the city. More specifically, this section is intended to make incompatible uses compatible by requiring a buffer or screen between incompatible uses in order to minimize the harmful impacts of noise, dust, and other debris, motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusion, and other objectionable activities conducted on or created by an adjoining or nearby use. 
(1)  A landscape plan, prepared by a certified landscape architect, which includes buffer areas, basic landscaping, and screening shall be provided for all development plans, where required by the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Buffer zone required. Buffer areas between adjoining incompatible land uses are required in all zoning districts to reduce or eliminate the incompatibility and to promote woodland conservation areas. 
(1)  There shall be a buffer zone provided between the A-1 Agricultural and R-1, R-2 Residential Districts, and (a) B-1, B-2 Commercial, and (b) I-1 Industrial district uses, in accordance with section 31-33. 
(2)  The zoning administrator may require buffer planting(s) on lots in the R-2 Multiple-Family Residential Districts under the following conditions: 
a.  Between permitted uses in the R-2 District and adjoining single-family dwellings when such plantings will help reduce the incidence of trespassing. 
b.  Both within areas for uses permitted in the R-2 District and along common lot line(s) when such uses are to be located adjacent to R-1 Districts, for the purposes of obscuring objectionable features such as parking lots, rear entrances, utility structures, loading facilities, and recreational areas. 
(3)  Buffer widths shall be: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) feet between residential use and a commercial or industrial building up to and including twenty feet tall (buffer width can be reduced to a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet or ten (10) percent of the total site, which ever is greater, if the buffer area would exceed ten (10) percent of [the] total site). 
b.  Forty (40) feet between a residential use and a commercial or industrial building that is greater than twenty (20) feet tall (buffer width can be reduced to a minimum of thirty (30) feet or ten (10) percent of the total site, which ever is greater, if the buffer area would exceed ten (10) percent of [the] total site). 
c.  One hundred (100) feet between railroad right-of-way and adjoining property if such adjoining property is zoned, used as or planned for residential or agricultural uses. 
(4)  The buffer zone shall be required at the outer boundaries of a lot and may be crossed by joint access connections for either motorized vehicles or pedestrians in order to provide enhanced connectivity between adjacent uses. 
(5)  The buffer zone may be provided within the required minimum yard. 
(6)  Existing trees, particularly mature trees, shall be incorporated into the landscaping of buffer areas to the maximum extent practicable and protected from damage during site development. 
a.  All existing trees shall be surveyed as part of the landscape requirements and have location, species, size, and condition or health noted. Trees that are of good or better quality, and are a desirable species, should be incorporated into the design in their existing location whenever possible. 
b.  When existing trees are preserved in a buffer area, credit towards the required landscaping shall be provided at a rate of one (1) for one (1). Such credit will only apply to the specific area(s) where trees are being preserved, not an entire site. This means that though more trees may be preserved in a defined area of a particular site, in excess of what is required for that area, the surplus, saved trees will not count towards the landscape requirement for other areas on the site. 
c.  Buffer areas are to be undisturbed areas except for the removal of dead, diseased or dying trees and the planting of new trees and shrubs in order to satisfy the planting requirement. 
(c)  Effect on existing development. No parcel developed prior to the effective date of this section shall be required to provide a buffer zone in accordance herewith, but any undeveloped parcel adjacent to such previously developed property shall be required to provide the buffer otherwise required by this section. For purposes of this section, a property shall be deemed previously developed if it is developed in fact, or if it is the subject of an approved site plan on the effective date of this chapter. 
(d)  Buffering requirements. 
(1)  When a section of a buffer area is void or deficient of mature plant coverage then the following plantings shall be required. The buffer zone shall consist of an unbroken strip of open space planted with one (1) large evergreen tree of a minimum height of six (6) feet when planted, likely to reach an ultimate height of forty (40) feet or greater, one (1) planted for every ten (10) linear feet; one (1) medium evergreen tree of a minimum height of six (6) feet when planted, and likely to reach an ultimate height of thirty (30) feet, one (1) planted for every five (5) linear feet; one (1) deciduous tree likely to reach an ultimate height of fifty (50) feet or greater, one (1) planted for every thirty (30) linear feet; and an additional evergreen tree likely to reach an ultimate height of forty (40) feet or greater, one planted for every fifteen (15) linear feet. 
(2)  This standard shall be deemed a performance standard, and the planning and zoning administrator may approve any other buffering which, in his judgment, would provide essentially the same characteristics as the planting required herein. Appeals of decisions of the administrator under this section shall be made to the city council. 
(e)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, agricultural uses shall be those permitted in an A-1 district, residential uses shall be those permitted in an R-1, R-2 or PUD (residential) district, industrial uses shall be those permitted in an 1-1 [I-1] or PUD (industrial) district and commercial uses shall be those permitted in a B-1, B-2, or PUD (commercial) district as defined in the Manassas Park City Zoning Ordinance. 
(f)  Landscaping requirements. Landscaping, as defined, shall be required in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District, B-1 Neighborhood Business District, the B-2 General Business District, and the I-1 Industrial District according to the following specifications: 
(1)  All areas not occupied by buildings, structures, driveways, walkways, off-street parking facilities, or other installations shall be covered by lawn grass and landscaped with one or more of the following: 
a.  Natural shrubbery; 
b.  Plants or trees. 
All shall be properly maintained to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Twenty (20) percent or more of each lot/parcel in the I-1 zone district shall be landscaped area. 
(3)  Inorganic ground cover (i.e., rock, gravel, mulch, etc.) may not be used on more than five (5) percent of any lot, in any zone district. 
(g)  Parking lot landscaping requirements. In all zoning districts in the city, the following provisions shall apply to all off-street parking lots designed for twenty (20) or more spaces: 
(1)  There shall be landscaped open space within the perimeter of the parking areas, in the minimum amount of eight (8) square feet for each parking space, which shall be located so that no parking space is more than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from a portion of the landscaped open space as required. This required landscaped open space need not be continuous, but there shall be at least one (1) tree in each separate area. 
(2)  Peripheral landscaping shall be required along any side of a parking lot that abuts adjoining property, that is not a right-of-way, such that a landscaped strip ten (10) feet in width shall be located between the parking area and the abutting property lines, except where driveway or other openings may be required. At least one (1) tree for each fifty (50) feet shall be planted in said landscaped strip. 
(3)  The primary landscaping materials used in parking lots shall be trees which provide shade or are capable of providing shade at maturity. Shrubs and other live planting material shall be used to complement the tree landscaping, but shall not be the sole contribution to the landscaping. 
(4)  The landscaping areas shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the parking lot. 
(h)  Maintenance. 
(1)  The owner, or his agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance and replacement of all landscaping plantings and materials as may be required by the provisions of this section. 
(2)  All plant material shall be tended and maintained in a healthy, growing condition, replaced when necessary, and kept free of refuse and debris. 
(i)  Buffering modifications. The zoning administrator may attach conditions to modifications which will assure that the results of a modification will be in accordance with the purpose and intent of this section. The buffering requirements may be modified by the zoning administrator in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Buffering requirements may be modified where the adjoining land is designated in the adopted comprehensive plan for a use which would not require the provision of a buffer zone between the land under site plan review and the adjoining property. 
(2)  Buffering requirements may be modified where the adjacent property is zoned to allow a use similar to that of the parcel under site plan review. 
(j)  Screening. 
(1)  On property zoned to the B-1, B-2, I-1, or PUD business or industrial zoning districts, all outdoor storage shall be screened from view at grade level of the building site. All trash receptacles, waste materials, garbage, raw materials, and other objects stored outside shall be screened. No storage shall be permitted between a frontage street and the building line. Screening shall be permanent and shall consist of a six-foot-high fence constructed of wood, stone, brick, or any other material approved by the director of planning and vegetation planted to provide opaque screening. Storage areas shall allow sufficient setbacks to accommodate the screening. 
(2)  On property zoned to the B-1, B-2, I-1, or PUD business or industrial zoning districts that is adjacent to property zoned to the R-1, R-2, PUD residential, or the residential component of property zoned to the M/U zoning district, screening shall be provided to mitigate the impact of incompatible or dissimilar uses or functions that would otherwise have a negative impact on the adjoining property. Screening shall be permanent and shall consist of (i) a six-foot-high fence constructed of wood, stone, brick, or any other material approved by the director of planning, and/or (ii) vegetation planted to provide opaque screening. 
(3)  On property zoned to the PF zoning district that is adjacent to property zoned to the R-1, R-2, PUD residential, or the residential component of property zoned to the M/U zoning district, screening shall be provided to the extent that the planning director determines is necessary to mitigate the impact of an incompatible or dissimilar use or function that would otherwise have a negative impact on the adjoining property. Screening shall be permanent and shall consist of (i) a six-foot-high fence constructed of wood, stone, brick, or any other material approved by the director of planning, and/or (ii) vegetation planted to provide opaque screening. 
(k)  Bonding. 
(1)  A bond in the form of cash bond, letter of credit, surety bond, or certified check, as provided for in section 31-40 of the zoning ordinance, shall be posted for all required planting shown on the approved landscape plan. This bond shall also be used to correct violations for failure to comply with any requirements of this section or with the approved plan. 
(2)  This bond will be released upon acceptance of the site work at the final inspection performed by the city, but not earlier than one (1) year from the planting date. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-225, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 85-1700-269, 2-6-85; Ord. No. 02-1700-697A, § 1, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 03-1700-718, § 1, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 06-1700-813, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 09-1700-864, § 3, 2-17-09) 
Sec. 31-33.1. - Lighting regulations. 
(a)  All outdoor light fixtures located in nonresidential zoning districts shall be designed and shielded so that illumination or glare from such fixtures which falls on the side or rear yard of any adjacent property occupied and zoned for residential purposes does not exceed five tenths (0.5) foot-candles. 
(b)  All outdoor lighting located in a nonresidential zoning district in Manassas Park shall be designed, located and mounted at heights no greater than: 
(1)  Eighteen (18) feet above grade for nondirectional lights; or 
(2)  Thirty-five (35) feet above grade for directional lights. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to light sources on (i) public utility poles in the public right-of-way or to public street lights, which shall meet roadway lighting standards of the Virginia Department of Transportation, for the appropriate roadway classification, or (ii) city-owned property used for a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-712, § 1, 5-20-03) 
Sec. 31-33.2. - Waivers and modifications. 
    The owner of any real property in the city may petition the governing body to waive or modify one (1) or more development standards of this chapter, provided such petition conforms to the following requirements: 
(a)  Each petition for a waiver or modification of development standards shall be submitted to zoning administrator on an approved form, which shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Payment of the application cost in the amount established by the fee schedule. 
(2)  A written statement of justification that demonstrates that (i) the requested waiver or modification conforms to the planned use of the subject property as set forth in the comprehensive plan and (ii) that such waiver or modification fulfills or exceeds the general intent and purpose of this chapter and the specific intent and purpose of the zoning district of the subject property. 
(3)  Four (4) sets of any supportive plans, profiles, or drawings necessary to review the petition. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "development standards" means one (1) of the following: 
 Lot coverage. 
 Setbacks for nonresidential zoning districts. 
 Height of buildings. 
 Parking. 
 Buffers. 
 Landscaping. 
 Approval of master sign plans and electronic message centers. 
(c)  Review of each petition to waive or modify one (1) or more development standards shall conform to the provisions of and procedures set forth in section 31-55 of this chapter. 
(d)  The planning commission may recommend and the governing body may approve or deny all or a portion(s) of any waiver or modification of development standards in their sole discretion. All decisions of the governing body on waiver or modification petitions shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 06-1700-818G, § 1, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 6, 6-19-18; Ord. No. 18-1700-1022, § 2, 7-17-18) 
Sec. 31-33.3. - General regulations for self-storage centers. 
    Where permitted in a particular zoning district, a self-storage center shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  Only dead-storage activities shall be permitted. For the purpose of this section, "dead-storage" means the keeping of goods not in use and not associated with any office, retail, or other business activity conducted on-site. Conducting an office, retail, or other business use from a storage unit shall be prohibited. 
(b)  One (1) office facility for the self-storage business and one (1) dwelling unit for a resident manager shall be permitted on-site in appropriately designed structures. If included, such dwelling unit must be an integral part of the self-storage center, and shall not be freestanding. 
(c)  All storage shall be inside a building. Vehicle parking shall be for tenants and employees only, while they are on-site. With the exception of a single motor vehicle for use by the resident manager, if any, motor vehicles shall not be parked overnight on-site. 
(d)  When facing streets, buildings shall be constructed to include significant brick facades of similar materials and design. The height of any individual storage unit, from floor to ceiling, shall not exceed ten (10) feet. Landscaping shall be provided in all yards facing public roadways in accordance with the standards set forth in section 31-33. On-site lighting shall be at roof level or below. 
(e)  The maximum size for any individual storage unit shall be four hundred (400) square feet of floor area. No loading docks or motorized materials-handling equipment shall be permitted. 
(f)  Storage of gasoline and similar petroleum products, radioactive materials, explosives, and flammable or hazardous chemicals shall be prohibited. The operator of the self-storage center shall include a provision to this effect in each lease used to rent a storage unit and shall post notices to such effect at places likely to be seen by tenants. 
(g)  The minimum lot size for a self-storage center shall be one (1) acre. 
(h)  The standards in subsections (b) and (e) above may be modified or waived by the governing body as part of the approval of a conditional use permit, such modification or waiver to be included therein. 
(i)  Storage of recreation vehicles and boats will be allowed as an accessory use in the I-1 Industrial zoning district, provided that (i) no more than twenty (20) percent of the site's acreage is used for such storage, (ii) no such storage shall be permitted within storage units, (iii) such storage does not block fire lanes or impede the flow of traffic into or on the site, and (iv) boats must be stored on a properly functioning trailer approved for use on the public highways of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(1)  Notwithstanding the restrictions in subsection (f) above, gasoline and similar petroleum products may be stored within a recreation vehicle or boat if fully and properly contained within the vehicle's or boat's combustion engine. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, a recreation vehicle is defined as a vehicle that is (i) built on a single chassis, (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections (e.g., set-up mode), (iii) self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and (iv) designed primarily not to be used as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
(Ord. No. 12-1700-924, § 1, 5-1-12) 
Sec. 31-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 1, adopted May 24, 2011, set out provisions that renumbered § 31-34, which pertained to conditional users permit (cup); guides and standards, as § 31-54.1. 
ARTICLE VII. - SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 31-35. - Statement of intent. 
    The purpose of these requirements is to promote the orderly development of certain activities in the city and to insure that such activities are developed in a manner harmonious with surrounding properties and in the interest of the general public welfare. To achieve these ends and to assure compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter, site plans for certain uses of land shall be submitted to and received by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 31-36. - Developments and uses requiring a site plan. 
    A site plan is required and shall be submitted for each of the following developments or uses: 
(1)  Conditional uses. 
(2)  Planned unit developments. 
(3)  All permitted uses in the R-2 Multiple-Family Districts, except two-family detached dwellings. 
(4)  All permitted uses in the B-1 Districts. 
(5)  All permitted uses in the B-2 Districts. 
(6)  All permitted uses in the I-1 Districts. 
Sec. 31-37. - Procedures for preparation. 
(a)  Site plans or any portion thereof involving engineering, architecture, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be certified by an engineer, architect, or land surveyor authorized by the commonwealth to practice as such. 
(b)  Site plans shall be prepared to a scale of not more than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). 
(c)  A site plan may be prepared in one (1) or more sheets to show clearly the information required by this article and to facilitate the review and approval of the site plan. If prepared in more than one (1) sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. 
(d)  All horizontal dimensions shown on the site plan shall be in feet and decimal fractions of a foot to the closest one hundredth of a foot, and all bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds to the nearest ten (10) seconds. 
(e)  Every site plan shall show the name and address of the owner or developer, the north point, the date, the scale of drawing, and the number of sheets. In addition, it shall reserve a blank space three (3) inches wide and five (5) inches high for the use of the approving authority. 
(f)  Nine (9) copies of the site plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for administrative review. 
(g)  The charge for a site plan submission shall be in the amount established by the fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-214, Ex. B, § 2, 3-1-83; Ord. No. 91-1700-450C, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 7, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 31-38. - Required information on site plans. 
(a)  All site plans shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Location of the tract by an insert may at a scale of not less than one inch equals two thousand feet (1"=2000') indicating the scale, the north arrow, and such information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads, streams and bodies of water, railroads, subdivisions, or other landmarks sufficient to clearly identify the location of the property. 
(2)  A boundary survey of the tract by bearings and distances certified by a licensed land surveyor. 
(3)  A certificate signed by the surveyor or engineer setting forth the source of title of the owner of the tract and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. 
(4)  All existing property lines; existing streets and easements, their names, numbers, and width; the location and sizes of existing sanitary and storm sewers, gas lines, water mains, culverts, and other utilities and their easements; existing buildings; existing watercourses, waterways or lakes and their names; and other existing physical features in or adjoining the project. 
(5)  Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries on the property in question, and on immediately surrounding properties. 
(6)  The present use of all contiguous or abutting property. 
(7)  Existing topography with a maximum of two (2) foot contour intervals. Where existing ground is on a slope of less than two (2) percent, either one (1) foot contours or spot elevations where necessary but not more than fifty (50) feet apart in both directions. 
(8)  Proposed changes in zoning, if any. 
(9)  The location, dimensions, and character of construction of proposed streets, alleys, driveways, and the location, type, and size of vehicular entrances to the site. 
(10)  All off-street parking, loading spaces and walkways indicating type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles, and a specific schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided. 
(11)  All proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities, indicating all pipe sizes, types, and grades and where connection is to be made to city or to other utility systems; all proposed gas lines and other utilities and their easements. 
(12)  The proposed location, general use, number of floors, height and floor area for each building, accessory and main, and where applicable the number, size and type of dwelling units. 
(13)  Proposed finished grading by contours supplemented where necessary by spot elevations. 
(14)  Provisions for the adequate disposition of natural and storm water in accordance with design criteria and construction standards of the city, indicating location, sizes, types, and grades of ditches, catch basins, and pipes and connections to existing drainage systems. 
(15)  Provisions for the adequate control of erosion and sedimentation, indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures that will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and construction. [9] 
(16)  Delineation of any floodplain limits. 
(17)  Location, type, size and height of fencing, retaining walls and screen planting where required under the provisions of this chapter. 
(18)  The location of wooded areas on the property, and the location of trees and wooded areas that will be retained. 
(19)  A landscape plan, drawn to scale, including dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials. 
(20)  The location and dimensions of proposed recreation, open space, and required amenities and improvements, including details of disposition. 
(21)  The location, character, size, height, and orientation of proposed signs and outdoor lighting systems. 
(22)  A site lighting plan, prepared by a qualified engineer, that displays the anticipated intensity of light originating from sources on the subject property, measured at the boundaries of the property. 
(b)  All features and elements of the site plan required by this article shall, in all respects, conform to all applicable provisions and standards of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and this Code including, but not limited to: 
(1)  This chapter and chapters 7, 13.5, 20, 21 and 25 of this Code. 
(2)  The standard of the Virginia Department of Highways and Transportation. 
(3)  The standards of the Virginia Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-712, § 6, 5-20-03) 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 8. 

Sec. 31-39. - Procedure for processing. 
(a)  All applicants for site plan review shall first request a pre-application review conference with the zoning administrator. Before the pre-application review conference, the applicant should submit to the zoning administrator a sketch plan of the proposed development. At this conference, the administrator will inform the applicant about the site plan review process, the requirements of this article, and all other applicable regulation within the city and state codes pertaining to the proposed development. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall review all finalized site plans which are submitted to him pursuant hereto. The administrator shall check the site plan for general completeness and compliance with all applicable requirements. The administrator shall circulate the site plan to the relevant city and state departments, agencies and officials for written comments as to the proposed development's conformance to all applicable standards and requirements and whether approval of the site plan is recommended. The reviewing departments, agencies, and officials may include, but need not be limited to, the city attorney, the director of public works, the city engineer, the city planning director, the state department of highways and transportation, and the department of health. The administrator shall see that all reviews are efficiently completed. 
(c)  Except under abnormal circumstances, within forty-five (45) days from the receipt of the site plan in his office, the zoning administrator shall approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the site plan and notify the applicant in writing of the action taken. If the site plan is denied approval, the administrator, in notifying the applicant of the decision, shall set forth in detail the reasons for the denial, which shall be limited to any defect in form or required information, any violation of any provision or standard of this chapter or any other ordinance, or the inadequacy of any utility, and shall state any changes which would make the site plan acceptable. 
(d)  An applicant may appeal any decision of the zoning administrator, within thirty (30) days of such decision, to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of article IX of this chapter. 
Sec. 31-40. - Agreement bond. 
(a)  Prior to approval of any site plan, there shall be executed by the owner or developer and submitted with the site plan an agreement to construct such required physical improvements as are located within public rights-of-way or easements or as are connected to any public facility, in form and substance as approved by the city. Such agreement shall be accompanied by a cash bond or equivalent, a surety bond of a surety company, or a certified check payable to the city in the amount of one hundred twenty (120) percent of the estimated cost of the required physical improvements, as determined by the city engineer. 
(b)  The aforesaid agreement and bonds or conditions shall be provided for completion of all work covered thereby within the time to be determined by the zoning administrator, which time may be extended by the council upon written application by the owner or developer, signed by all parties, including the sureties, to the original agreement. 
(c)  The adequacy, conditions and acceptabilities of any bond hereunder shall be determined by the council or any official of the council, as may be designated by resolution of the council. 
(d)  In any case where any such official has rejected an agreement or bond, the owner or developer shall have the right to appeal such determination to the council. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-215, Ex. D, § 2, 3-1-83) 
Sec. 31-41. - Site plan termination, extension and revisions. 
(a)  Approval of a site plan submitted under the provisions of this article shall expire five (5) years after the date of such approval, unless a building permit has been obtained for construction in accordance therewith. 
(b)  Such approval may be extended by the zoning administrator for a single one-year period upon his receipt of a written request for an extension. The administrator shall acknowledge the request and shall make a decision regarding the extension within thirty (30) days after receipt of the request. 
(c)  If it becomes necessary for an approved site plan to be changed, the administrator shall, at the applicant's request, either administratively approve an amendment to the site plan, or if the change is major, require that a new site plan be drawn and submitted for review and action in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-768, § 1, 10-19-04) 
Sec. 31-42. - Site plan prerequisite to issuance of permits. 
    No building permit shall be issued to construct, erect, or alter any building or structure or any permit or authorization granted to improve or develop land subject to the provisions of this article, unless a site development plan has been submitted and approved. 
Sec. 31-43. - Compliance with approved site plan. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the construction standards for all on-site and off-site improvements shall conform to the adopted city design and construction standards. 
(b)  Inspections during the installation of the off-site improvements and required on-site improvements shall be made by the department, division, or agency responsible for such improvements as required to certify compliance with the approved site plan and applicable city standards. 
(c)  The owner or developer shall provide adequate supervision at the site during installation of improvements required by the site plan and shall make one (1) set of approved plans available at the site at all times that work is being performed. A designated employee shall be available for contact by city inspectors. 
(d)  Upon satisfactory completion of all installations of the required improvements, the owner shall receive an approval from the zoning administrator, city engineer, and director of public works on the improvements upon the application for such approval. Such approval will authorize the release of any bond which may have been furnished for the guarantee of satisfactory installation of such improvements or parts thereof. Inspection is to be made within a reasonable time of the request, and the bond released as quickly as circumstances permit. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 31-44. - Interpretation and enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  Zoning administrator: The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by an officer to be known as the zoning administrator, who shall be appointed or designated by the city council. The zoning administrator shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the council: 
(1)  To refuse to issue any permit for any building, or for the use of any premises which would violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  To order, in writing, the remedy of any condition found in violation of this chapter. 
(3)  The bringing of legal action to insure compliance with this chapter, including injunction, abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding. 
(b)  Assistance and cooperation: The zoning administrator may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of the chief of police in enforcing orders, of the city attorney in prosecuting violations, and of other city officials as necessary, including the reporting to the administrator of any seeming violation in new construction, reconstruction, or land uses. 
(c)  Inspection warrant: The zoning administrator or his agent may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction and if such sworn testimony establishes probable cause that a zoning ordinance violation has occurred, request that the magistrate or court grant the zoning administrator or his agent an inspection warrant to enable the zoning administrator or his agent to enter the subject dwelling for the purpose of determining whether violations of the zoning ordinance exist. The zoning administrator or his agent shall make a reasonable effort to obtain consent from the owner or tenant of the subject dwelling prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant under this section. 
(d)  Interpretation of chapter: Every question with respect to the interpretation of any provision of this chapter, including the exact location of a boundary of any district established hereunder, shall first be presented to the zoning administrator. Any person aggrieved by such decision may file an appeal in accordance with subsection 31-50(a) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-1700-904, §§ 1, 2, 5-24-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-1700-904, § 1, adopted May 24, 2011, amended § 31-44 title to read as herein set out. Former § 31-44 title pertained to enforcement of chapter. 
Sec. 31-44.1. - Fees. 
(a)  All fees associated with the administration of this chapter shall be imposed in accordance with the fee schedule. 
(1)  All planning and zoning fees are due at the time of application or plan submission. 
(2)  All site development and site inspection fees are due at the issuance of the site development permit. 
(3)  All fees related to reinspections and as-built plans are due prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or permit final. 
(Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 8, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 31-45. - Permits. 
(a)  Building permit: 
(1)  No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, altered, moved, converted, extended, or enlarged without the owner or owners first having applied for and obtained a building permit from the building official, the designated authority charged with the enforcement of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(2)  The building official shall submit such building permit application to the zoning administrator, who shall certify whether the proposed use, structure, alteration, or enlargement is or is not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. If such proposal is in conflict with this chapter, the building official shall refuse to issue such building permit. 
(b)  Certificate of occupancy: 
(1)  A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize, and is required for, any of the following: 
a.  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected. 
b.  Any enlargement, extension, or alteration of a building to change from one use group, as classified in section 202.0 of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, to another. 
c.  Any change in the use of a nonconforming use or building. 
(2)  Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made with the building official, in accordance with the rules and regulations of section 120.0 of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(3)  The building official shall submit such certificate of occupancy application to the zoning administrator, who shall certify whether the use, structure, alteration or enlargement is or is not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. If said use, structure, alteration or enlargement is in conflict with this chapter, the building official shall refuse to issue such certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Certificate of compliance required for rental dwelling units: 
(1)  Applicability. The rental or leasing of any residential dwelling unit located in a rental inspection district so designated by the governing body pursuant to the criteria set forth in paragraph 31-45(c)(2) of this code, for occupancy by any person who is not an owner of such dwelling unit, shall be permitted only after the property owner has obtained a certificate of compliance for rental use (hereinafter referred to as a "certificate of compliance for rental use," a "certificate," or a "certificate of compliance") from the city. 
(2)  Establishment of rental inspection districts. 
a.  After holding a duly advertised public hearing, the governing body may designate a rental inspection district, setting designated boundaries of the district, if the governing body finds that: 
1.  There is a need to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the occupants of dwelling units inside the designated rental inspection district; 
2.  The residential rental dwelling units within the designated rental inspection district are either: 
A.  Blighted or in the process of deteriorating; or 
B.  In the need of inspection by the building department to prevent deterioration, taking into account the number, age and condition of residential dwelling rental units inside the proposed rental inspection district; and 
3.  The inspection of residential rental dwelling units inside the proposed rental inspection district is necessary to maintain safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants and other residents living in the proposed rental inspection district. 
b.  After holding a duly advertised public hearing, the governing body may designate an individual residential rental dwelling unit outside of a designated residential district as being subject to the provisions of subsection 31-45(c) of the code if the governing body finds that: 
1.  There is a need to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the occupants of that individual dwelling unit; 
2.  The individual dwelling unit is either 
A.  Blighted; or 
B.  In the process of deteriorating; or 
3.  There is evidence of violations of the building code that affects the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants living in such individual dwelling unit. 
c.  The following districts and individual residential rental dwelling units have been duly designated as residential rental districts based on the findings of the governing body pursuant to subparagraphs 31-45(c)(2)a. and b. herein and shall be subject to the requirements of subsection 31-45(c) herein: all dwelling units in the city west of Euclid Avenue with the exclusion of Moseby Court. 
(3)  Notification. 
a.  No later than fifteen (15) days after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this subsection derives, the code official designated by the city manager (the "code official") shall make reasonable efforts to notify all owners of residential rental units in a designated rental inspection district and all individual dwelling units not within a residential inspection district but subject to the rental inspection ordinance, of the adoption of the ordinance, providing information and an explanation of the responsibility of the owner to notify the code official of any real property of the owner that is located in the residential rental district and is used for residential rental purposes. 
b.  Each owner of a rental dwelling unit in a rental inspection district shall file with the code official a written notice no later than sixty (60) days after the date on the notice sent by the code official pursuant to subparagraph 31-45(c)(3)a. herein, that said property is a residential rental unit. The notice shall be on a form provided by the city and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  The address of the residential rental dwelling unit; 
2.  The number of units; 
3.  The name, home and business addresses and telephone numbers of the owner; and 
4.  The name, business address and telephone number of any other person or agency responsible for maintenance and supervision of the property. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statements in a written notice sent pursuant to subparagraph 31-45(c)(3)b. herein. 
(4)  Conditions for issuance of certificate of compliance; inspections of dwelling units; fees. 
a.  Upon receipt of the written notice required by subparagraph 31-45(c)(3)b., the code official shall issue a certificate after determining that the dwelling unit(s) for which the certificate is sought and the related premises are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable state and local laws and regulations, and that all required fees have been paid. 
b.  To make such determination of compliance, the code official shall inspect the dwelling unit(s), grounds, and accessory structures. The code official shall perform such inspection when there is a change in tenancy or ownership, and once every four (4) years if there is no such change. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirement, the code official shall not conduct a new inspection when there is a change in tenancy or ownership if a successful inspection has been conducted during the twelve-month period immediately preceding such change or when a current certificate of compliance has been issued prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance; provided however that the pre-existing certificate of compliance shall be valid for four (4) years from the date it was initially issued and shall be subject to revocation. Upon revocation or expiration of the four (4) year period, such pre-existing certificate shall be subject to reinspection on the same basis as a certificate issued pursuant to subparagraph 31-45(c)(4)a. herein. 
c.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraphs 31-45(c)(4)b. herein, the code official may inspect any property or direct the inspection of any property by other city or county officials if: 
1.  There is a complaint registered with the city or if the official has other reason to believe that the owner(s) or occupant(s) of such property is (are) in violation of the provisions of this chapter or that such property does not comply with applicable state and local regulations, and 
2.  The code official determines that an inspection is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare of city residents. 
d.  If a multifamily dwelling unit complex, including all multifamily buildings that are part of the same development, contains more than ten (10) dwelling units, in the initial and periodic inspection the code official shall inspect only a sampling of dwelling units of not less than two (2) units and not more than ten (10) percent of the units. At no time shall the fee for inspection of a multifamily dwelling unit complex be charged for more than ten 10 dwelling units. If the code official determines that a violation of the building code that affects the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants in such dwelling units was found upon inspection of the sampling of dwelling units, the code official may inspect as many of the dwelling units in such multifamily dwelling unit complex as is necessary to enforce the building code and may charge a fee based on a per dwelling unit inspected as provided for in subparagraph 31-45(c)(4)e. 
e.  Fees. There shall be a charge for any inspection, reinspection or renewal related to a certificate of compliance in the amount established by the fee schedule. 
(5)  Limitations of validity of certificate of compliance. 
a.  A certificate of compliance shall be valid for a period of four (4) years or until the termination of the rental tenancy for the subject property or until the ownership of the subject property is transferred, whichever occurs first. Notwithstanding the foregoing limitation, a certificate of compliance shall be valid for a minimum of one (1) year from the date of issuance of the certificate. 
b.  In the event ownership of one (1) or more dwelling unit(s) subject to this subsection is transferred, the new owner or the owner's agent shall notify the code official within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of transfer. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirement, a new certificate shall not be required until one (1) year has elapsed since the issuance of the certificate in effect on the date of such property transfer. 
(6)  Failure to pass inspection. 
a.  If the code official determines, after inspection, that any dwelling unit or any part of the premises related thereto fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice of the violation or violations shall be given to the applicant in accordance with section 131.2 of the state building code. The notice shall specify a date by which the applicant shall remedy the listed violations, at which time a reinspection shall be conducted. If a reinspection is required after the first inspection, the applicant shall pay an inspection fee for each such reinspection visit to each dwelling unit or any part of the premises related thereto to be reinspected. 
b.  The decision of the code official to disapprove an application for a certificate may be appealed to the local board of building code appeals by the applicant in accordance with section 132.0 of the state building code. 
(7)  Operation without certificate of compliance. It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent to rent or lease any vacant dwelling unit subject to the provisions of this subsection and allow occupancy thereof, unless the unit is subject to a valid certificate of compliance. 
(8)  Suspension of certificate of compliance. 
a.  A certificate of compliance once issued may be suspended by the code official when the official finds that the owner or occupants of the property are in violation of the provisions of this section or that the property does not comply with applicable state and local regulations. 
b.  No certificate shall be suspended unless the code official has served the owner or the owner's agent with a notice specifying the violations and affording the owner or the agent a reasonable period of time to correct the violations. 
c.  Upon the failure of the owner or the owner's agent to comply within the time specified in the notice of violation, the code official shall suspend the certificate of compliance. If the code official determines that the violations are of a serious enough nature to warrant immediate repair, the code official may use the authority granted in section 129.0 of the state building code to have the repairs made. 
d.  In the event the property owner or agent properly appeals a notice of violation of the property maintenance code in accordance with section 132.0 of the state building code, any pending suspension shall be stayed until the appeal has been completed. 
e.  A suspended certificate shall be reinstated after the violation or violations have been corrected and after reimbursement has been made to the city for any funds expended in abating any such violation. 
(9)  Revocation of certificate of compliance. 
a.  Substantiated reports of a violation by any owner or occupant of any rented dwelling unit, or a guest of such owner or occupant, of any provision of this chapter of the city code, on two (2) or more occasions within any six-month period, shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the certificate of compliance if the code official determines that revocation is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents therein and/or residents of the neighborhood. 
1.  The code official shall send written notice to the property owner or agent of each substantiated report of any violation of this chapter. Upon receipt of the second such notice within a six-month period, the property owner or agent shall submit a proposal for assuring that such incidents will not continue on the subject property. If the property owner or agent fails to submit a satisfactory proposal within ten (10) days of receipt of such notice, the code official shall issue a notice of revocation of the certificate, the revocation being effective thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice by the property owner or agent. 
2.  Revocation of a certificate by the code official pursuant to this subparagraph (8)a. may be appealed to the board zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of section 31-50 of the city code. The board shall sustain the decision of the code official unless it finds that the provisions of this chapter of the city code have not been violated on two (2) or more occasions within any six-month period or that any and all of the violations have been corrected and provisions have been made to assure future compliance. 
b.  Occupation of a rental dwelling unit in violation of the maximum occupancy standard of the state building code shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the certificate of compliance if the code official determines that revocation is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents therein and/or residents of the neighborhood. Revocation of a certificate by the code official pursuant to this subparagraph (8)b. may be appealed to the local board of building code appeals in accordance with section 132.0 of the state building code. 
c.  Upon revocation of any certificate of compliance, no application for a subsequent certificate shall be accepted by the code official for such property within three (3) months of the date of revocation. In the case of an appeal that has been denied, the date of denial of the appeal shall constitute the date of revocation of the certificate. 
(10)  Display and availability of certificate of compliance required. Every owner or agent must show to every prospective tenant before occupancy a valid certificate of compliance covering the dwelling unit to be rented. Every owner or agent must show to any tenant, upon demand, a valid certificate covering the dwelling unit the tenant occupies. 
(11)  Enforcement. 
a.  Penalty for violation of subsection. Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). In addition, the court may impose a bond to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section for the next succeeding year. 
b.  Enforcement by injunction. Failure, refusal or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this section may, in addition to any other remedy provided in subsection 31-45(c) or in place thereof, be restrained, prohibited or enjoined by an appropriate proceeding instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction by the city attorney. 
c.  Notwithstanding subparagraphs 31-45(c)(11)a. and b. above, at no time shall the penalty for failure of the owner to provide notice pursuant to subparagraph 31-45(c)(3)b. be more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and at no time shall the basis of an injunction pursuant to subparagraph 31-45(c)(11)b. herein be failure to provide the notice required pursuant to subparagraph 31-45(c)(3)b. However there shall be no penalty for the failure of the owner to provide the notice to the code official if the code official has not complied with the notice required by subparagraph 31-45(c)(3)a. 
(12)  New construction. The requirement for an inspection fee shall not apply to any building for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city until one (1) year after the issuance of such certificate of occupancy. 
(13)  State building code. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit an inspection of any rental dwelling unit for a violation of the state building code pursuant to a complaint. 
(14)  Landlord and tenant rights. Nothing in this subsection shall in any way alter the rights and responsibilities of landlords or tenants pursuant to applicable provisions of chapters 13 or 13.2 of title 55 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 03-1700-720, § 1, 7-15-03; Ord. No. 05-1700-782, § 1, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 9, 6-19-18) 
Cross reference- Building Code, § 7-16 et seq.; occupancy permit required by housing standards ordinance, § 13.5-8. 
Sec. 31-46. - Violation and civil penalties. 
(a)  Violation: All departments, officials, and public employees of this jurisdiction who are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. They shall issue permits for uses, buildings, or purposes only when they are in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Any such permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be null and void. 
(b)  Penalty: Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating, causing, or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day upon which such violation shall continue will constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Civil penalties: 
(1)  [Civil infraction and penalties.] Any violation of the following provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a civil infraction and shall be punishable by a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each additional violation thereafter for the same offense: 
a.  Erecting or maintaining signage in violation of the provisions of section 31-29 of this Code. 
b.  Conducting a home occupation in violation of subsections 31-32(c)(1)-(9) of this Code. 
c.  Keeping motor vehicles in violation of subsection 31-15(c)(9) of this Code. 
d.  Keeping animals that are not permitted by section 5-1 of this Code. 
(2)  [Separate offense.] Each day during which any violation of the provisions enumerated in subsection (c) of this section is found to have occurred shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  [Frequency of charges.] In no event shall any such violation arising from the same set of operative facts be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period, nor shall a series of such violations arising from the same set of operative facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). 
(4)  [Criminal sanctions.] The designation of a particular violation of this chapter as an infraction pursuant to subsection (c) of this section shall be in lieu of criminal sanctions, and except for any violation resulting in injury to any person or persons, such designation shall preclude the prosecution of a violation as a criminal misdemeanor. 
(5)  [Summons.] After the zoning administrator, code enforcement officer or designated agent has served a written notice of warning identifying the violation on any person committing or permitting a violation of the zoning ordinance provisions enumerated in subsection (c) of this section; and if such violation has not ceased within such reasonable time as is specified in such notice, then, the zoning administrator or the code enforcement officer shall cause two (2) copies of a summons to be personally served upon such person. 
(6)  [Required information.] Such summons shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the person charged. 
b.  The nature of the infraction and the ordinance provision(s) of this chapter allegedly being violated. 
c.  The location, date and time that the infraction occurred or was observed. 
d.  The amount of the civil penalty assessed for the infraction. 
e.  The manner, location and time in which the civil penalty may be paid to the city. 
f.  The right of the recipient of the summons to elect to stand trial for the infraction and the date for such trial. 
g.  That a signature to an admission of liability will have the same force and effect as a judgment of court. 
h.  That any person summoned for a violation may elect to pay the civil penalty by making an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the city treasurer's office at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the time and date fixed for trial and, by such appearance, may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offense charged. 
i.  That a signature to an admission of liability shall have the same force and effect as a judgment of court; however, admission shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
j.  If a person charged with a violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court serving the City of Manassas Park in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
k.  The remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 01-1700-679, § 1, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 04-1700-746, § 3, 4-20-04; Ord. No. 08-1700-856, § 1, 10-21-08; Ord. No. 11-1700-904, §§ 2, 3, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 31-47. - Validity, conflicting ordinances, and when effective. 
(a)  Validity: Should any section or provision of this chapter be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so held to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(b)  Conflicting ordinances: All conflicting ordinances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(c)  Effective date: This chapter shall become effective February 13, 1979. 
ARTICLE IX. - PROVISIONS FOR APPEAL 

Sec. 31-48. - Board of zoning appeals generally.[10] 
(a)  A board consisting of five (5) residents shall be appointed by city council. Members of the board shall hold no other public office in the city except that one may be a member of the planning commission. The board shall serve without pay other than for traveling expenses. Appointments for vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall in all cases be for the unexpired term. 
(b)  The term of office shall be for five (5) years, except that the original appointments shall be made for such terms that the term of at least one (1) member shall expire each year. 
(c)  Members may be removed for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
(d)  Any member of the board shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the board with respect to property in which the member has an interest. 
(e)  The board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business, such rules to be made available to the public. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(f)  For the conduct of any hearing, a quorum shall be not less than three (3) members and an affirmative vote of three (3) members of the board shall be required to overrule any decision, ruling, or determination of the official charged with enforcement of this chapter or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board is required to pass. 
(g)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. It shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filled and shall be a public record. 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Local boards of zoning appeals, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2308 et seq. 

Sec. 31-49. - Powers of the board of zoning appeals. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(b)  To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest when, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary hardship; provided that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done, as follows: 
(1)  When a property owner can show that his property was acquired in good faith and where, by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the effective date of this chapter, or where, by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary situation or condition of such piece of property, or of the use or development of property immediately adjacent thereto, the strict application of the terms of this chapter would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the property, or where the board is satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it, that the granting of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation, as distinguished from variations sought by applicants for purposes or reasons of special privilege, convenience, or profit, provided that all variances shall be in harmony with the intended spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(2)  No such variance shall be authorized by the board unless it finds: 
a.  That the strict application of this chapter would produce undue hardship. 
b.  That such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity. 
c.  That the authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and that the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance. 
(3)  No such variance shall be authorized except after notice and hearing as required by Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia and subsection 31-52(c) herein. 
(4)  No variance shall be authorized unless the board finds that the condition or situation of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practical the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to this chapter. 
(5)  In authorizing a variance, the board may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed structure for use as it may deem necessary in the public interest, and may require a guarantee or bond to insure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(c)  To hear and decide applications for such special exceptions as may be authorized in this chapter. 
(1)  The board may impose such conditions relating to the use for which a special exception is granted as it may deem necessary in the public interest and may require a guarantee or bond to insure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(2)  No such special exception may be granted except after notice and hearing as provided by section 15.1-431, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(d)  To hear and decide appeals of the zoning administrator's interpretation of the zoning district map where there is an uncertainty regarding the location of a district boundary, as set forth in section 31-11 of this chapter. After notice to the owners of the property affected by any such question and after public hearing with notice as required by section 15.1-431, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, the board may interpret the map in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter for the particular section or district in question, and in accordance with the guidelines set forth in section 31-33 of this chapter. The board shall not have the power: 
(1)  To change substantially the locations of district boundaries as established by ordinance. 
(2)  To rezone property. 
(Ord. No. 11-1700-905, § 2, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 31-50. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  An appeal to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the county or municipality affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. Such an appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the zoning administrator and for good cause shown. 
(b)  Applications for appeals shall be made to the zoning administrator in accordance with rules adopted by the board. The application and accompanying maps, plans, or other information shall be transmitted promptly by the administrator: 
(1)  To the secretary of the board of zoning appeals. 
(2)  To the secretary of the planning commission, which may send a recommendation to the board or appear as a party at the hearing. 
(3)  To any individual, official, department or agency concerned. 
(c)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application or appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within sixty (60) days. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination of any administrative officer, or decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or effect any variance from this chapter. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official actions which shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be public records. The chairman of the board or, in his absence, the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
Sec. 31-51. - Appeal of a decision of the board of zoning appeals. 
    Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning appeals, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city, may present to the circuit court of the county a petition specifying the grounds on which aggrieved within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. Said appeal shall be handled in a manner prescribed in Code of Virginia § 15.2-2314. 
ARTICLE X. - ZONING AMENDMENTS; CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS; COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS; NOTICE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 1, adopted May 24, 2011, amended Art. X title to read as herein set out. Former Art. X title pertained to zoning changes and amendments. 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-141 et seq. 

Sec. 31-52. - Initiation. 
(a)  Whenever public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice require, the governing body may amend, supplement, or change the text of this chapter and/or any zoning district boundary shown on the official zoning map. Any such amendment may be initiated by resolution of the governing body, by motion of the planning commission, or by petition of any property owner addressed to the governing body. Before any requested map change or conditional use permit, the applicant or designated representative, shall contact the city planner to schedule a pre-application meeting. This meeting will provide an opportunity to discuss the project and determine whether the map change or conditional use permit is necessary. 
(b)  An application by an individual property owner to amend, supplement, or change the text of this chapter and/or any zoning district boundary shown on the official zoning map shall be made to the zoning administrator and shall include the following: 
(1)  A fully completed application form, (which shall be supplied by the planning and zoning administrator) and signed by the property owner (or duly authorized agent). The application form shall include the name and current mailing address of the applicant and all owners of the property with a ten (10) percent or greater interest, the zoning classification sought, and any other information as may be reasonably required by the administrator. A special power of attorney affidavit is required, if someone other than property owner(s) is signing the application and other documents requiring the property owner(s) signature. 
(2)  An, interest disclosure affidavit, which shall be sworn to under oath before a notary public, stating whether or not any member of the Manassas Park Governing Body, the planning commission, or any elected or appointed official has an interest in such property, either individually, by ownership of stock in a corporation owning such land, or partnership or as a holder of ten (10) percent or more of the outstanding shares of stock in or as a director or officer of any corporation owning such land, directly or indirectly, or by any such member or members of his immediate household. 
(3)  The latest deed for the property and an accurate plat of the property showing the following: 
a.  Metes and bounds of all property lines, and bearings and distances with a scale of 1" = 100' or less, for all property lines and existing and proposed zoning district lines; 
b.  Total area of the property proposed for consideration, in square feet or acres; 
c.  Scale and north arrow; 
d.  Location of all existing buildings and structures; 
e.  Names of all boundary roads or streets, and width of existing rights-of-way; 
f.  Signature and certificate number of person preparing the plat; 
g.  Tax map number. 
(4)  A schematic drawing of the proposed development as described in section 31-53 of this chapter. 
a.  The names and mailing addresses, as listed in the current real estate tax assessment books, of all owners of property abutting or immediately across the street or road from the subject property. If such property owners total less than twenty-five (25), then the names and mailing addresses of other property owners in the immediate vicinity must be provided so that a total of at least twenty-five (25) names are supplied. 
(5)  The names and mailing addresses, as listed in the current real estate tax assessment books, of all property owners, in all directions, within two hundred (200) feet of the property to be rezoned. 
(6)  Such additional information as may reasonably be required by the city in order for the planning office, planning commission, or governing body to make a proper evaluation of the proposal. 
(7)  Payment of the application costs in the amount established by the fee schedule. 
(8)  Amendments to the zoning map shall be reviewed, considered and acted upon as set forth in section 31-55 of this chapter. The city shall be under no obligation to consider a property owner's application for a map amendment that does not meet the standards set forth in section 31-52 of this chapter. 
(c)  Notice requirements. Prior to a public hearing before the planning commission or the governing body to consider an application for a zoning amendment (including proffered condition amendments), a conditional use permit or a comprehensive plan amendment, or before the board of zoning appeals to hear an application for a variance or a zoning appeal, notice as required by this subsection (c) shall have been given. The planning commission shall not recommend and neither the governing body nor the board of zoning appeals shall approve any such application until such notice has been given. 
(1)  The planning director shall ensure that initial notice, and any subsequent notice required if a hearing is continued, is published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city as required by Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia. The cost of publishing any such notice shall be paid by the applicant. 
(2)  Written notice required by Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia shall be sent by registered or certified U.S. mail by the applicant, at the applicant's expense. Evidence of notice sent by registered or certified mail shall be provided to the zoning administrator within three (3) days after the notices have been deposited with the U.S. Postal Service. If a public hearing is continued, notices shall be re-mailed by the applicant in the same manner and at the applicant's expense. The zoning administrator will provide the applicant the names and addresses of addressees who are to receive notice. The charge for compiling the address list shall be in the amount established by the fee schedule. 
(3)  Notice shall also be provided by the posting of at least one (1) sign on the subject property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Additional signs shall be required for properties with more than one (1) road frontage, or properties with more than two hundred (200) feet of frontage along a single road. The required sign(s) shall be supplied by the planning director and shall be posted by the applicant, who shall make an affidavit that posting of the property in accordance with this subsection (c) was done. The applicant shall file such affidavit with the planning director within three (3) days after posting of the property. Such signs shall be posted in the following manner: 
(a)  All signs shall be posted so as to assure the greatest public visibility practical. 
(b)  Signs shall be posted adjacent to the street right-of-way abutting the subject property, no more than ten (10) feet from the edge of said right-of-way. If more than one (1) street abuts the subject property, at least one (1) sign shall be posted along each abutting street. If no street abuts the subject property, at least one (1) sign shall be posted along the closest public street with a note added to help locate the property, which note will provide both distance and direction from the sign. If more than one (1) sign is posted along the same road frontage, such signs shall be posted at least two hundred (200) feet apart. 
(c)  The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the sign(s) in good condition until the public hearing, and shall replace damaged or removed signs as soon as practical. 
(d)  All signs shall be removed by the applicant no later than five (5) days following final action by the governing body or board of zoning appeals, as appropriate. 
(d)  Payment of delinquent real estate taxes. Prior to the initiation of an application for a zoning amendment, conditional use permit, variance or other land disturbing permit, including a building permit and an erosion and sediment control permit, and prior to the issuance of final approval of the same, the applicant must first provide satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the city which have been properly assessed against the subject property have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-225, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 06-1700-818H, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 11-1700-905, § 1, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 11-1700-911, § 1, 6-21-11; Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 10, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 31-53. - Schematic land use plan required. 
(a)  A schematic land use plan shall be required, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Topography shall be shown by contour lines. Contour interval shall not be more than five (5) feet; 
(2)  Vicinity map at 1" = 2,000'; 
(3)  Tax map numbers, name, present zoning, with zoning and use of all abutting or contiguous parcels; 
(4)  Property lines with bearings and distances, and existing and proposed zoning district lines; 
(5)  Area of land for consideration, in square feet or acres; 
(6)  Scale (1" = 200' or less) and north point; 
(7)  Names of boundary roads or streets and width of existing rights-of-way; 
(8)  Any easements and encumbrances; 
(9)  Proposed roads, with right-of-way width, including those identified in the comprehensive plan that will connect with or pass through the subject property; 
(10)  General locations of proposed major access points to existing and planned curb cuts shown, proposed traffic circulation plan, vehicles per day counts, connection to public roads and pedestrian amenities; 
(11)  Both sides of existing rights-of-way, with all existing and planned curb cuts shown; 
(12)  List of the proposed density for each dwelling unit type, and/or intensity of each nonresidential use; 
(13)  Location of any open space and buffer areas (existing and proposed), storm water management facilities, community and public facilities and storm drainage improvements; 
(14)  Location of existing and proposed utilities. 
(b)  In addition to the schematic plan, a written narrative providing the following information shall also be provided: 
(1)  The use(s) proposed for the property ), a detailed description of the operation(s) and any special processes, conditions, hazards, safety concerns, or impacts on public facilities or the public health, safety and welfare associated with the proposal. 
(2)  Those areas that have historic or scenic assets, or natural features deserving of protection and preservation, shall be provided along with a statement of how protection and maintenance of same will be accomplished. 
(3)  The relationship of the development to the adopted comprehensive plan of the city shall be included. If the development is not consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan, the applicant shall state why the development is justified, notwithstanding the plan. 
(4)  The method by which adjacent and neighboring properties shall be protected from the adverse effects of the proposed development, including proposed measures and types of landscaping and screening, and peripheral setback and yard requirements. 
(5)  The maximum height of all proposed structures in the development. 
(6)  The maximum number of dwelling units proposed, maximum lot coverage and/or maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) as appropriate. 
(7)  The special amenities to be provided within the development. 
(8)  All off-site improvements that are proposed, such as roads. 
(9)  Additional information as desired by the applicant. 
(10)  Additional information as desired by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-225, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 06-1700-818H, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 31-54. - Conditional zoning. 
    The Virginia Code, § 15.1-491.1 allows for an owner of real property who is an applicant for a zoning map amendment (rezoning) to, as a part of his application, proffer reasonable conditions concerning the use and development of his/her property, including off-site improvements that may serve or benefit the property and the public welfare. 
(1)  Such proffered conditions shall be set forth with clarity and specificity in a "proffer statement", which shall mirror the following format: 
PROFFER STATEMENT 
Re: Applicant's Name and Project Name 
Date of original proffered conditions, and date(s) of all revisions 
Rezoning file number (to be added by the planning and zoning administrator) 
As provided for by the Code of Virginia, § 15.1-491.1, I hereby proffer that the use and development of this property shall be in strict accordance with the following conditions: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
etc. 
(2)  Any revision to the proffer statement shall be submitted in the same format, with a new date, and shall include at the end of the statement the following: The conditions set forth in this proffer statement supersede all conditions set forth in previous proffer statements dated and submitted as a part of this application. 
(3)  The applicant may also proffer to use and develop his property in accordance with the plans, profiles, elevations, demonstrative materials and written statements submitted as a part of his site plan. In such a case, the proffer statement shall make reference to such materials, and each copy of such materials shall contain the following statement: I hereby proffer that the use and development of this property shall be in strict accordance with the conditions set forth and/or depicted hereon. 
(4)  The governing body when acting on an application for a zoning map amendment, may adopt as a part of the zoning map the proffered conditions, in whole or in part, as set forth by the applicant. Once adopted by the governing body, such proffered conditions shall be binding on the use and development of the property, and shall continue in full force and effect until a subsequent amendment changes the zoning on the property covered by such conditions; provided, however, that such conditions shall continue if the subsequent amendment is part of a comprehensive implementation of a new or substantially revised zoning ordinance and/or map. 
(5)  Proffered conditions adopted by the governing body shall be in addition to the regulations provided for by the zoning district as specified by the zoning ordinance, and shall not provide for altering the standards required by the ordinance except when specifically authorized in the ordinance. 
(6)  The zoning map, and other appropriate files maintained by the zoning administrator, shall reference the existence of adopted proffered conditions attached to various properties. Any site plan, subdivision plat or permit application thereafter submitted for development of property to which proffered conditions have been attached, shall conform with all such conditions, and shall not be approved by any city official in the absence of such conformity. For the purpose of this section, conformity shall mean such conformity which leaves a reasonable margin of adjustment due to final engineering data, but conforms with the general nature and intent of the development, the specific uses, and the general layout depicted by the plans, profiles, elevations and other demonstrative materials presented by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-225, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 06-1700-818H, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 31-54.1. - Conditional use permits; guides and standards. 
(a)  Statement of intent: The purpose of the conditional use procedure is to provide for certain uses, which, by their nature, can have an undue impact upon or be incompatible with other uses of land within a certain zoning district and therefore require the exercise of planning judgment and site plan review. It shall be the duty of the governing body, under the provisions of this section, to evaluate the impact and compatibility of each such use, and to specify such conditions and restrictions as will assure the use being compatible with the area in which it is to be located; or where that cannot be accomplished, to deny the use as not in accord with adopted plans and policies or as being incompatible with the existing uses permitted by right in the area. 
(b)  Authorization: In consideration of an application filed with the administrator, the governing body may authorize the establishment of those uses that are expressly listed as conditional uses in a certain zoning district; provided, however, that no such conditional procedure shall be required for a use allowed as a permitted use in such district. 
(c)  Standards: In reviewing each application for a conditional use permit, the planning commission and the governing body will consider each of the following factors prior to voting to recommend approval or denial, in the case of the planning commission, and prior to voting to approve or deny the application, in the case of the governing body: 
(1)  The proposed use at the stipulated location shall be in accordance with the official policies of an adopted comprehensive plan, and with any specific element of such plan. 
(2)  The proposed use shall be in accordance with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district requirements. 
(3)  The proposed use will not adversely affect the use or values of surrounding properties and structures. 
(4)  The proposed use will not adversely affect the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing, working or visiting in the neighborhood. 
(5)  Pedestrian and vehicular traffic generated by the proposed use will not be hazardous or conflict with the existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood. 
(6)  Utility, drainage, parking, loading and other necessary facilities provided to serve the proposed use will be adequate. 
(7)  Appropriate landscaping, screening, and signs will be provided as regulated by this chapter. 
(8)  The proposed use will be in harmony with the purpose of this chapter as set forth in section 31-3. 
(9)  The nature of the proposed use, including factors such as noise, light, hours of operation, and number of employees involved. 
(10)  Any other factors relating to the purposes of zoning that the planning commission and/or governing body, in its legislative discretion, shall consider as relevant. 
(d)  Conditions and restrictions. 
(1)  In approving a conditional use permit, the governing body may attach reasonable conditions, including a renewal/expiration date, to such approval with or without the applicant's consent. In the event a renewal date is given, it will be the applicant's responsibility to submit a request for renewal at least sixty (60) days prior to such renewal date. If a request for renewal is not timely received by the planning office, the conditional use permit will expire on the renewal date. In the event an expiration date is given, the applicant will be required to submit a request for a new conditional use permit to the planning office at least ninety (90) days prior to such expiration date or the permit will expire on the expiration date. If a request for a new conditional use permit is timely received by the planning office, the expiration date will be postponed until the date that final action is taken by the governing body. Once a conditional use permit has been approved with conditions, such conditions shall be considered as a part of the text of this chapter, and may be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator. A violation of an attached condition shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(2)  A condition attached to the approval of a conditional use permit may only be modified by a subsequent application for a conditional use permit. 
(3)  Minor deviations from an approved conditional use permit are allowed without the filing of a new conditional use permit application, provided all such minor deviations are shown on a site or subdivision plan. A determination that deviations to the site or subdivision plan do not substantially alter conditions of the approved conditional use permit plan must be made by the zoning administrator prior to approval of such plan pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph. 
(e)  General provisions. 
(1)  After approval of a conditional use permit by the governing body, the applicant shall have one (1) year to submit site or subdivision plans for the approved use and shall occupy the site and commence the use within one (1) year of approval of the site plan; provided, however, that the governing body may allow a longer period at the time and as part of approval. If the use has not begun as provided herein, the conditional use permit shall be void, and the use may not thereafter begin except upon approval of a new conditional use permit. 
(2)  After approval of a conditional use permit by the governing body, the use approved may intensify and/or expand, provided that any conditions attached to the approval shall not be violated. 
(3)  If an approved conditional use ceases operation for a period of one (1) year, for any reason, the conditional use permit shall become void, and thereafter the use may only be conducted after approval of a new conditional use permit. 
(4)  Unless specifically restricted by its conditions, a conditional use permit shall be transferable with the land, provided that the use for which it was obtained does not change with such transfer. 
(5)  Unless otherwise restricted by its conditions, a conditional use permit shall have an indeterminate duration, provided that the use for which it was obtained is commenced as required in paragraph (e)(1) above and continues without abandonment as provided in paragraph (e)(3) above. 
(f)  Revocation of conditional use permits. 
(1)  The governing body may, by resolution, initiate the revocation of a conditional use permit. When initiated, the revocation process shall be handled as would a new application for a conditional use permit, following the procedure set forth in subsection 31-34(g). 
(2)  After review by the planning office and consideration and recommendation by the planning commission, the governing body shall act on the proposal to revoke the conditional use permit. Grounds for revocation shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  A change in conditions affecting the public health, safety and welfare since approval of the conditional use permit; or 
(b)  Repeated violations of this chapter, including any conditions attached to the conditional use permit, by the owner/operator of the use; or 
(c)  Fraudulent, false or misleading information supplied by the applicant (or his agent) for the conditional use permit; or 
(d)  Improper public notice of the conditional use permit public hearing(s) when the conditional use permit was considered by the planning commission or governing body; or 
(e)  An error or mistake in fact that led to an arbitrary and unreasonable decision made by the governing body when approving the conditional use permit. 
(g)  Procedures. 
(1)  Written application for a conditional use may be made by any property owner, his agent or tenant, or a department, board or bureau of any government. If the application is made by a contract owner, a copy of the purchase agreement shall be filed with and made a part of the application. If a person other than the property owner submits an application for a conditional use permit, a legally sufficient power of attorney must first have been executed by the property owner authorizing such application. In addition, the applicant may designate an agent to represent it with regard to such application, provided a legally sufficient power of attorney has first been executed by the applicant authorizing such agent to act in its behalf. Notwithstanding the foregoing, before any conditional use permit application is submitted to the planning office, the applicant or designated representative must first contact the planning director or his designee to schedule a pre-application meeting. This meeting will provide an opportunity to discuss the project and determine whether a conditional use permit is necessary for the desired use. 
(2)  The application shall be filed with the zoning administrator on forms provided by the city. 
(3)  A conditional use permit plan must be included with each application. Such plan must include the following: 
(a)  Vicinity map at 1" = 2,000'. 
(b)  Owner and project name. 
(c)  Tax map number(s), name(s), present zoning and use of subject property and all abutting or contiguous parcels. 
(d)  Property lines with bearings and distances, and existing and proposed zoning district lines. 
(e)  Area of land proposed for consideration, in square feet or acres. 
(f)  Scale (no less than 1" = 200') and north point. 
(g)  Any and all easements and/or other encumbrances. 
(h)  Topography, indicated by contour lines with an interval of not more than five (5) feet. 
(i)  Existing drainage facilities, including major culverts, ponds and/or streams. 
(j)  The generalized proposed pattern of lots and/or buildings (including number and size, street layout, off-street parking, recreation areas, open space, improvements to existing streets and rights-of-ways, buffers, vehicles per day, and storm water management facilities). 
(4)  The procedures for approval of a conditional use shall be the same as those prescribed for zoning changes and amendments as set forth in article X of this chapter. The area included in an approved conditional use permit shall be noted on the district maps by means if a special symbol. 
(5)  Except for the application fee, the zoning administrator or his designee may waive the submission requirements, or any portion thereof, set forth in this subsection (g), provided such information is not necessary for the proper review of the application. 
(h)  Concurrent processing: Site and subdivision plans can be processed concurrently with a conditional use permit application consistent with the long-range land use designation of the comprehensive plan upon the request of the applicant; provided, however, that the applicant must affirm, in writing, its acknowledgement that the approval of such concurrent processing by the planning director or his designee will in no way affect the outcome of the conditional use permit application. By requesting concurrent processing, the applicant acknowledges that it assumes the risk that such conditional use permit application might be denied, and that all costs related to the submission of such site and/or subdivision plans are its sole responsibility. The submission of site and/or subdivision plans will not be accepted for concurrent processing until after the first round of comments on the conditional use permit application have been received from reviewing agencies and the applicant has committed to satisfying any concerns raised by such agencies. 
(Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 1, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 11, 6-19-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-1700-903, § 1, adopted May 24, 2011, renumbered former § 31-34 as § 31-54.1. Former § 31-34 title pertained to conditional users permit (cup); guides and standards and derived from Ord. No. 06-1700-818H, adopted Dec. 12, 2006. 
Sec. 31-55. - Review process. 
(a)  Review by the planning office. 
(1)  When an amendment has been proposed, and when an amendment to the zoning map has been initiated, the zoning administrator shall have the amendment reviewed by such staff, departments, offices, or other personnel as he finds appropriate. 
(2)  In the case of an application for a rezoning, the review shall include an examination of the applicant's proffer statement, if any. The administrator may suggest revisions to the proffer statement in order to clarify the proffers volunteered by the applicant. In addition, before the application is scheduled for a public hearing before the planning commission, the administrator may present to the applicant a summary of the findings of the review in order that the applicant may make modifications of his application should he desire to do so. However, once advertised for a public hearing, no substantial change shall be made in any application unless it is re-advertised. 
(3)  The application shall then be referred to the planning commission for a public hearing. The administrator shall not be required to refer such application immediately, but shall consider the applicant's preference, the planning commission's schedule, and the appropriate use of city staff. 
(4)  When referring an application to the planning commission, the administrator shall prepare a report for the commission's review and such report shall include a recommendation on the application. 
(5)  Amendments to the zoning map and amendments to the text of this chapter not initiated by an application of a property owner shall be referred to the planning commission after a report, and recommendation, by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Concurrent processing. Site and subdivision plans can be processed with a rezoning application consistent with the long range land use designation of the comprehensive plan, upon the request of the applicant, if the applicant acknowledges responsibility for costs related to site and subdivision plans submittal, regardless of whether the rezoning application is approved or denied. The submission of plans may not be accepted until the first round of comments have been received from city agencies and the zoning administrator has approved the concurrent processing affidavit. 
(b)  Review by the planning commission. 
(1)  The commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on such proposed amendment, after notice as required by Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia and subsection 31-52(c) herein. 
(2)  In recommending the adoption of any amendment to this ordinance, the planning commission shall fully state its reasons for any such recommendations, describing the change(s) in conditions, if any, that it believes makes the amendments advisable and specifically setting forth the manner in which the amendment would be in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the city and would be in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. 
(3)  A petition for an amendment may be withdrawn at any time, but if the planning commission has commenced its hearing on the petition, a petition covering any of the same described land will not be reconsidered within twelve (12) months of withdrawal. This provision shall not be held to impair the right of either the planning commission or the governing body to propose any amendments to this chapter on its own motion at any time. 
(c)  Review by governing body. 
(1)  Before approving the proposed amendment, the governing body shall hold at least one (1) public hearing thereon, after notice as required by Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia and subsection 31-52(c) herein, after which the governing body may make appropriate changes or corrections in the proposed amendment; provided that no additional land may be zoned to a different classification than was contained in the public notice without an additional public notice as required by Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia and subsection 31-52(c) herein. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall require a bond and agreement satisfactory to the governing body in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of any physical improvements required by the proffered conditions. 
(3)  Failure to meet or comply with any proffered condition shall be sufficient cause to deny the issuance of any permits. 
(Ord. No. 83-1700-225, 10-18-83; Ord. No. 06-1700-818H, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 11-1700-905, §§ 3, 4, 5-24-11) 
Sec. 31-56. - Temporary uses. 
(a)  Statement of intent. The purpose of the temporary use procedure is to provide for certain uses which by their nature are short term in duration and not requiring a fixed base of operation and to ensure their compatibility with existing surrounding uses. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to issue a temporary use permit after reviewing submitted information and determining that there should be no conflicts created by the requested temporary use. A temporary use permit application may be reviewed by additional staff members depending on the complexity of the submittal. 
(b)  Authorization. In considering a submitted application, the zoning administrator may authorize the temporary use to locate on a specific property based on the zoning district and the temporary uses expressly listed for each respective zoning district. 
(c)  Standards. A temporary use shall be approved only if its design, location, construction, method of operation, special characteristics and other aspects satisfy the following standards: 
(1)  New home sale or rental trailer may be issued for no longer than thirty (30) days following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the first five (5) units of the development. At that time, the trailer should be removed from the site and the office relocated inside one of the permanent units. 
(2)  Construction office trailers may be allowed in all zoning district for no longer than thirty (30) days following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the last unit of the development. 
(3)  Holiday-related sale events such as Christmas trees, pumpkins, or fireworks shall only be permitted in the B-2 and PUD (retail use) zoning districts only and shall only be permitted for thirty (30) days prior to and including the related holiday. 
(4)  Outdoor or sidewalk sales may only be permitted for no more than four (4) consecutive days and nor more than four (4) times per year on any particular property. Such sales may only take place in the B-1, B-2, I-1, MU and PUD (retail area) zoning districts. No sale shall be permitted that is not related to the nature of the business located on the property and is not to be conducted by either the property owner, a lessee, or an employee of one (1) of the two (2), with the exception of holiday sales. 
(5)  Circuses, street fairs, festivals and other outdoor group assemblies shall be permitted in all zoning districts for no more than five (5) consecutive days and no more than six (6) times per year at any particular property. 
(6)  Applications will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis for potential ingress/egress or parking problems. An application may be denied if the requested use is deemed likely to create a hazardous situation or otherwise negatively impact the traveling public, pedestrians or adjacent properties. 
(7)  A temporary use permit application shall include information pertaining [to]: 
a.  Adequate lighting and ventilation; 
b.  Adequate automobile and pedestrian traffic flow; 
c.  Adequate off-street parking; 
d.  Adequate lot access for fire and police protection. 
(8)  All temporary use permits must be applied for a minimum of ten (10) working days in advance of the event. No applications will be accepted that do not comply with this requirement. 
(9)  An application will not be considered as being accepted unless all relevant information is provided. This means if an application is submitted and additional information is required for a complete review then the accepted date will be the day that all required information is submitted to the city. 
(10)  The charge for submitting a temporary use permit application shall be in the amount established by the fee schedule. 
(11)  All regulations of the respective zoning district will pertain to temporary uses. 
(12)  The granting of a temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district nor on the property wherein the temporary use is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-744, § 1, 3-30-04; Ord. No. 18-1700-1015, § 12, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 31-57. - Unlawful to keep inoperable motor vehicles; definition; removal, storage and sale. 
(a)  An "inoperable motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer that: 
(1)  Is not in operating condition; 
(2)  Does not display valid license plates; 
(3)  Does not display an inspection decal that is valid or does display an inspection decal that has been expired for more than sixty (60) days; or 
(4)  For a period of sixty (60) days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep an inoperable motor vehicle on any property zoned or used for residential purposes, or on any property zoned for commercial or agricultural purposes, except within a fully enclosed building or structure. Tarpaulins, tents and other similar temporary structures or coverings shall not be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Upon determining that an inoperable motor vehicle is being kept in violation of this section, the city manager or his designee shall give written notice of the violation to the owner of the premises, as listed in the current real estate tax assessment records. A failure to remedy said violation within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the written notice shall constitute a civil infraction and shall be punishable by a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00); a failure to remedy said violation within ten (10) working days of the issuance of a citation for the initial civil infraction shall constitute an additional civil infraction and shall be punishable by an additional civil penalty of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), both pursuant to the provisions of section 31-46 of this Code. If the violation has not been remedied within ten (10) working days of the issuance of a citation for an additional civil infraction, as set forth above, the city manager or his designee shall direct that the inoperable motor vehicle be removed from the premises and stored for a period of not less than seven (7) days. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, upon an affirmative showing of hardship by the vehicle owner the city manager or his designee shall be authorized to grant an additional period of no more than thirty (30) days to remedy said violation before an inoperable motor vehicle will be removed from the premises. For the purpose of this subsection, "hardship" means an event or circumstance beyond the reasonable control of the owner of an inoperable motor vehicle that would make it physically or economically impossible for said owner to remedy a violation of this section, the determination of which shall be in the sole discretion of the city manager or his designee. 
Upon the removal of an inoperable motor vehicle from the premises in accordance with this subsection, the city manager or his designee shall give notice to the owner of the vehicle or, if the owner of the vehicle cannot be ascertained after reasonable inquiry, to the owner or tenant of the premises, that the vehicle will be disposed of if it has not been redeemed within seven (7) days of its removal. To redeem the vehicle, the owner of the inoperable motor vehicle must pay all reasonable costs incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle and provide reasonable assurances that the violation of this section will not recur. 
(d)  Should the owner of an inoperable motor vehicle that has been removed and stored pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph fail or refuse to redeem the vehicle within seven (7) days of its removal from the premises, or should the identity or whereabouts of the owner be unknown or unascertainable after a reasonable effort has been made, the city manager or his designee may dispose of the vehicle by any reasonable means, including assignment of the vehicle to a salvage dealer for scrap value. 
(e)  If the proceeds from the sale of the inoperable motor vehicle are insufficient to pay the costs of the removal, storage and disposal of the vehicle, said costs shall be charged to either the owner of the inoperable motor vehicle or the owner of the premises and the costs will be collected in the same manner as taxes and levies. In addition, the costs of the removal, storage and disposal of an inoperable motor vehicle shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such costs has been made to the city. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which on June 26, 1970, was regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(Ord. No. 04-1700-746, § 2, 4-20-04) 
ARTICLE XI. - APPENDIX 

Sec. 31-58. - Summary of permitted uses. 
    Refer to the appropriate zoning district in article IV, "District Regulations," for specific regulations governing each use. 
Key: P = Permitted Principal Use 
C = Use Permitted With Conditions 
A = Permitted Accessory Use 
Use District A-1 R-1 R-2 B-1 B-2 I-1 FP Residential & Related Dwelling, multi-family P Dwelling, proprietor or employee A A A Dwelling, single-family detached P P Dwelling, townhouse P Dwelling, two-family P Garage, private A A A Guest house A A Home occupation A A A Human care facility P P Kennel, private A C Mobile home; park, subdivision C Multi-family development office A Multi-family laundry room A Parking area, serving use A A A A A A A Sign, for permitted use A A A A A A A Storage building, domestic A A A A Storage, major recreational equipment A A A Swimming pool, tennis court, etc. A A A Agricultural & Related Barn A A Farm buildings, accessory A A Farm, cultivation of field crops P P Farm, dairy P P Farm, general P P Farm, horticulture P P Farm, horticulture P P Farm, livestock raising P P Farm orchard P P Farm, plant nursery P P Grain storage structure A A Produce stand, raised on premises A A Stable, public or private A A Agricultural implements, sales, service, storage P Amusement center P Animal hospital C Auto body repair & painting P P Auto rental P Auto repair, general P P Auto sales P Auto service P Auto service station P Auto wash facility P Bakery C P Bank P P Barber shop P P Beauty parlor P P Bicycle, sales & repair P P Billiard parlor or pool hall C Boat & trailer sales & service P Bowling alley P Building materials, sales & storage yard P Camps, day or boarding C Carpet, rug, garment cleaning P Cemetery C C Clinic, medical or dental C C C P Club, lodge, meeting hall, private P P Contractors equipment storage yard P Dance hall or establishments C Delicatessen P P Distribution establishment P Dry cleaning pick-up station C P Engraving business P Florist shop P P Funeral home P Furniture home P Furniture repair & upholstery shop P P Golf course P P Golf, miniature P Greenhouse or plant nursery P P P Home occupation A A A Hotel, motel P Ice cream parlor C P Kennel, private A C Kennel, commercial C C Laundering establishment P Laundromat P P Loan or credit office P Lock repair P Lodge, private P P Medical clinic or office C C P P Motel, hotel P Motorcycle sales, rental, service P Night club C Nursery school, child care center C C P P Nursing home C C P Office, business & professional C P P Parking area, serving use A A A A A A A Pet shop P P Printing & publishing plant P Recreation clubs, private C C P Recreational facilities, public-commercial C P P Recreational facilities, private A A A P Rental establishment (house-hold) C P Repair shop or business C P Restaurant P P Restaurant, drive-in P Retail store or shop C P Service establishment, personal or business C P Shoe repair C P Shopping center P P Sign, for permitted use A A A A A A A Storage building, for permitted use A A A A A A A Store (see retail store) Studio (artist, musician, etc.) P P Tailoring business P Temporary construction building A A A A A A A Theater, movie P Theater, movie; drive-in C Tire sales and service P Tire recapping or retreading P Tourist home P Travel agency P Truck sales, rental, service P P Upholstery shop P P Warehouse C P Wholesale establishment C P Industrial See Sec. 31-20 Public, Semi-Public, Institutional Airports, landing fields C C Athletic field, public C C C C Charitable institution C C C Church or other place of worship P C C Communication center (public utility) C C C P C Community center C C C Conservation area P P P P P P Educational institution C C C Forests, public or private P P P P P P Governmental buildings & uses C C C Hospital, sanitarium C C P Landfill C Library (public) C C C Museum C C C Parking area, serving use A A A A A A A Philanthropic institution C C C School, public or private C C C Sign, for permitted use A A A A A A A Utility building, plant, station C C C P C Utility line, pipe, easement A A A A A A A Wildlife preservation P P P P P  
(Ord. No. 04-1700-744, § 1, 3-30-04; Ord. No. 04-1700-746, § 1, 4-20-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-1700-744, § 1, adopted March 30, 2004, and Ord. No. 04-1700-746, § 2, adopted April 20, 2004, created sections 31-56 and 31-57, respectively. The previously existing § 31-56 has been renumbered as § 31-58 to accommodate the addition of these new provisions. 
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, whether in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
Code of 
Virginia 
Section Disposition 1-10 1-4 1-13.3 1-2 1-13.9 1-3 2.2-614.1 2-127 2.2-3700 et seq. 25-98 2.2-3711 2-26 3.1-361 Ch. 10(note) 3.1-610.1 5-10 3.1-796.66 Ch. 5(note) 3.1-796.72 5-6 3.1-796.85 5-36 3.1-796.86 5-37 3.1-796.87 5-38 3.1-796.88 5-38.1 3.1-796.89 5-40 3.1-796.90 5-39 3.1-796.92 5-40 3.1-796.93:1 5-27 3.1-796.97 5-39 3.1-796.98 5-57, 5-58 3.1-796.100 5-60 3.1-796.105 5-27 3.1-796.115 5-74, 5-75 3.1-796.119 5-27 3.1-796.121 5-7 3.1-796.122 5-6 3.1-796.126:1 5-19 3.1-796.127 5-30 3.1-796.128 5-38.2 4-97 17-8 Title 4.1 14-149, 14-150 4.1-100 14-148 8.01-43 13.1-5 8.01-323 19.4-12 8.01-324 19.4-12 9.1-101 18-21 9.1-400-9.1-406       2-11 10.1-104.2 8-38 10.1-603.3 8-15 10.1-603.12:2 8-39 10.1-604 et seq. 8-3 10.1-1100 et seq. 8-3 8-14 10.1-1163B 8-3 8-14 10.1-1414 13-5 10.1-1426 et seq. 25-79 10-17.30(h) Ch. 9, Art. VIII(note) 15.1 2-205e Title 15.1, Chapter 1.1       Charter 2.2 Title 15.1, Chapter 11       2-143 Arts. 3 & 4 
15.1-11 13-5 17-48, 17-49 17-53 15.1-11.2 7-21(c) 15.1-13.2 2-2 15.1-14 17-2 Ch. 20(note) 15.1-15 Ch. 9(note) 15.1-29.9 Ch. 9, Art. V 15.1-32.1 25-31 15.1-37.3 1-1 1-9, 1-10 21-1 Ch. 31(note) 15.1-132 24-35 15.1-138 Ch. 18(note) 15.1-175 25-24 15.1-292 17-47 15.1-363-15.1-426       Ch. 20(note) 15.1-427       Ch. 2, Art. VIII(note) 15.1-427.1 2-141 15.1-431 31-53, 15.1-437 2-142 15.1-465 21-1 15.1-486.2 31-14, 31-15 15.1-491.1 31-54 15.1-837-15.1-840       Charter 2.1 15.1-841 Charter 2.1 15.1-842-15.1-854       Charter 2.1 15.1-855, Charter 2.1, 15.1-856 Ch. 25(note) 15.1-857 Charter 2.1, 
13-5 15.1-858-15.1-862       Charter 2.1 15.1-865 Charter 2.1, 26.3 15.1-866 Charter 2.1 15.1-867 Charter 2.1 17-2 17-48-17-50 20-12 15.1-868 Charter 2.1 15.1-869 Charter 2.1 15.1-870 Charter 2.1 15.1-871-15.1-874       Charter 2.1 15.1-875 Charter 2.1 Ch. 25(note) 25-24 15.1-876 Charter 2.1 25-6 15.1-877-15.1-887       Charter 2.1 15.1-888 Charter 2.1 Ch. 20(note) 15.1-889, 15.1-890       Charter 2.1 15.1-891 Charter 2.1 Ch. 24(note) 15.1-892 Charter 2.1 15.1-893 Charter 2.1, 20-3 15.1-894-15.1-900       Charter 2.1 15.1-901 Ch. 13(note) 15.1-901, Charter 2.1, 15.1-902 1-12 15.1-903, 15.1-904 Charter 2.1 15.1-905 Charter 2.1 1-12 15.1-906, 15.1-907 Charter 2.1 15.1-927 Ch. 13(note) 15.1-1373 2-157 15.1-1376 2-156 Title 15.2 2-205(e) 15.2, Chapter 22 31-54 15.2-900 13.1-6 15.2-1104 Ch. 22(note) 15.2-1129.2 22-210 22-212 15.2-1725 18-23 (note) 15.2-1731 18-21 (note) 15.2-1733 18-21 (note) 15.2-1734 18-22 (note) 15.2-1735 18-23 (note) 15.2-1736 18-24 (note) 15.2-2000 Ch. 20(note) 15.2-2009 20-3 15.2-2107 Ch. 25(note) 25-3 15.2-2109 et seq. Ch. 25(note) 15.2-2122 25-100.4 15.2-2204 31-49 31-55 15.2-2283 8-1 8-12 15.2-2308 31-48 15.2-2314 31-51 15.2-4900 et seq.       2-157 15.2-2500 et seq.       2-2 15.2-5103(B) 2-229 15.2-5113 2-230 15.2-5155 2-227 15.2-5157 2-226 15.2-5158(A) 2-231 16.1-69.40:1.B. 24-41 16.1-241(A)(1) 17-9 16.1-260(H)(1) 17-9 17.1-281 2-12 18.2-1 14-179 18.2-9, 18.2-11 1-12 18.2-27 17-3 18.2-46.1 13.1-4 18.2-57 17-11 18.2-61 11-88(a)(8) 18.2-63 11-88(a)(8) 18.2-67.1-18.2-67.5       11-88(a)(8) 18.2-87 9-9 18.2-88 9-10 18.2-96 17-30 18.2-103-18.2-106       17-31 18.2-119 17-40 18.2-120 17-41 18.2-121 17-45 18.2-125 17-44 18.2-128 17-43 18.2-130 17-42 18.2-137 17-32 18.2-146-18.2-148       17-36 18.2-179 17-28 18.2-209 17-29 18.2-212 17-7 18.2-247 11-88(a)(2) 18.2-247, 18.2-248       17-25 18.2-250 17-25 18.2-256 17-25 18.2-257 17-25 18.2-258 17-26 18.2-264 17-27 18.2-266 24-3(b) 24-35 18.2-276 16-5 18.2-280 26-3 18.2-282 26-4 18.2-283 26-2 18.2-284 26-8 18.2-286 26-3 18.2-308 26-1 18.2-309 26-9 18.2-311 26-7 18.2-316 17-55 18.2-317 17-56 18.2-318 17-56 18.2-319 17-51 18.2-322 17-46 18.2-323 5-7 18.2-324 20-8 18.2-325-18.2-327       12-1-12-3 18.2-329-18.2-331       12-4-12-6 18.2-332-18.2-334       12-8-12-10 18.2-336 12-7 18.2-340.1-18.2-340.12       12-11 18.2-344 17-17 18.2-345-18.2-350       17-19-17-24 18.2-346 11-88(a)(8) 18.2-348 11-88(a)(8) 18.2-349 11-88(a)(8) 18.2-365 17-17 18.2-366 17-18 18.2-370 11-88(a)(8) 18.2-370.1 11-88(a)(8) 18.2-371 17-10 11-88(a)(8) 18.2-371.1 11-88(a)(8) 18.2-372 15-5 18.2-372-18.2-375       16-1-16-4 18.2-377 16-6 18.2-378 16-7 18.2-379 16-10 18.2-382 16-8 18.2-383 16-11 18.2-387 16-9 18.2-388 17-16 18.2-389       Ch. 16, Art. I(note), 
17-16 18.2-390 16-23, 31-6 18.2-391 16-24, 31-6 18.2-403.1 et seq. Ch. 5(note) 18.2-415 17-14 18.2-416 17-12 18.2-424 23-17 18.2-425 23-18 18.2-426 23-16 18.2-427 23-3 18.2-428 23-1 18.2-429 23-2 18.2-431 23-4 18.2-432 4-24 18.2-433       Ch. 4, Art. II(note) 18.2-460 17-4 18.2-461 18-7 18.2-463 18-8 18.2-472 17-6 19.2-305.1 13.1-4 19.2-389 2-8 Title 20.1 5-6 Title 25, Chapter 1.1       Charter 2.2 Title 27 Ch. 9(note) 27-6.1 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. II(note) 27-15.1 9-4 27-30 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. VII(note) 27-63 et seq. 7-18(d) 27-86 et seq. 7-18(d) 27-94 et seq. 9-1 27-97 9-2 29-196 5-27 29-200 5-7 Title 32.1, Art. 2       25-137 32.1-156 Ch. 11(note) 32.1-167 Ch. 25(note) Title 33.1, Chapter 1       Charter 2.2 33.1-121-33.1-132       Charter 2.2 35-25 Ch. 10(note) 36-105 7-1 36-106 7-4 42.1-70 2-15 Title 45.1 8-14 Title 46.1 Ch. 24(note) 24-3(a) 46.1-3 24-58 46.1-3.01 24-60 46.1-16.01 24-2 46.1-180 Ch. 24(note) 24-2 46.1-180.1 Ch. 24(note) 24-26 46.1-181, 46.1-182 Ch. 24(note) 46.1-183 Ch. 24(note) 24-4 46.1-184-46.1-187 Ch. 24(note) 46.1-188 Ch. 24(note) 24-3(a) 24-35 46.1-252 Ch. 24, Art. III(note) 24-47 46.1-258 24-48 46.1-555.1-46.1-555.5       24-62 46.2-100 14-114 15-3 24-28.1 24-37(a) 24-38 31-29 46.2-113 19.4-10 46.2-734 14-116 46.2-739 14-124 46.2-752 14-115 14-119 46.2-752(b) 14-129 46.2-828 24-29 46.2-844.A. 24-41 46.2-859 24-41 46.2-936 24-11 46.2-938 24-12 46.2-940 24-13 46.2-1044 19.4-3 46.2-1090 24-41 46.2-1200-46.2-1208       24-63 46.2-1212 24-10 46.2-1213 24-57.2 24-58 46.2-1214 24-60 46.2-1215 24-58 24-60 46.2-1220 19.4-2 19.4-5 Ch. 24, Art. III(note) 46.2-1225 19.4-10 46.2-1230 19.4-11 26.2-1239 24-48 46.2-1300 19.4-7 46-2.1301 24-26 46.2-1302 19.4-4 46.2-1309 24-4 46.2-1312 19.4-7 46.2-1313 24-35 46.2-2000 14-116 46.2-2062 et seq. Ch. 11(note) 54-524.1 17-25 54-524.2 17-26 54.1-400 et seq. 8-18 8-20 8-38 55-210.1 et seq. 18-9 55-248.13 9-83(c) 56-345 Ch. 19(note) 56.412.1 19-2 19-7 57-63 19.5-18 Title 58 2-205(e) 58-617.2 Charter 2.3 58-1332 2-182 58.1 2-205(e) Ch. 22(note) 22-44 58.1-12 2-8 58.1-15 8-43 58.1-206 2-201 58.1-622 22-96 58.1-628 22-96 58.1-1201 22-62 58.1-1204 22-63 58.1-1207 22-64 58.1-1211 22-64 58.1-1735 14-116 58.1-1736A2 14-116 58.1-1821 14-32(c) 58.1-1822 14-32(c) 58.1-2401 14-116 58.1-2901 22-78, 22-79 58.1-3000 et seq. Ch. 22(note) 58.1-3010 22-1 58.1-3100-58.1-3122.1       2-208 58.1-3211 22-26 58.1-3213 22-28, 22-29 58.1-3214 22-30 58.1-3215 22-32 58.1-3217 22-27 58.1-3219.4 22-210 22-212 58.1-3220 et seq. 22-34 58.1-3226.1 22-18 58.1-3250 2-202 22-210 22-212 58.1-3251 2-181 58.1-3281 22-1 58.1-3373 2-201 58.1-3500 et seq. Ch. 22, 
Art. III(note) 58.1-3504 22-48 58.1-3506 22-46 58.1-3511 22-45 58.1-3515 22-44 58.1-3516 22-47 58.1-3518 22-49 58.1-3523 22-201 58.1-3524(C) 22-202 58.1-3700 et seq. 14-3 58.1-3701 14-1 14-23(c) 14-42(c) 58.1-3706.D.2. 14-57 58.1-3715 14-1, 14-4 14-23(a)(1) Title 58.1, Ch. 38, Art. 4       22-77 58.1-3800, 58.1-3801       22-108 58.1-3803, 58.1-3804       22-109 58.1-3813 22-78, 22-79 58.1-3814 22-78, 22-79 58.1-3853 22-210 22-212 58.1-3910 et seq. 22-17 58.1-3916 14-24(b) 22-4-22-6 22-49 58.1-3916.1 22-7, 22-8 58.1-3919 22-2 58.1-3919.1 22-2 58.1-3934 22-2 58.1-3940 et seq. 13.3-18 58.1-3940 14-31(c) 22-3 58.1-3958 22-7 58.1-3965 et seq. 13.3-18 58.1-3984 14-31(c) 14-32(c) 58.1-3986 14-23(c) 58.1-3990 22-9 58.1-3993 14-23(c) Tit. 59.1, Ch. 11 9-51 59.1-144 Ch. 9, Art. II, Div. 2(note) 9-53 59.1-392 14-1 59.1-393 14-1 59.1-1442 9-55, 9-56 62.1-44.2 et seq. 8-13 62.1-44.3 17-47 62.1-44.15:24 et seq. 8-1 8-4 8-12, 8-13 62.1-44.15:27 8-1 8-12 62.1-44.15:28 8-4 8-26 62.1-44.15:33 8-22 8-35 62.1-44.15:34 C.7. 8-4 62.1-44.15:35 8-24 62.1-44.15:51 et seq. 8-2 8-3 62.1-44.15:52 8-4 8-5 8-7 62.1-44.15:54 8-4 62.1-44.15:55 8-7 62.1-44.15:55 E 8-5 62.1-44.15:56 8-5 8-7 62.1-44.15:63 A. 8-8 62.1-44.19:7 8-24 62.1-159 et seq. 2-157 63.1-195 31-6  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1971 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1971 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1971 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1971 Code Section Section this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-14 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-3 2-1 2-1 2-3 2-5 2-4 2-23 2-5 2-25 2-6 2-24 2-7 2-26 2-8 2-27 2-9-2-18 2-36-2-45 2-19 2-58 2-20 2-59 2-21-2-24 2-89-2-92 2-25 2-104 2-26 2-107 2-27, 2-28 2-106 2-29 2-108 2-30 2-105 2-31, 2-32 2-60 2-33 2-57 2-35 2-123 2-39 22-2 2-40 22-3 2-44-2-47 2-141-2-144 3-1 5-1 3-3-3-7 5-2-5-5 3-8 5-7 3-9 5-6 4-1-4-3 6-1-6-3 4-5 6-4 4-7 6-16 4-8 6-20 4-9 6-19 4-10 6-17 4-11 6-18 6-1 1-12 6-2 1-13 7-2 4-16 7-3 4-17 7-4 4-20 7-5 4-25 7-6, 7-7 4-24 7-8 4-23 7-9 4-22 7-10 4-26 7-11 4-21 7-12-7-14 4-19 8-1 22-1 8-2-8-4 2-2-2-4 9-1 9-2 9-8-9-12 9-51-9-53 9-13 9-58 9-14 9-54 9-15 9-55 9-16 9-54 9-17 9-59 9-18 9-56 9-19 9-57 9-20-9-24 9-66-9-69 9-25 9-1 10-1 12-2 10-2 12-6, 12-7 10-3 12-4 10-4 12-5 10-6 12-10 10-13 12-8 10-14 12-7 11-1 10-2 11-2 17-47 13-1-13-3 17-52 15-1 14-1, 14-12 15-2 14-2 15-3 14-4 15-4 14-9 15-5 14-5 15-6 14-19 15-7 14-10 15-8 14-15 15-9 14-10 15-10 14-11 15-11 14-2 15-12 14-20 15-13 14-23 15-14 14-7, 14-116 15-15 14-6, 14-26 15-16 14-22 15-17 14-14 15-18 14-17 15-19 14-13 15-20 14-18 15-21 14-24 15-22 14-25 15-23 14-3 15-24 14-16 15-25 14-41 15-26 14-42 15-27 14-46 15-28 14-51 15-29 14-39 15-30 14-74 15-31 14-79 15-32 14-84 15-33 14-85 15-34 14-97 15-35 14-148 15-36 14-149 15-37 14-150 15-38 14-151 15-39 14-153 15-40 14-155 15-41 14-156 15-42 14-154 15-43 14-152 15-44 14-149 15-45 14-150 15-46 14-152 15-47 14-153 15-48 14-155 15-49 14-156 15-50 14-154 15-51-15-56 14-52 15-57 14-47 15-58 14-49 15-59 14-70 15-60 14-66 15-61 14-78 15-62 14-65 15-63 14-77 15-64 14-59 15-65 14-63 15-66 14-90 15-67 14-91 15-68 14-40 15-69-15-72 14-54 15-76 14-55 15-77 14-57 15-80-15-84 14-62 15-85-15-89 14-83 15-90 14-92 15-91 14-58 15-92 14-43 15-93 14-88 15-95-15-97 14-69 15-101, 15-102 14-48 15-103 14-50 15-104 14-53 15-105 14-56 15-106 14-60 15-107 14-64 15-108 14-44 15-109 14-75 15-110 14-76 15-111 14-93 15-112 14-81 15-113 14-86 15-114 14-101 15-115 14-87 15-116 14-8 15-117 14-96 15-118 14-80 15-119 14-94 15-120 20-6 15-121 14-98 15-122 14-45 15-123 14-67 15-124 14-68 15-125 14-71 15-127 14-73 15-128 14-89 15-129 14-99 15-130 14-102 15-131 14-133 15-132 14-126 15-133 14-132 15-134 14-134 15-135 14-135 15-136 14-127 15-137 14-128 15-138 14-136 15-139 14-129 15-140 14-130 15-142 14-131 15-143 14-117 15-144 14-114 15-145, 15-146 14-82 15-147 14-95 15-148 14-100 16-1 24-1 16-2 24-3 16-3 24-26, 24-47 16-4 24-4 16-5 17-36 16-6 20-7 16-7 24-5 16-8 24-30, 24-31 16-9-16-11 24-6-24-8 16-12 15-6, 15-7 16-13 20-8 16-14 24-9 16-15 19-1, 19-2 16-16, 16-17 24-27 16-18 24-28 16-19 24-32 16-20 24-33 16-32 24-10 16-33 24-2 16-34 24-48 16-35 24-50 16-36 24-49 16-37-16-39 24-54-24-56 16-40-16-42 24-58-24-60 16-43 24-57 16-44 24-58, 24-61 17-1 17-12 17-2-17-4 17-17 17-5 17-37 17-6 17-7 17-7 17-11 17-8 17-3 17-9 17-8 17-10 20-2 17-12 17-28 17-13-17-15 17-31 17-17 17-13 17-18-17-20 17-14 17-21 17-16 17-22 17-29 17-23 17-51 17-24 17-19 17-25 17-15 17-26 15-1 17-27 17-2 17-32 17-30 17-33 17-4 17-34 17-6 17-36 17-16 17-37 18-6 17-38 17-5 17-39 10-1 17-42-17-45 17-36 17-46 17-33 17-47 17-32 17-48 17-34 17-49 9-3 17-50, 17-51 17-35 17-52-17-57 17-20-17-24 17-58-17-60 17-40-17-42 17-61 17-44 17-62 17-43 17-63 17-45 19-1 14-27 20-1 2-9 21-1 18-3 21-3 18-4 21-4 18-5 21-5 18-1 21-6, 21-7 18-2 22-1 13-4 22-2 13-5 22-3-22-5 13-1-13-3 22-7, 22-8 17-48 22-9 17-49 22-10 17-53 22-11-22-15 17-54 23-1 20-3 23-2 20-12 23-3 20-5 23-4 20-4 23-5 20-8 23-6 20-13 23-7 20-30 23-8 20-28 23-9 20-27, 20-29 23-10 20-32 23-11 20-33 23-12 20-31 23-13 20-26 23-15 20-14 25-1-25-4 22-16-22-19 25-5 22-62 25-6 22-63 25-7 22-1 25-8 22-64 25-9 22-65 25-10 22-77 25-11 22-78, 22-81 25-12 22-81 25-13 22-82 25-14 22-80 25-15 22-79 25-16 22-83 26-1 11-1 26-2 11-3 26-3 11-2 26-4 11-17 26-5 11-19 26-6 11-19, 11-20 26-7 11-21 26-8 11-21-11-23 26-9 11-26 26-10 11-18, 11-24 26-11 11-25 26-12 11-39, 11-43 26-13 11-44 26-14 11-45 26-15 11-39 26-16 11-4 26-17 11-5 27-1 23-3, 23-4 27-2 23-1 27-3 23-2 27-4 23-17 27-5 23-18 27-6 23-16 28-1-28-3 20-9-20-11 29-1-29-4 25-8-25-11 29-5 25-24 29-6 25-25 29-7-29-12 25-27-25-31 29-15 25-2 29-16 25-3 29-17 25-5 29-18 25-12 29-19 25-46 29-20 25-12 29-21 25-6 29-22-29-25 25-45 29-26 25-47 29-27 25-48 29-28 25-4 29-29 25-3 29-30 25-49 29-31 25-49 29-32 25-50 30-1 26-1 30-2 26-3 30-3-30-5 26-5-26-7  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1971 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1971 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance Number Date Section  Section 
this Code 70-1700-44 11-17-70 18-6 71-1700-45 4-3-71 17-8 72-1700-47 2-1-72 17-10 72-1700-48 5-2-72 24-53 72-1700-49 6-20-72 25-8 72-1700-50 9-19-72 14-61 73-1700-52 3-20-73 26-4 73-1700-53 3-20-73 24-11, 24-13 73-1700-54 5-15-73 14-72 74-1700-59 2-19-74 25-1 74-1700-61 4-11-74 14-117, 14-126-14-129, 14-132, 14-134, 14-136 74-1700-62 6-4-74 14-116 74-1700-63 9-3-74 24-51 74-1700-64 9-17-74 22-77, 22-78, 22-81 74-1700-67 11-8-74 22-77, 22-81 74-1700-68 11-8-74 22-78 75-1700-68 1-7-75 2-11 75-1700-69 1-7-75 17-9 75-1700-70 2-18-75 1 2-156, 2-157 2 2-156 75-1700-71 3-4-75 22-16-22-19 75-1700-74 6-3-75 25-24 75-1700-75 6-4-75 22-108, 22-109 75-1700-76 7-1-75 32-1-32-4 8-1-8-4 32-5.1-32-5.3 8-6 32-5.4 8-28 32-6.1 8-26 32-6.2-32-6.4 8-5 32-6.5 8-27 32-7.1, 32-7.2 8-30 32-7.3 8-31 32-7.4 8-9 32-8.1-32-8.3 8-7 32-8.4 8-29 32-9 8-8 32-10-32-12.4 8-10-8-15 75-1700-77 8-5-75 22-95, 22-96 75-1700-78 12-16-75 22-43 76-1700-79 1-1-76 1 22-44-22-47 76-1700-80 1-6-76 3-10 5-19 3-11 5-36, 5-38 3-12 5-38.1 3-13 5-37, 5-39 3-14 5-39 3-15 5-42 3-17 5-39 3-18 5-22 3-19 5-21 3-20 5-27 3-21 5-25, 5-26, 5-28, 5-41, 5-63 3-22 5-28 3-23 5-23 3-24 5-20 3-25 5-56 3-26 5-56, 5-62 3-27 5-56, 5-57 3-28 5-56 3-29 5-58 3-30 5-24 3-31-3-33 5-59-5-61 3-34 5-55 76-1700-81 3-16-76 14-116, 14-117, 14-126-14-129, 14-132, 14-134, 14-136 76-1700-82 4-6-76 18-21-18-23 76-1700-84 8-3-76 24-35 76-1700-86 8-17-76 22-26-22-29 22-30, 22-31 76-1700-87 8-3-76 22-48, 22-50 76-1700-88 8-17-76 2-7 76-1700-89 9-7-76 14-115 76-1700-90 10-19-76 2-8 76-1700-91 12-21-76 3 2-76 10-12 2-72-2-74 13 2-6 14 2-75 77-1000-93 1-4-77 3-16-3-20 77-1700-95 2-15-77 7-18 77-1700-96 2-15-77 5.1-5.5 7-16-7-20 77-1700-97 3-15-77 25-28-25-32 77-1700-101 5-3-77 1-3 27-16-27-18 4 27-1, 27-19 77-1700-108 9-6-77 5-3 15-1-15-6.1, 15-8-15-15 77-1700-109 10-4-77 3-17 77-1700-110 10-20-77 1 22-45, 22-46 77-1700-111 10-20-77 1 22-49, 22-50 77-1700-112 11-1-77 1 25-8 2 25-9 78-1700-113 1-24-78 24-51.1 78-1700-114 2-7-78 25-40-25-42 22-26-22-29.1 25-43 22-31 25-44 22-30 78-1700-115 2-28-78 14-115 78-1700-117 4-11-78 3-21 78-1700-120 6-6-78 2-7 78-1700-121 6-6-78 2-125 78-1700-122 6-20-78 24-57.1 78-1700-123 6-28-78 25-24, 25-25, 25-28-25-32 78-1700-127 6-6-78 12-1 13.5-1 12-2 13.5-2 12-3.1 13.5-3 12-3.2 13.5-8 12-3.3 13.5-3 12-4.1-12-4.3 13.5-33 12-4.4, 12-4.5 13.5-9 12-4.6-12-4.9 13.5-10 12-4.10.1, 12-4.10.2 13.5-34 12-4.11-12-4.15 13.5-35 12-4.16-12-4.19 13.5-36 12-4.20-12-4.22 13.5-37 12-4.23 13.5-12 12-5.1- 13.5-48- 12-5.5 13.5-52 12-5.8-12-5.11 13.5-53 12-6.1- 13.5-64- 12-6.6 13.5-68 12-7.1- 13.5-79- 12-7.6 13.5-81 12-8.1, 12-8.2 13.5-92 12-8.3 13.5-93 12-8.4 13.5-95 12-8.5, 12-8.6 13.5-96 12-8.7 13.5-94 12-9.1 13.5-121, 13.5-124 13.5-126 12-9.1.1 13.5-122 12-9.1.2 13.5-123 12-9.1.3 13.5-125 12-9.1.4 13.5-127 12-9.2 13.5-107 12-9.2.1- 13.5-111- 12-9.2.3 13.5-113 12-9.2.4 13.5-115 12-9.2.5- 13.5-108- 12-9.2.7 13.5-110 12-9.2.8 13-5.114 12-10.1-12-10.7 13.5-7 12-10.8 13.5-11 12-11- 13.5-15- 12-11.8 13.5-17 12-12 13.5-14 12-13.1- 13.5-18, 12-13.6 13.5-19 12-13.7 13.5-5 12-13.8-12-13.11 13.5-20 12-13.12 13.5-19, 13.5-20 12-14.1, 12-14.2 13.5-21 12-14.3 13.5-6 12-14.4 13.5-13 12-15 13.5-4 78-1700-129 10-3-78 17-39.1 79-1700-130 2-6-79 2-142 79-1700-130-A 2-13-79 Ch. 31 79-1700-131 2-6-79 3-10 5-19 3-11 5-36, 5-38 3-12 5-38.1 3-13 5-37, 5-39 3-14 5-39 3-15 5-42 3-16 5-40 3-17 5-39 3-18 5-22 3-19 5-21 3-20 5-27 3-21 5-25, 5-26, 5-41, 5-63 3-22 5-28 3-23 5-8, 5-23 3-24 5-20 3-25 5-56 3-26 5-62 3-27 5-57 3-28 5-56 3-29 5-58 3-30 5-24 3-31-3-33 5-59-5-61 3-34 5-55 79-1700-132 2-27-79 25-24, 25-25, 25-28-25-32 79-1700-137 1-5-79 10-3 79-1700-140 7-3-79 24-50 79-1700-141 8-21-79 24-50 79-1700-142 8-21-79 24-62 79-1700-143 8-21-79 24-62 79-1322(Res.) 10-2-79 21-1 2-1, 2-2 21-11, 21-12 3-1-3-4 21-21-21-24 4-1-4-4 21-31-21-34 5-1-5-7 21-41-21-47 6-1-6-7 21-61-21-67 7-1-7-7 21-81-21-87 8-1-8-4 21-101-21-104 79-1700-145 11-6-79 25-8, 25-9 79-1700-146 12-4-79 24-36 79-1700-147 12-4-79 1, 2 19.5-1, 19.5-2 3-12 19.5-11-19.5-20 79-1700-148 12-4-79 1 24-57.1 79-1700-149 12-5-79 25-24(e) 80-1700-150 3-4-80 25-61-25-63, 25-71-25-83, 25-91-25-94 80-1700-151 3-4-80 25-101-25-117 80-1700-156 5-20-80 2-156 80-1700-161 10-17-80 22-4 80-1700-162 10-17-80 22-18 80-1700-163 10-21-80 Adopting Ordinance, p.ix 80-1700-164 10-28-80 25-24(a)(3), (4), (b)(4), (c)(3), (d)(3), (h) 80-1700-165 11-1-80 25-24(i) 80-1700-167 11-18-80 24-62 80-1700-168 11-18-80 24-63 80-1700-169 11-18-80 14-157-14-170 80-1700-170 12-2-80 25-8, 25-9 81-1700-171 3-3-81 1-5 22-70-22-74 81-1700-173 4-22-81 13.5-28-13.5-30 81-1700-175-A 6-2-81 25-24, 25-25, 25-28-25-32 81-1700-178 8-4-81 14-51(a), 14-57(a), 14-84(a), 14-85(a), 14-87 81-1700-179 7-7-81 14-10 81-1700-181 8-4-81 1 7.5-1-7.5-12, 7.5-14-7.5-24, 7.5-26-7.5-59 81-1700-182 10-6-81 24-53.1 81-1700-182-A 10-6-81 24-48(a)(14), 24-57.1(a) 81-1000-183 11-4-81 31-18(b)(17) 81-1700-184 12-1-81 4-23 81-1700-185 12-1-81 22-26-22-31 82-1700-186 1-5-82 1-7 9-16-9-20 82-1700-189 3-2-82 8-4, 8-5(1), 8-8(b), 8-10 82-1700-192 4-20-82 31-21(e)(4) 82-1700-192A 4-20-82 8-6, 8-9 82-1700-197 5-5-82 1 7.5-1-7.5-12, 7.5-14-7.5-24, 7.5-26-7.5-66 82-1700-200 8-16-82 2-125(b) 82-1700-201 8-17-82 2-159-2-163 82-1700-202 8-17-82 2-7 82-1700-203 8-17-82 24-3(b), 24-35 82-1700-206 10-19-82 1-7 25-126-25-133 83-1700-212 1-18-83 5-55-5-65 83-1700-213 1-18-83 1-5 2-171-2-175 83-1700-214 3-1-83 Ex. B, § 1 21-46 Ex. B, § 2 31-37(g) Ex. B, § 3 8-29 Ex. B, § 4 Rpld 8-30(b) 83-1700-215 3-1-83 Ex. D, § 1 21-65(11)(a) Ex. D, § 2 31-40(a) 83-1700-216 4-5-83 Ex. A, § 1 31-15(f) Ex. A, § 2 31-32(a)(1), (3) Ex. A, § 3 31-16(f)(3) 83-1700-220-A 4-20-83 25-24(1)(a) 83-1700-222 1 21-68 2 21-35 83-1700-225 10-18-83 31-15(f), 31-32(a)(1), (3) 31-16(f), 31-33, 31-52-31-55 83-1700-227 12-20-83 24-3(b), 24-35 84-1700-229 2-21-84 9-72 84-1700-230 2-21-84 24-57.1(a), (d) 84-1700-237 5-15-84 22-27(3) 84-1700-238 6-19-84 22-78(b) 84-1700-239 6-5-84 24-3, 24-35 84-1700-245 9-4-84 20-14 84-1700-251 11-20-84 22-18, 22-50 85-1700-269 2-6-85 31-30(c)(1), 31-20(e), 31-33(j), 31-32(c), (d), 31-29(f)(2)-(4), 31-29(d)(2), 31-6 85-1700-272A 3-5-85 2-1 85-1700-277 4-16-85 25-24-25-33 85-1700-285 7-2-85 24-3(b), 24-35 85-1700-289 8-6-85 17-2, 17-49 85-1700-300 9-17-85 14-114-14-117, 85-1700-305 10-15-85 14-126-14-135 85-1700-309 11-5-85 24-28(d) 9-21 85-1700-310 11-19-85 1.1-1.3 25-61-25-63 2.1-2.8 25-71-25-78 4.1-4.7 25-86-25-92 5.1-5.5 25-93-25-97 6.1, 6.2 25-98, 25-99 85-1700-311 11-19-85 Added 31-20(c) Rnbd 31-20(c)-(g) as 31-20(d)-(h) 86-1700-327A 3-18-86 Rpld 2-39(4) Amd'd 2-95 86-1700-329 4-1-86 2-160, Rpld 2-161 86-1700-334 5-20-86 7.5-1, 7.5-2, 7.5-3(b)-(d), 7.5-4-7.5-6, 7.5-25, 7.5-27, 7.5-38(a), 7.5-40(c), 7.5-43, 7.5-45(a), 7.5-59(a) 86-1700-336A 6-3-86 1 14-1 2 Rpld 14-39-14-51, 14-53, 14-55-14-64, 14-66-14-79, 14-83-14-87, 14-89-14-100, 14-102 3 Rnbd 14-101 as 14-44 Rpld 14-52 Added 14-45 Rnbd 14-65 as 14-46, 14-80 as 14-47, 14-81 as 14-48, 14-88 as 14-49, 14-82 as 14-50 Rpld 14-54 Added 14-51 4 Added 14-52, 14-53 86-1700-337 6-3-86 25-8, 25-9 86-1700-338 6-17-86 14-54 86-1700-339 6-17-86 17-54(b), (c) 86-1700-340 6-17-86 24-3, 24-35 86-1700-342 9-2-86 31-6, 31-27(b)(1), (c) 86-1700-343 9-16-86 31-18(g)(3) 86-1700-346 10-7-86 22-49 86-1700-347 10-7-86 14-4 86-1700-348 10-21-86 24-51 86-1700-350 12-16-86 22-31 87-1700-351  2-17-87 22-30 87-1700-354  3- 3-87 7-21(a) 1-3 7-21(b)-(d) 87-1700-358  4-21-87 1 24-63(a) 2 24-63(b)-(f) 87-1700-360  6- 2-87 24-3, 24-35 87-1700-362  6- 2-87 24-51(a)(1)-(4) 87-1700-365 11- 4-87 11-1-11-29, 
11-39-11-48, 
11-51-11-60 87-1700-336 11-17-87 9-80-9-86 87-1700-367 12- 1-87 22-79(b) 88-1700-373  3-15-88 1-4 9-4 88-1700-376  5-17-88 31-15(f) 88-1700-381  6-21-88 24-3, 24-35 88-1700-382  6-21-88 14-55 88-1700-383  9- 6-88       Amnd 7-18(b)       Rpld 7-19 89-1700-393  2-21-89 31-6, 31-27(b)(1) 89-1700-394  3- 7-89 3-17       Rpld 3-16, 3-18-3-21 89-1700-395  4- 4-89 24-53.1(a), 
24-57.1(a) 89-1700-395A  4-18-89 14-116 89-1700-396A  4-18-89 11-49 89-1700-400  6- 6-89 24-3, 24-35 89-1700-401  6-20-89 2-157 89-1700-402  6-20-89 14-114 89-1700-405  9- 5-89 14-28 89-1700-408 10-18-89 24-3(a) 90-1700-411  1-16-90 25-8(b), (c)(1), (3) 90-1700-413  2- 6-90       Rpld 9-72 90-1700-421  5-15-90 1-3 2-126 90-1700-422  6-19-90 24-3(b), 24-35 90-1700-425  8- 7-90 2-181-2-184 90-1700-426  8-21-90 2-181-2-184 90-1700-427  9- 4-90 1 2-12 90-1700-428 10-16-90 13.3-21-13.3-26 90-1700-429 12- 4-90 24-3, 24-35 90-1700-430 12-18-90 2-175 91-1700-431  1-15-91 1 22-26(1) 2-4 22-27(1)-(3) 5, 6 22-30(1), (2) 7 22-32 91-1700-432A  2-15-91 22-30(2) 91-1700-434  3- 5-91 22-26(2) 91-1700-435  3- 5-91 7-18, 7-21 91-1700-437  4-16-91 22-32 91-1700-438  4-16-91 14-137 91-1700-442  5-21-91 21-111-21-114 91-1700-443  5-21-91 22-120-22-133 91-1700-443A  6- 4-91 3-17(m), (n) 91-1700-446  6-18-91 25-24, 25-33 91-1700-447  7- 2-91 24-3(b), 24-35 91-1700-449  8-20-91 8-3, 8-4, 
8-5(3), 8-8(b)       Rpld 8-28       Amnd 8-31 91-1700-450  9-17-91 24-53.1(d) 92-1700-450B  9-17-91 8-29 91-1700-450C  9-17-91 31-37(g) 91-1700-450D  9-17-91 31-32(c)(9) 91-1700-450E  9-17-91 2-46 92-1700-450A  2-18-92 19.5-17 92-1700-451  2-18-92 13.5-52, 13.5-110 92-1700-454  3- 3-92 2-127 92-1700-455  4- 7-92 8-10(note) 
8-12(note) 
8-26(note) 
8-30(note) 92-1700-456  4- 7-92 25-10(c) 92-1700-457  4- 7-92 14-138 92-1700-458  4- 7-92 22-43.1 92-1700-459  4-21-92 25-8(b), (c) 92-1700-462  4-21-92 25-24, 25-33 92-1700-463  4-21-92 2-201-2-207 92-1700-463a  5-19-92 5-23(a) 92-1700-464  5-19-92 24-64-24-76 92-1700-465  6- 7-92 22-151-22-164 92-1700-466  7- 7-92 24-3, 24-35 92-1700-468  7-21-92 1 14-171-14-179 92-1700-472 10- 6-92 22-154(d) 92-1700-478 12- 1-92 17-57 92-1700-479 12- 1-92 5-23 92-1700-480 12- 1-92 1-12(a) 93-1700-482  2- 2-93 25-32(a) 93-1700-483  3- 2-93 5-23 93-1700-486  3- 2-93 25-24, 25-33 93-1700-490  7- 6-93 24-3 93-1700-497 12-21-93 1 31-6 2 31-18(b) 3       Added 31-18(d)       Rnbd 31-18(d)-(g)       as 31-18(e)-(h) 4 31-19(b) 5 31-19(d) 93-1700-498  2- 1-94 5-1, 5-2, 5-36, 5-38.1, 5-56, 5-66-5-76 94-1700-499  2-15-94 7-18(b) 94-1700-503  4-19-94 25-24 94-1700-504  5- 2-94 22-45(a), 
22-48, 22-49 94-1700-506  5-17-94       Rpld 14-1-14-179       Added 14-1-14-179 94-1700-507  5-17-94       Added 18-9 94-1700-509  7- 5-94 24-35 94-1700-510  7-19-94 2-205(b) 94-1700-512 10-18-94 14-43(d) 94-1700-513 10-18-94 14-55 94-1700-517 12- 6-94 7.5-45(a)(2) 94-1700-518 12- 6-94       Added 2-216, 2-217 94-1700-519 12-20-94 2-58 94-1700-520 12-20-94 1       Added 2-208-2-211 2       Added 14-4.1 95-1700-521  1- 3-95 31-21 95-1700-522  1- 3-95 1, 2 31-6 3 31-15(d)(6) 4 31-16(d)(6) 95-1700-523  1- 3-95 31-32(c)(9) 95-1700-525  2- 7-95 24-3, 24-35 95-1700-527  4- 4-95 1 14-4 2       Added 14-4.1 95-1700-530  4-18-95 25-24 95-1700-534  7- 5-95 24-3, 24-35 95-1700-537  8- 1-95 11-41 96-1700-543  5- 8-96       Rpld 22-1-22-4 22-16-22-19, 22-26-22-32, 22-43-22-50, 22-62-22-65, 22-70-22-74, 22-77-22-83 22-95, 22-96 22-100, 22-109, 22-120-22-133, 22-151-22-164       Added 22-1-22-9, 22-16-22-18, 22-26-22-32, 22-43-22-50, 22-62-22-64, 22-77-22-83, 22-95, 22-96 22-108, 22-109, 22-120-22-132, 22-151-22-164, 22-175-22-185 96-1700-544  5- 8-96 14-21(a) 96-1700-545  6-18-96       Rpld 12-11 96-1700-546  7- 2-96 24-3, 24-35 96-1700-547  7-23-96 2-39 96-1700-548  9-17-96 Added 7-18(c), (d), 7-19, 7-22-7-24 7-16 7-18(b) 7-21 Rpld 13.5-1-13.5-22, 13.5-28-13.5-30, 13.5-33-13.5-37, 13.5-48-13.5-53, 13.5-64-13.5-68, 13.5-80, 13.5-81, 13.5-92-13.5-96, 13.5-107-13.5-115, 13.5-121-13.5-127 96-1700-549  9-17-96 Added 17.1-1, 17.1-2, 17.1-21-17.1-28, 17.1-31-17.1-34 96-1700-552 12-17-96 Rpld 14-1-14-28, 14-38-14-55, 14-114-14-117, 14-126-14-137, 14-148-14-179 Added 14-1-14-32, 14-38-14-58, 14-114-14-117, 14-126-14-137, 14-148-14-179 96-1700-553 12-17-96 Added 14-180-14-183 96-1700-547a  8- 6-96 2-142 96-1700-558  3- 4-97 2-75 96-1700-560  4-22-97 22-16 96-1700-562  5-20-97       Added 24-37 96-1700-563  7- 1-97 24-3 24-35 96-1700-565  7-15-97 22-50 96-1700-567  8- 5-97 14-116(b) 96-1700-568  7-15-97 7-18(b) 96-1700-569  9- 1-97 14-114 96-1700-570  9- 2-97 14-130 96-1700-571 10- 7-97 25-8(b) 97-1700-573 10-21-97       Added 24-38 97-1700-575 12-16-97 25-8(b) 98-1700-580  5-19-98 14-1 14-16 14-18       Added 14-39A 98-1700-585  6- 2-98       Rnbd 24-28(e) as (f)       Added 24-28(e) 98-1700-586  7- 7-98 24-3, 24-35 98-1700-587  8- 4-98 22-50 98-1700-589 10- 6-98       Rpld 2-208-2-211 99-1700-598  2-16-99 9-100-9-107 99-1700-600  3- 2-99 1       Rpld 7.5-1-7.5-66       Added 7.5-1-7.5-19 99-1700-605  6-15-99 1 25-8(b) 99-1700-606  6- 1-99 1 24-28(d) 99-1700-607  6- 1-99 1 25-8(b) 99-1700-609  7- 6-99 24-3 24-35 99-1700-612A  9-21-99 2-9 00-1700-616  1-18-00 1 2-23 2 2-39 3 2-45 00-1700-617  1-18-00 1 14-47(a) 00-1700-618  2-15-00 1 22-27(1) 2 22-31(2) 2000-1700-619  3- 7-00 1 25-28 00-1700-620  3- 7-00 1       Rpld 5-1-5-8, 5-19-5-28, 5-36-5-42, 5-55-5-65, 5-66-5-73, 5-74-5-76       Added 5-1, 5-2-5-10 5-19-5-30 5-36-5-42, 5-53-5-76 00-1700-624  4-18-00 1 22-33-22-39 00-1700-626  5-16-00 1 14-130 00-1700-627  6- 6-00 1 22-120-22-123 22-129, 22-130, 22-132 00-1700-628  6- 6-00 1 17-57(a) 00-1700-629  6-20-00 1 22-33-22-39 00-1700-630  7- 5-00 24-3, 24-35 00-1700-631  7- 5-00 1 22-123, 22-130 2000-1700-632 11- 6-00 1       Rpld 15-1-15-15       Added 15-1-15-10 00-1700-633 10- 3-00 1 17-9 2000-1700-634 10- 3-00 1 25-24 2       Rpld 25-27 2000-1700-636 10-17-00 1 34-28(d) 2000-1700-637 10-17-00 1       Rpld 22-77-22-83       Added 22-77-22-82 2000-1700-638 10-17-00 1 24-47, 24-48, 24-53.1, 24-53.2, 24-57.1 2       Rpld 24-64-24-76 00-1700-640 12-19-00 1 14-114-14-129 2000-1700-641 12-19-00 1 22-50 01-1700-642  1-16-01 1 11-52 01-1700-634  1-16-01 1 25-8(b) 2001-1700-645  1-16-01 1 14-117, 14-120(a) 14-125(c), 14-126 01-1700-648  2- 6-01 1       Rpld 17-13(10) 2 17-30(2) 3 17-31(b), (c) 4 17-37 5       Added 17-32(b) 6       Added 17-33(b) 7       Added 17-34(b) 8       Added 17-35(b) 01-1700-649  2- 6-01 1 22-16 01-1700-650  2- 6-01 1       Added 24-27(e) 2 24-28(d) 01-1600-651  2-20-01 1       Rpld 31-17(k)(2) 01-1700-652  2- 6-01 1 31-16(g)(1) 01-1700-660  4-17-01 1 31-29(f)(4) 01-1700-661  4-17-01 1       Added 31-29(e)(14) 01-1700-662  4-17-01 1       Added 31-17.A 01-1700-665  5-15-01 1 2-175 01-1700-670  7- 3-01 24-3(b), 24-35 01-1700-671  7- 3-01 1 25-24(c), (f) 01-1700-672  7- 3-01 1 25-8(c)-(f) 01-1700-675  7-17-01 1 22-31 01-1700-676  7-17-01 1 2-125 2 2-126 01-1700-677 11- 7-01 1 17.1-33 01-1700-678 11-20-01 1 24-2 2 24-10 3       Added 24-48(a)(16), (17) 4 24-57.1(a), (b), (d) 01-1700-679 12- 4-01 1       Added 31-46(c) 01-1700-681  4-16-02 1       Added 25-13 02-1700-682  4-16-02 1       Added 22-80(e) 2       Rltd 22-80(e)-(g)       as 22-80(f)-(h) 02-1700-685  5-21-02 1 2-75 02-1700-686  5-21-02 1 5-19 2 5-29 02-1700-687  6- 4-02 1 22-27 2 22-28 3 22-31 02-1700-688  7- 2-02 24-3, 24-35 02-1700-689  7- 2-02       Added 2-13 02-1700-691  9- 3-02 1 2-141(note), 2-142, 2-143 02-1700-692 10- 1-02 1       Added 24-28(e) 02-1700-695 12- 3-02 1 2-1 02-1700-696 12- 3-02 1 15-3 2 15-4(c) 3 15-5(4) 02-1700-697A 12-17-02 1 31-33 03-1700-699  1- 3-03 31-20 03-1700-700  1-21-03 1 19.5-11-19.5-21 03-1700-701  3- 4-03 1 22-33 22-35-22-38 03-1700-702  3-18-03 1 31-29(f)(4)c.i. 03-1700-703  3-18-03 14-123(b) 03-1700-704  3-18-03 1 24-50 03-1700-705  4- 1-03 1       Added 15-5(10) 03-1700-706  4- 1-03 1       Added 24-39 03-1700-707  4- 1-03 2-36-2-42 03-1700-707A  7- 1-03 1 22-152 03-1700-712  5-20-03 1       Added 31-33.1 6       Added 31-38(22) 03-1700-713  5-20-03 1 2-7 03-1700-718  7- 1-03 1 31-33(3) 03-1700-719  7- 1-03 24-3, 24-35 03-1700-720  7-15-03 1       Added 31-45(c) 03-1700-721  8-19-03 1 2-13 03-1700-722  8-19-03 1 17-15 03-1700-723  8-19-03 1       Added 2-14 03-1700-724  9- 2-03 1 31-7 2       Added 31-17.B 03-1700-726  9- 2-03 1 24-58-24-62       Rpld 24-63 03-1700-727 10 7-03 2-6 03-1700-728 10-21-03 1       Added 13-6 03-1700-731 11-18-03 1 24-27(e) 2 24-28(d) 03-1700-733 12-23-03 1 31-17(j) 04-1700-736  2- 3-04 1       Rpld 11-1-11-60       Added 11-2-11-162 04-1700-737  2- 3-04 1 2-76(c) 04-1700-738  2-17-04 1 25-33 04-1700-739  2-17-04 1 22-27(2) 2 22-31(1), (2) 04-1700-740  2-17-04 1       Added 24-34.1 04-1700-742  3-16-04 1 31-19 04-1700-743  3-16-04       Rpld 9-1-9-107       Added 9-1-9-124 04-1700-744  3-30-04 1       Added 31-56       Rnbd 31-56       as 31-57 04-1700-746  4-20-04 1       Rnbd 31-57       as 31-58 2       Added 31-57 3 31-46(c)(1) 04-1700-747  4-20-04       Rpld 7-1-7-24       Added 7-1-7-12 04-1700-748  6- 1-04 1 22-152 04-1700-750  7- 1-04 24-3, 24-35 04-1700-751  7- 1-04 24-3, 24-35 04-1700-753  7-20-04 1 2-23 2 2-39 04-1700-754  7-20-04 1 31-6 04-1700-755  7-20-04 1 31-30(c)(1) 2       Added 31-30(c)(2) 04-1700-756  7-20-04 2       Added 31-30(d)(6) 04-1700-757  8-17-04 1 22-47 04-1700-758  8-17-04 1       Added 24-14 04-1700-759  8-17-04 1 2-122 04-1700-764  9-21-04 1 22-35 04-1700-766 10-19-04 1       Added 31-32(c)(10) 04-1700-767 10-19-04 1 31-6 2       Added 31-19(d)(12) 3 31-17(d) 04-1700-768 10-19-04 1 31-41(a) 04-1700-769 11-11-04 1 25-126-25-133       Added 25-134-25-137 04-1700-770 11-11-04 1 31-17.A(b)(2) 04-1700-771 11-23-04       Added 2-77 04-1700-772 12-21-04 1 17.1-33 04-1700-773 12-21-04 2-77 05-1700-780  5-31-05 22-80(d) 05-1700-782  6-21-05 1 31-45(c) 05-1700-783  6-21-05 24-3, 24-35 05-1700-784  7-19-05 1       Added Art. I (tit.) 13-11-13-19 05-1700-789 11-15-05 1 31-17.A(e) 05-1700-795 12-20-05       Added 19.4-1-19.4-12 05-1700-775  2-15-05 2 2-1 05-1700-777  3- 8-05 1, 2 2-1 06-1700-801  3-14-06 1 22-26 22-28 22-31 06-1700-806  5-16-06 1       Added 22-201-22-204 06-1700-807  6-29-06 24-3 24-35 06-1700-808  6-29-06 1 25-25 06-1700-809  7-18-06 1a.       Rpld 2-10 1b.       Rnbd 2-1-2-9       as 2-2-2-10 1c.       Added 2-1 06-1700-810  8-28-06 1 31-29(e)(12)       Added 31-29(f)(3)d, (f)(4)h 06-1700-811  9-19-07       Rpld 8-1-8-31       Added 8-1-8-8 06-1700-812  9-19-06 31-6 a.       Rpld 31-19(b)(6)       Rnbd 31-19(b)(7)-(15)       as 31-19(b)(6)-(14) b.       Added 31-19(d)(13) a., b. 31-27 06-1700-813  9-19-06       Added 31-33(b)(3)c 06-1700-814  9-19-06 31-52-31-55 06-1700-815  9-19-06 31-19(d)(10) 06-1700-816  9-19-06 2 31-19(d)(10) 06-1700-817 11-21-06 1 24-38 06-1700-818A 12-12-06 31-6       Rpld 31-15(c)(3) 06-1700-818B 12-12-06       Rpld 31-17.A.(d)(2) (k) 06-1700-818C 12-12-06       Rpld 31-17.A.(d)(2), (4)       Rnbd (3)       as (2) (g), (k) 06-1700-818D 12-12-06       Added 31-17.A.(d)(5) 06-1700-818E 12-12-06       Rpld 31-18(b)(2)       Added (d)(2) 06-1700-818F 12-12-06       Added 31-19(d)(14) 06-1700-818G 12-12-06 1       Added 31-33.2 06-1700-818H 12-12-06 31-34 31-52-31-55 07-1700-820  1- 9-07 1-7       Added 2-225-2-231 07-1700-821  2-20-07 1 13-2       Added Cross refs. 2       Added 20-3 cross refs. 3       Added 28-48(a)(18)       Added Cross refs. 07-1700-822  2-20-07 2-205(b) 07-1700-824  2-20-07 10 22-27(1) 07-1700-829  5-15-07 1 2-13(a) 07-1700-830  5-15-07 1 Ch. 2, Art. IX title 2-156 2-157 07-1700-831  5-17-07 5       Added 17-39.1(c) 07-1700-832  5-15-07 1       Added 9-125-9-129 07-1700-833  6-19-07 24-3 24-35 07-1700-834  6-19-07 1       Added Ch. 22, Art. II, Div. 2 (tit.) 
22-26(3),(4) 22-28 07-1700-837  7-17-07 1 31-28(a)(2) 2 31-28(c) 07-1700-840  9-18-07 1 31-29(f)(4)c.ii. 07-1700-841 11-20-07 1 31-20(b)(8) 2 31-20(c)       Added 31-20(c)(2) 08-1700-844  2-19-08 1 2-201 08-1700-846  3- 4-08 25-7, 25-8 08-1700-847  3-11-08 1       Added 13.1-1-13.1-10 08-1700-849  3-18-08 1 31-29(d)2c 08-1700-854  6-17-08 24-3(b), 24-35 08-1700-855  7-16-08 1       Rpld 25-24       Added 25-24 08-1700-856 10-21-08 1       Rpld 31-46(c)(1)b-d, g-i       Rnbd 31-46(c)(1)e, f, j       as 31-46(c)(1)b-d 08-1700-860 11-18-08 1 2-182(e) 2 2-205(b) 3 22-1 09-1700-864  2-17-09 1 31-6 2 31-17.B 3 31-33(j) 09-1700-869  4-21-09 1       Added 24-28.1 09-1700-874  6-16-09 1       Rpld 18-21-18-24       Added 18-21-18-24 09-1700-876  6-16-09 24-3 24-35 09-1700-878  9-15-09 1       Rpld 24-5       Added 24-5 09-1700-880 10-20-09 1       Added 2-15 10-1700-885  2- 2-10 1       Added 24-48(a)(19) 10-1700-888  4-20-10 1 24-28(e) 10-1700-891  6-15-10 24-3 24-35 10-1000-892  6-15-10       Added 2-163(note) 10-1700-894  8- 5-10 1 Ch. 8(title) 2       Added Ch. 8, Art. I(title) 3       Added 8-11-8-30 10-1700-889  5-18-10 1 22-27 2 22-27(1), (2) 3 22-28 4, 5 22-31, 22-32 11-1700-901  4-19-11 1 2-8 11-1700-902  4-19-11 1       Rpld 22-7       Added 22-7 11-1700-903  5-24-11 1 Ch. 31, Art. X(title)       Rnbd 31-34       as 31-54.1 2 31-6 3 31-14(d) 4 31-15(d) 5 31-16(d) 6 31-17(d) 7 31-17.A(d) 8 31-17.B(c) 9 31-18(d) 10 31-19(d) 11 31-20(c) 11-1700-904  5-24-11 1 31-44(title)       Added 31-44(c) 2       Rnbd 31-46(c)(7)       as 31-44(d) 3       Rpld 31-46(c)(8) 11-1700-905  5-24-11 1       Added 31-52(c) 2 31-49(b)(3) 3, 4 31-55(b)91), (c)(1) 11-1700-906  5-24-11 1       Rpld 14-114 14-115-14-129 24-50(b) 11-1700-910  6-21-11 24-3 24-35 11-1700-911  6-21-11 1       Added 31-52(d) 11-1700-914 11- 1-11 1       Added 26-3(tit.)       Added 26-3(c) 2 26-5(tit.) 26-5 12-1700-916  1-24-12 1 31-6 2 31-17.A 3       Added 31-19.A 4       Added 31-20.A 12-1700-917  2- 7-12 1       Added 22-210-22-227 12-1700-920  4- 3-12 1 14-120(b) 12-1700-921  4- 3-12 1 31-6 12-1700-922  4- 3-12 1 31-20 12-1700-924  5- 1-12 1       Added 31-33.3 12-1700-927  5-15-12 1 25-24(a)-(c) 12-1700-930[A]  6-19-12 1 31-29(f)(4) 12-1700-930[B]  5-15-12 1       Added 31-13(h) 12-1700-931  7-31-12 1 31-31 12-1700-936 10- 2-12 1 25-61-25-63, 25-71-25-79, 25-86-25-100.9 13-1700-942  4-16-13 1 22-212 2 22-213 13-1700-945  7-16-13 24-3 24-35 14-1700-952  5-20-14 2-203 14-1700-953  6- 3-14 24-3 24-35 14-1700-954  6- 3-14 1 5-25 5-26 14-1700-956  6- 3-14 1 2-175 14-1700-957  7-15-14 1 8-1-8-56 14-1700-958 10- 7-14 1 7-1-7-12 14-1700-959 10-21-14 1 25-24-25-26       Rnbd 25-28-25-32       as 25-27-25-31       Added 25-32 25-33 14-1700-963 12- 2-14 1 22-27(1), (2) 2 22-28 3 22-31 15-1700-964  2-24-15 2 2-2 15-1700-965  3- 3-15 1       Added 2-16 15-1700-970  6- 2-15 1       Added 24-40 15-1700-973  9- 1-15 1 14-114-14-129 16-1700-981  1- 5-16 1 31-27, 31-28 16-1700-982  2- 2-16 1 25-30 16-1700-983[A]  4- 5-16 1 8-2-8-9 16-1700-983[B]  4- 5-16 1       Rpld 8-56 2       Added 8-12(j) 3       Added 8-57-8-66 16-1700-987  5- 3-16 1 25-25(b)(3)a. 25-31(a) 25-32(b), (c)(3)-(5) 2       Added 25-34 16-1700-993  6-21-16 1       Rnbd Ch. 13.3, Art. II       as Ch. 13.3, Art. III 2       Added 13.3-15-13.3-20.1 17-1700-999  4- 4-17 1 14-1 14-12 14-15       Rpld 14-16       Rpld 14-18 14-19 17-1700-1000  4-19-17 1 22-46 2 22-49 17-1700-1001  5- 2-17 1       Added 24-41 17-1700-1004  6- 6-17 1 22-152 17-1700-1005  5-16-17 1 14-114-14-126 17-1700-1007  8-15-17 1 24-41 18-1700-1011  2-20-18 1 2-8 2 2-127 18-1700-1013  3-20-18 1 15-3-15-6 15-8 15-10 18-1700-1015  6-19-18 1 1-2 2 21-46 3 31-10 4 31-29(c)(2) 5 31-32(c)(9) 6 31-33.2(a) 7 31-37(g) 8       Added 31-44.1 9 31-45(c)(4)e. 10 31-52(b), (c) 11 31-54.1(g)(2), (5) 12 31-56(c)(10) 18-1700-1016  6-19-18 24-3 24-35 18-1700-1019  6-19-18 1 24-53.1(a) 2 24-57.1 3       Added 24-57.2 18-1700-1022  7-17-18 1 31-29 2 31-33.2(b)  
